detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/13225monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators anddata systems352 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309218504 | doi 10.17226/13225morgan a. ford and carol mason spicer, editors; committee to review data systemsfor monitoring hiv care; board on population health and public health practice;institute of medicinemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee to review data systems for monitoring hiv careboard on population health and public health practicemorgan a. ford and carol mason spicer, editorsmonitoring hiv care in the united statesindicators and data systemsmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract no. hhsp23320042509xi between the national academy of sciences and the white house ofce of national aids policy. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.international standard book number13: 9780309218504international standard book number10: 0309218500additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360 washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu. for more information about the institute of medicine, visit the iom home page at: www.iom.edu. copyright 2012 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. the serpent adopted as a logotype by the institute of medicine is a relief carving from ancient greece, now held by the staatliche museen in berlin.suggested citation: iom (institute of medicine). 2012. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systems. washington, dc: the national academies press.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ﬁknowing is not enough; we must apply. willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ šgoetheadvising the nation. improving health.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee to review data systems for monitoring hiv carepaul a. volberding (chair), professor, department of medicine, university of california, san francisco angela a. aidala, associate research scientist, department of sociomedical sciences, joseph l. mailman school of public health, columbia university, new york, new yorkdavid d. celentano, professor and chair, department of epidemiology, bloomberg school of public health, johns hopkins university, baltimore, marylandmoupali das, director of research, hiv prevention section,  san francisco department of public health, californiavictor g. degruttola, professor and chair, department of biostatistics, harvard school of public health, boston, massachusetts carlos del rio, professor and chair, hubert department of global health, rollins school of public health, emory university, atlanta, georgiamarshall forstein, associate professor of psychiatry, department of psychiatry, harvard medical school, boston, massachusetts carmine grasso, director (retired), care and treatment unit,  new jersey department of health and senior services, trenton shannon houser, associate professor, department of health services administration, university of alabama, birmingham jennifer kates, vice president and director, global health & hiv policy, the henry j. kaiser family foundation, washington, dcerika g. martin, assistant professor, rockefeller college of public affairs and policy, state university of new york at albanykenneth h. mayer, visiting professor, harvard medical school; medical research director, fenway health, boston, massachusetts vickie m. mays, professor, departments of psychology and health services, school of public health, university of california, los angelesdavid p. pryor, west coast medical director, nbc universal, universal city, californiasten h. vermund, professor of pediatrics, amos christie chair in global health, and director, institute for global health, vanderbilt university, nashville, tennessee adam b. wilcox, associate professor, department of biomedical informatics, columbia university, new york, new yorkdouglas wirth, president and chief executive ofcer, amidacare, new york, new yorkmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viproject staffmorgan a. ford, study directorcarol mason spicer, associate program ofcer colin f. fink, senior program assistant (since july 2011)china dickerson, senior program assistant (september 2010œjuly 2011)rose marie martinez, director, board on population health and public health practicehope hare, administrative assistantmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viireviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:ayse akincigil, rutgers universityjohn auerbach, massachusetts department of public healthnanette d. benbow, chicago department of public healthsheila m. bird, university forvie sitefrancine cournos, columbia universitykaren b. desalvo, city of new orleans, health departmentronald hershow, university of illinois at chicagonicholas p. jewell, university of california, berkeleyjames g. kahn, university of california, san franciscojames s. kahn, university of california, san franciscomichael lindsay, emory university school of medicinej. marc overhage, siemens medical solutions usa, inc.tomas j. philipson, university of chicagoelise d. riley, university of california, san franciscomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii reviewersfritz j. scheuren, university of chicagojudith solomon, center on budget and policy prioritiesalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by kristine m. gebbie, flinders university, and stephen e. fienberg, carnegie mellon university. appointed by the national research council and institute of medicine, they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgmentsthe committee to review data systems for monitoring hiv care (the committee) and the institute of medicine (iom) staff would like to thank many individuals for providing information, data, discussions, presentations, and comments throughout this study. the insight, expertise, and information provided by these individuals were essential to the development of the conclusions and recommendations of this report.to create this report, we needed the cooperation of the hiv care data monitoring systems from across the united states. the committee thanks the following people for responding to requests for information: roxanne andrews and irene fraser (agency for healthcare research and quality) for the healthcare cost and utilization project; chris bina (federal bureau of prisons) for the bureau electronic medical record; linda cummings (national public health and hospital institute); peter delany (substance abuse and mental health services administration) for the national survey on drug use and health and the minority substance abuse/hiv prevention initiative; janet durfee and victoria davey (department of veterans affairs) for the clinical case registry: hiv; kelly gebo (johns hopkins university) for the hiv research network (hivrn); esther hing (centers for disease control and prevention [cdc]) for the national ambulatory medical care survey and the national hospital ambulatory medical care survey; michael horberg (kaiser permanente [kp]) for kp electronic medical records and databases; jeffrey jacques (activehealth); suzanne kinsky (aids united) for aids united access to care; mari kitahata (university of washington) for centers for aids research network of integrated clinical systems and the north american aids cohort collaboration on monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x acknowledgmentsresearch and design (naaccord); amy lansky (cdc) for the national hiv surveillance system, the medical monitoring project, the hiv outpatient study, and the sun study; faye malitz (health resources and services administration [hrsa]) for the ryan white hiv/aids program and aids drug assistance program; kay miller (thomson reuters) for the thomson reuters marketscan research databases; richard moore (johns hopkins university) for naaccord and hivrn; elaine olin (centers for medicare and medicaid services [cms]) for the medicaid statistical information system; brigg reilley and lisa neel (indian health service [ihs]) and scott giberson (u.s. public health service) for the ihs resource and patient management system, hiv/aids management system, and clinical reporting system; thomas reilly (cms) for the medicare chronic condition warehouse; peter shin and sara rosenbaum (george washington university medical center) and rene sterling (hrsa) for the uniform data system; david vos (department of housing and urban development) for housing opportunities for persons with hiv/aids; nancy walczak (the lewin group) for the ingenix normative health information database®; marcus wilson (healthcore) for healthcore integrated research database (hird®).the committee thanks the presenters for volunteering to share their expertise, knowledge, data, and opinions not only with the committee but also with the members of the public who participated in its four open sessions. the committee recognizes the following individuals from its open session meeting on february 6, 2011 (listed in order of their presentations): jeffrey crowley (white house ofce of national aids policy [onap]); greg millett (cdc); michael horberg (kp). the committee recognizes the following individuals from its open session meeting on april 28, 2011 (listed in order of their presentations): ron valdiserri (u.s. department of health and human services [hhs]); amy lansky (cdc); faye malitz (hrsa); thomas reilly (cms); efe george (cms); david dore (brown university); mari kitahata (university of washington). the committee recognizes the following individuals from its open session meeting on july 8, 2011 (listed in order of their presentations): jamie ferguson (kp); william tierney (indiana university school of medicine); james willig (university of alabama, birmingham). the committee recognizes the following individuals from its open session meeting on september 1, 2011 (in order of their presentations): andrew forsyth (hhs); amy lansky; richard wolitski (cdc).throughout the course of this study, the committee received input from outside sources that provided valuable information and resources and thanks the following people for their contributions to the study: ruth pederson (colorado health network, inc.); richard power (bureau of hiv/aids, florida state department of health); suzanne kinsky, vignetta monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgments xicharles, and maura riordan (aids united); david holtgrave and cathy maulsby (johns hopkins university); susan scheer (san francisco department of public health); manya magnus (george washington university school of public health and health services). each of these individuals provided valuable information that greatly helped with the development of the report.finally, the committee acknowledges the support of the iom staff, in particular the efforts of morgan ford (study director) and carol mason spicer (associate program ofcer). in addition to planning and facilitating the meetings, they wrote much of the text for this report. the committee also appreciates the efforts of china dickerson (senior program assistant, november 2010œaugust 2011) and colin f. fink (senior program assistant, august 2011œpresent) for attending to the logistical requirements for the meetings and for aiding in the drafting of the report. the committee recognizes rose marie martinez (director, board on population health and public health practice) who attended meetings and aided greatly in the discussion of the conclusions and recommendations. additional staff support included assistance from: hope hare (administrative assistant), amy przybocki (nancial associate, november 2010œdecember 2011), doris romero (nancial associate, january 2012œpresent), laura destefano (ofce of reports and communication), and florence poillon (copy editor). the staff acknowledges william mcleod (senior librarian, the national academies) who provided valuable research support at the onset of the study.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentsabbreviations and acronyms xixsummary 11 introduction 19 study context, 20 the committee™s approach to its charge, 31 report organization, 32 references, 332 indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive services 39 indicators of clinical hiv care and access to mental health,  substance abuse, and supportive services, 40 healthrelated disparities, 71 data elements to gauge the impact of the nhas and the aca, 74 conclusions and recommendations, 88 references, 92 chapter 2 appendix tables, 1103 sources of data on hiv care to assess indicators  of hiv care and access to supportive services 127 identication of data systems, 127 sources of hiv care data, 130 additional data systems for monitoring hiv care, 158monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contents similar data collection efforts, 164 conclusions and recommendations, 167 references, 170 chapter 3 appendix tables, 1784 barriers to the collection of hiv care data 237 potential reimbursementrelated barriers to the collection of  hiv care data, 237 potential reportingrelated barriers to the collection of  hiv care data, 240 other policy barriers to the collection of hiv care data, 248 conclusions and recommendations, 264 references, 2675 the role of health information technology  and data system integration in the  collection of hiv care data 273 utilization and conguration of health information  technology to improve the collection of hiv care data, 273 models and best practices in data system integration, 286 conclusions and recommendations, 291 references, 2926 efficient analysis of hiv care indicators and dissemination of data by federal agencies 299 efcient analysis of hiv care indicators by federal agencies, 299 dissemination of data to improve hiv care quality, 309 conclusions and recommendations, 315 references, 316appendix biographical sketches of committee members 319monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvtables, figures, and boxestabless1 core indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, with rationale, 1011 insurance at first outpatient visit for patients attending adult care sites in the hiv research network, cy2010, 2321 hiv care quality measures, 42appendix 21 core and additional indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, 110appendix 22 indicators of clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, mapped to entry and engagement in care, 120appendix 23 cooccurring conditions and etiological cofactors with link to guidance for optimal management, 124appendix 31 summary of data systems for monitoring hiv care identied by the committee, 178appendix 32a data elements for core clinical hiv care indicators, 202monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvi tables, figures, and boxesappendix 32b data elements for core mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicators, 206appendix 32c data elements for additional clinical hiv care indicators, 208appendix 32d data elements for additional mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicators, 214appendix 32e data elements to estimate indicators for subpopulations, 216appendix 32f additional data elements for monitoring hiv care, 218appendix 33a data systems mapped to core clinical hiv care indicators, 220appendix 33b data systems mapped to core mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicators, 224appendix 33c data systems mapped to additional clinical hiv care  indicators, 226appendix 33d data systems mapped to additional mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicators, 230appendix 34 publicly available data collection instruments and  information, 232appendix 35 cd4 and viral load reporting by hiv surveillance reporting area (as of june 15, 2010), 23441 hiv testing and reporting policies, 24242 potential eligibility criteria for care coverage for plwha, by major payer/source, 25043 scope of state and territorial statutes and regulations governing hivrelated information, 26051 descriptions of health it products and functionalities, 274monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tables, figures, and boxes xviifiguress1 continuum of hiv care arrow mapped to indicators of hiv care and supportive services, 621 continuum of engagement in care, 4822 continuum of hiv care arrow, 4823 engagement in hiv care cascade, 4924 continuum of hiv care arrow mapped to indicators for hiv care and supportive services, 7041 federal reporting requirements for core and supplemental hiv/aids grant awards administered by state health department hiv/aids directors, 247boxess1 statement of task, 4s2 national hiv/aids strategy targets, 511 national hiv/aids strategy action steps and targets, 2621 healthy people 2020 summary of objectives: hiv, 4522 pepfar essential reported indicators, 4631 data collection activities considered by the committee, 12941 hipaa privacy ruleœcovered entities, 25251 key considerations for the adoption of health it by hiv care providers, 279monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xixabbreviations and acronymsabc abacaviraca patient protection and affordable care actadap aids drug assistance programadr adap data reportai/an american indian or alaskan nativeaids acquired immune deciency syndromeampath academic model providing access to healthcareapr annual progress reportarra american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009art antiretroviral therapyarv antiretroviralaspr assistant secretary for preparedness and responsebc british columbiabemr bureau of prisons electronic medical recordbop federal bureau of prisonscah critical access hospitalcaper consolidated annual performance evaluation reportccr clinical case registryccw chronic condition data warehousecd4 cd4+ t cellcdc centers for disease control and preventioncds clinical decision supportcfar centers for aids researchmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xx abbreviations and acronymscfr code of federal regulationschc community health centerclia clinical laboratory improvement amendmentscms centers for medicare and medicaid servicescnics cfar network of integrated clinical systemscns central nervous systemcpoe computerized physician order entrycrs clinical reporting systemechpp enhanced comprehensive hiv prevention planning projectehr electronic health recordelr electronic laboratory reporting systememr electronic medical recorderx eprescribingfda food and drug administrationfpl federal poverty levelfqhc federally qualied health centerfqhcla federally qualied health center ﬁlookalikeﬂhaart highly active antiretroviral therapyhab hiv/aids bureauhbv hepatitis b virushcci health care cost institutehcv hepatitis c virushearth homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing act of 2009hhs u.s. department of health and human serviceshie health information exchangehipaa health insurance portability and accountability act hird® healthcore integrated research databasehitech health information technology for economic and clinical healthhitsp healthcare information technology standards panel (hhs)hiv human immunodeciency virushivrn hiv research networkhmis homeless management information systemhmo health maintenance organizationhms hiv management systemhopwa housing opportunities for persons with aidshptn hiv prevention trials networkmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.abbreviations and acronyms xxihpv human papillomavirushrsa health resources and services administrationhud u.s. department of housing and urban developmenticd9 international classication of diseases, ninth revisionidu injection drug useihs indian health serviceiom institute of medicineiqa information quality act/data quality actipw inverseprobability weightingit information technologykff kaiser family foundationkp kaiser permanentelaphie louisiana public health information exchangelsu hcsd louisiana state university health care services divisionmax medicaid analytic extractmcbs medicare current beneciary surveymco managed care organizationmmp medical monitoring projectmoca montreal cognitive assessment scalemsa metropolitan statistical areamsis medicaid statistical information systemmsm men who have sex with mennaaccord north american aids cohort collaboration on research and designnastad national alliance of state and territorial aids directorsnhas national hiv/aids strategynhss national hiv surveillance systemnih national institutes of healthnjdhss new jersey department of health and senior servicesnqf national quality forumnrc national research councilnvss national vital statistics systemnwhin nationwide health information networknyc dohmh new york city department of health and mental hygienemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxii abbreviations and acronymsoasis outcome and assessment information setocr ofce of civil rightsoi opportunistic infectionomb ofce of management and budgetonap white house ofce of national aids policyonc ofce of the national coordinator for health information technologypacha presidential advisory council on hiv/aids pcip primary care information project (nyc dohmh)pcp pneumocystis jiroveci pneumoniapepfar u.s. president™s emergency plan for aids reliefphi protected health informationphr personal health recordphs public health serviceplwha people living with hiv/aidspro patientreported outcomeqsoa qualied service organization agreementrhio regional health information organizationrna ribonucleic acidrpms resource and patient management systemrsr ryan white hiv/aids program service reportspns special projects of national signicancestd sexually transmitted diseasesti sexually transmitted infectionsun study to understand the natural history of hiv/aids in the era of effective therapytb tuberculosisuab university of alabama at birminghamusda u.s. department of agricultureuspstf u.s. preventive services task forceva u.s. department of veterans affairsvha veterans health administrationvl viral loadvista veterans health information systems and technology architecturemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summary1backgroundthe number of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) in the united states is growing each year largely due both to advances in treatment that allow hivinfected individuals to live longer and healthier lives and to a steady number of new hiv infections each year. the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) estimates that there were 1.2 million people living with hiv infection in the united states at the end of 2008, the most recent year for which national prevalence data are available. as a disease that disproportionately affects populations who already have a range of care and supportive service needs, now more than ever hiv requires continuous and coordinated quality care. furthermore, there continue to be challenges to curbing the toll of the epidemic. each year, approximately 16,000 individuals die from aids despite overall improvements in survival, and 50,000 individuals become newly infected with hiv. in 2011, the cdc estimated that about three in four people living with diagnosed hiv infection are linked to care within 3 to 4 months of diagnosis and that only half are retained in ongoing care. treatment with antiretroviral therapy (art) can help to reduce the level of hiv virus in the blood, sometimes to viral suppression (i.e., to an undetectable level), resulting in improved health outcomes for plwha as well as reduced risk of hiv transmission. yet, only 19œ28 percent of plwha are virally suppressed. 1 this summary does not include references. citations to support text, conclusions, and recommendations made herein are given in the body of the report.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthe national hiv/aids strategy and the patient  protection and affordable care actin the context of the continuing challenges posed by hiv, the white house ofce of national aids policy (onap) released a national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) for the united states in july 2010. the primary goals of the nhas are to˚reduce hiv incidence; ˚˚increase access to care and optimize health outcomes for plwha; and ˚reduce hivrelated health disparities. federally run hiv programs traditionally have been administered in a siloed fashion due to differences in the missions of the agencies within which they originate or in funding stream requirements. meeting the nhas objectives will require increased synergy of hiv programs across federal agencies, and among federal agencies, states, and other jurisdictions. as such, the nhas includes a fourth objective to increase coordination of hiv program activities across levels of government. subsumed within this objective is the development of improved mechanisms to monitor progress in achieving the nhas goals. in the agency operational plans for the nhas, this institute of medicine (iom) report is named as one of the activities that onap is undertaking to address existing gaps in the collection, analysis, and integration of data on the care and treatment experiences of plwha. the nhas is intended to build upon the patient protection and affordable care act (aca), whichšif implemented as originally plannedšis expected to bring millions of uninsured individuals, including many plwha, into the health care system. examples of provisions of the aca that may increase access to care for plwha include changes in eligibility requirements for public (e.g., medicaid) and private health insurance, reduced outofpocket costs for medicare part d prescription drugs, expansion of coverage for preventive health services, and increased care capacity in community health centers. charge to the committee onap requested that the iom convene a committee to identify critical data and indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive services, as well as to monitor the impact of the nhas and the aca on improvements in hiv care. in addition, the committee was tasked with identifying public and private data systems that capture the data needed to monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 3estimate these indicators. the committee was also asked to address a series of specic questions related to the collection, analysis, and dissemination of such data (box s1). the iom convened a committee of 17 members with expertise in hiv clinical care and supportive services, health policy, data collection and analysis, informatics, and other relevant areas to respond to this charge. committee™s approach to its chargenhas targets for increasing access to care and improving health outcomes for plwha and for reducing hivrelated health disparities by 2015 (box s2) provided the basis for several of the indicators recommended by the committee.2 the committee also reviewed existing indicators of hiv care and measures of hiv care quality. these include healthy people 2020 objectives and president™s emergency plan for aids relief (pepfar) indicators that pertain to hiv care and supportive services, as well as performance measures for hiv care that were endorsed by the national quality forum, an organization that sets national consensus standards of performance in health care. the committee also reviewed current guidelines for hiv treatment. the committee identied indicators linked to benchmarks along the continuum of hiv care, from diagnosis through virologic suppression (figure s1). the committee compiled a list of 32 public and private data systems and data collection agencies, including ones highlighted in the project proposal from onap and others identied by the committee as potentially important sources of information on hiv care and supportive services. the committee reviewed both hivspecic data systems and data collection activities, such as epidemiologic studies of plwha and ryan white hiv/aids program data, and those that are not hiv specic but capture information on care received by plwha, such as medicaid and medicare claims data. the committee requested information from individuals who are familiar with the data systems and data collection activities in the areas of hiv testing and linkage to care, clinical care, access to care, treatment and adherence, nancial security, need for supportive services, demographics, risk behavior assessment, and patient experience with care. the committee then compared the compiled information against the data elements needed to estimate the indicators to identify the best sources of 2 the committee interpreted its charge as focusing on the population of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) who have been diagnosed with hiv. therefore, the committee did not identify indicators to monitor the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) objective related to reducing the occurrence of new hiv infections, although some of the indicators promote reduced hiv transmission as well as improved health outcomes for plwha. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 monitoring hiv care in the united statesbox s1 statement of taskthe white house ofce of national aids policy has requested that the institute of medicine (iom) convene a committee of experts to assess available public and private data systems that capture information about hiv care to investigate ways to maximize their usefulness and recommend approaches for supplementing current data sources and to identify and provide recommendations for the most critical data and indicators to gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act in improving hiv/aids care.1. what are the best sources of data (and which data elements should be used) from public and private hiv care databases to assess core indicators related to continuous care and access to support services, such as housing, for people living with hiv? a. what data collection items need to be revised or reconsidered in existing databases of care and services provided to people living with hiv and in demographic data about populations receiving these services? are there proposed changes that can provide necessary data without adding additional burden to data collection? b. what is the difference between claims data and clinical data found in medical records and do these differences encompass gaps in measures for hiv care? 2. what similar data collection or standardization efforts are currently under way by public agencies or private industry that should be tapped? 3. how do we regularly obtain data (core indicators) that capture the care experiences of people living with hiv without substantial new investments? 4. what situations may impose barriers to the collection of core indicators? a. what policies, reimbursement issues or reporting issues need to be addressed to collect necessary data? b. how can data be collected in a way that will not signicantly increase provider burden?5. how can federal agencies efciently analyze care indicators and disseminate data to improve hiv care quality?6. what models or best practices in data system integration can be gleaned from public agencies or private industry to make existing data systems and core indicators interoperable? a. which among these models or combination of models would be most cost effective?7. how should health information technology (including electronic medical records) be utilized or congured in order to improve the collection of comprehensive data describing the care experiences of people living with hiv?monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 5box s2 national hiv/aids strategy targets targets for increasing access to care and improving health outcomes for people living with hivby 2015, ˚˚increase the proportion of newly diagnosed patients linked to clinical care within 3 months of their hiv diagnosis from 65 to 85 percent. ˚˚ increase the proportion of ryan white hiv/aids program clients who are in care (at least two visits for routine hiv medical care in 12 months at least 3 months apart) from 73 to 80 percent.˚˚increase the percentage of ryan white hiv/aids program clients with permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. targets for reducing hivrelated health disparities and inequitiesby 2015, ˚˚ increase the proportion of hiv diagnosed gay and bisexual men with undetectable viral load by 20 percent. ˚˚ increase the proportion of hivdiagnosed black americans with undetectable viral load by 20 percent.˚˚increase the proportion of hiv diagnosed latinos with undetectable viral load by 20 percent.data for gauging the impact of the nhas and aca on improvements in hiv care.the committee™s information gathering for the remaining aspects of its charge consisted of presentations before the committee during its open sessions and review of the research literature. committee™s recommendations core indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive servicesthe committee concluded that the primary challenges to optimal health outcomes for plwha include late diagnosis, delayed linkage to care for hiv, poor retention in care, delayed initiation of art, and poor adherence to art (i.e., discontinuing or intermittent use of art), as well as untreated nonhiv comorbidities (e.g., substance abuse, hepatitis c), and unmet basic needs (e.g., housing, food, or transportation assistance needs). the commitmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 linkageengagement/retention proportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsin the past 12 monthssince diagnosisproportion who received 2 or more cd4 testsproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for influenzaproportion who received 2 or more viral load testsproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for tuberculosisproportion screened for hepatitis bproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumoniaproportion who received drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with a measured cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicted), or active tuberculosis who are not on artproportion of hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral loadallcause mortality rateproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisengagement/retention proportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with an unmet need for housingfood or nutritiontransportationproportion screened for mental health disorders at least once in preceding 12 monthsproportion screened for substance use disorders at least once in preceding 12 monthsproportion assessed for need forhousingfood or nutritiontransportationproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months with cd4+ cell count 350proportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)figure s1 continuum of hiv care arrow mapped to indicators of hiv care and supportive services. note: indicators in bold text correspond with the committee™s recommended core indicators, while the indicators in italics correspond with the additional indicators. more information on the committee™s selection of both core and additional indicators can be found in chapter 2. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 7tee identied a set of core indicators that can be used to measure the degree to which these challenges are being addressed across the continuum of hiv care and to monitor the impact of the nhas and aca on improvements in hiv care (table s1 provides the committee™s rationale for each of the core indicators).recommendation 21. the department of health and human services should use the following core indicators to assess the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act on improving hiv/aids care and access to supportive services for individuals with hiv:core indicators for clinical hiv care˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aids˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosis˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count 350 cells/mm3˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 monitoring hiv care in the united statescore indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services3˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 days4˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 days5 ˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 months6˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months73 as discussed in chapter 2, the committee found that the indicators for supportive services may be particularly difcult to measure. however, there is evidence from research that addressing need for housing, food security, and other supportive services is effective for retention in care and improving health outcomes among people with hiv. in addition, the committee was specically asked to address core indicators relating to ﬁaccess to support services, such as housing,ﬂ as well as those relating to continuous care. the fact that indicators for supportive services may be difcult to estimate did not preclude the committee from including them as core indictors. 4 receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time frame. urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.5 see footnote 4 above. 6 the u.s. department of housing and urban development™s homeless management information system (hmis) data standards provide guidance for classifying housing status in four categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular nighttime residence, staying in an emergency shelter), following the mckinneyvento homeless assistance act (42 u.s.c. 11302, sec. 103) denition of homelessness, as amended by the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing (hearth) act of 2009 (p.l. 11122, div. b, sec. 1003); imminently losing housing (e.g., being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no housing options identied); unstably housed and atrisk of losing housing (e.g., temporarily doubled up with others, moving frequently for economic reasons); and stably housed (http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdatastandardsmarch2010.pdf, accessed march 12, 2012).7 according to the u.s. department of agriculture, households with high food security have ﬁno reported indications of foodaccess problems or limitationsﬂ; households with marginal food security have ﬁone or two reported indicationsštypically of anxiety over food sufciency or shortage of food in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or food intakeﬂ; households with low food security have ﬁreports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and households with very low food security have ﬁreports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced food intake.ﬂ the lower two levels indicate food insecurity (http://www.ers.usda.gov/brieng/foodsecurity/labels.htm#cnstat, accessed march 12, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 9˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 monthsin addition to the core indicators, the committee identied a set of additional indicators based on more granular process measures to provide a comprehensive assessment of the quality of hiv care. these additional indicators are included in figure s1 and discussed in detail in chapter 2 of the report. demographic data on plwha have to be collected to monitor the impact of the nhas and aca on improvements in hivrelated health disparities. the committee found that many crucial data elements, such as gender identity, sexual orientation, sexual risk behaviors, geographic marker of residence, income, primary means of reimbursement for medical services, and level of acculturation as re˚ected in primary language are not routinely collected in many of the federal data systems that it reviewed. data on race and ethnicity often are not collected with a sufcient level of detail to make nuanced distinctions among the health needs of different racial and ethnic groups. on october 31, 2011, the u.s. department of health and human services (hhs) issued new guidance on minimum standards for collection of data on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status in national population health surveys that are sponsored or conducted by hhs. the guidance mandates the collection of more granular data on race and ethnicity, as well as data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and english prociency as a measure of primary language. hhs is also developing a plan to integrate the collection of data on sexual orientation and gender identity into hhs national surveys, and to collect data on socioeconomic status.recommendation 22. the department of health and services and the ofce of management and budget should continue to expand the demographic data elements to be captured by federal data systems relevant to hiv care to permit calculation of the indicators for subgroups of the population of people with diagnosed hiv infection, including, but not limited to, the following:  age race ethnicity sex (assigned at birth) gender identity (e.g., male, female, transgender [maletofemale, femaletomale], bigender, gender queer)monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 table s1 core indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, with rationalecore indicators for hiv clinical careproportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsrationale: improve health outcomes by reducing the number of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) with late diagnosis.proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisrationale: timely linkage to care improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)rationale: continuous hiv care results in better outcomes, including decreased mortality, and reduced transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 monthsrationale: regular cd4 testing permits providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (art), and assess the need for prophylaxis for opportunistic infections.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 monthsrationale: regular viral load (plasma hiv rna) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response in individuals on art.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3rationale: achieving and maintaining a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art*rationale: appropriate initiation of art improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionrationale: the goal of art is durable virologic suppression, which improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus.allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection*rationale: mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed with hiv infection. mortality among plwha should be inversely related to the quality of overall care delivered.core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 days**rationale: untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 days**rationale: untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: homelessness and housing instability negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: food insecurity affects maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others. poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to dietsensitive comorbidities.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: unmet need for transportation to access hiv health care and related services negatively affects treatment access, service utilization, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.*in contrast to the other indicators, the estimates for these indicators should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.**receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time frame. urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 11table s1 core indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, with rationalecore indicators for hiv clinical careproportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsrationale: improve health outcomes by reducing the number of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) with late diagnosis.proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisrationale: timely linkage to care improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)rationale: continuous hiv care results in better outcomes, including decreased mortality, and reduced transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 monthsrationale: regular cd4 testing permits providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (art), and assess the need for prophylaxis for opportunistic infections.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 monthsrationale: regular viral load (plasma hiv rna) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response in individuals on art.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3rationale: achieving and maintaining a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art*rationale: appropriate initiation of art improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionrationale: the goal of art is durable virologic suppression, which improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus.allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection*rationale: mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed with hiv infection. mortality among plwha should be inversely related to the quality of overall care delivered.core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 days**rationale: untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 days**rationale: untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: homelessness and housing instability negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: food insecurity affects maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others. poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to dietsensitive comorbidities.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*rationale: unmet need for transportation to access hiv health care and related services negatively affects treatment access, service utilization, and health outcomes for plwha and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.*in contrast to the other indicators, the estimates for these indicators should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.**receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time frame. urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 monitoring hiv care in the united states sexual orientation (e.g., heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual) current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census block) income or poverty level primary means of reimbursement for medical services (including medicaid, medicare, ryan white hiv/aids program, private insurance or health maintenance organization, no coverage)in addition, hhs should, to the extent practicable, extend its expanded data collection standards beyond national populationbased health surveys to all hhssponsored data collection activities.sources of data on hiv care to assess core indicators and access to supportive servicesdata on hiv care and supportive services are currently being collected by a number of public and private data systems. although no single data system on its own provides all of the data needed to estimate the indicators recommended by the committee (listed above), these data systems as a whole are collecting relevant information that can serve as a collective platform for evaluating access to continuous and highquality care in all populations of plwha. the committee identied 12 data systems in particular that collect data of use for estimating the core indicators to monitor progress toward meeting the goals of the nhas and aca:national hiv surveillance system (cdc)medical monitoring project (cdc) ryan white services report (health resources and services administration [hrsa])ryan white aids drug assistance program reports (hrsa) medicaid statistical information system (centers for medicare and medicaid services [cms])chronic condition data warehouse (cms)north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design cfar network of integrated clinical systems hiv research network clinical case registry: hiv (department of veterans affairs)monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 13kaiser permanentenational vital statistics systemthe committee identied two additional data systems that provide information of use in tracking the impact of the nhas and aca on care for two small but important subpopulations of plwha (american indians and alaskan natives; federal prisoners), and a third that provides information relevant to housing assistance and other supportive services for plwha:resource and patient management system (indian health service)bureau of prisons electronic medical record  housing opportunities for persons with aids (u.s. department of housing and urban development)the committee™s review showed that each data system has limitations. for example, few contain all of the data elements needed to estimate all of the indicators recommended by the committee, especially those for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (housing, food security, transportation). in addition, most of the data systems are not fully representative of the population of plwha in the united states. in many cases (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program, medicaid statistical information system [msis], chronic condition data warehouse [ccw], clinical case registry: hiv), the population represented in the data system is dened by program eligibility and cannot be expanded. similarly, the purposes for which the data systems were designed preclude expansion of the data elements they collect to include all of those needed to estimate all of the indicators identied by the committee. modest changes in individual data systems, however, could improve the usefulness of their data for tracking changes in hiv care and access to supportive services for plwha. for example, a given data system might add one or more data elements or modify an existing data element to allow the system to provide data for estimating a subgroup of the indicators identied by the committee, such as those pertaining to supportive services, or to simplify identication of data representing hivinfected individuals (e.g., ˚agging hiv/aids as a chronic condition in the ccw). in cases where the population represented in a data system is not constrained by the program it serves (e.g., medical monitoring project), steps might be taken either to make the population more representative of the national population of plwha or to include groups (e.g., homeless) who are less apt to be represented in other data systems.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 monitoring hiv care in the united statesrecommendation 31. the department of health and human services, the department of veterans affairs, the department of housing and urban development, and other relevant federal agencies should review and, to the extent practicable, modify the federal data systems identied by the committee to better enable them to be used for monitoring progress toward achieving the goals of the national hiv/aids strategy. currently there is variation among cdc reporting areas with respect to longitudinal reporting of cd4 and viral load test dates and results. uniform longitudinal reporting of cd4 and viral load test dates and results from all jurisdictions would facilitate the use of data from the national hiv surveillance system (nhss) to estimate the core indicators for hiv care identied by the committee. in addition, collection of longitudinal data on the initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy for individuals diagnosed with hiv would provide the remaining data elements necessary to use the nhss as a source of data to estimate all of the core clinical hiv care indicators. use of nhss data would permit estimation of the indicators for the majority of the population diagnosed with hiv in the united states, as well as for subpopulations based on race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age, geographic area, and country of origin. capturing information on sexual orientation, sources of coverage for medical treatment, and current geographic area of residence would facilitate use of nhss data for evaluation of indicators for specic subpopulations identied in the nhas.recommendation 32. the centers for disease control and prevention should take steps to enhance the national hiv surveillance system including issuing guidelines or criteria for national hiv surveillance system reporting to include all cd4 and viral load test results ˚capturing longitudinal data pertaining to the initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy for individuals diagnosed with hiv (e.g., through pharmacybased reporting) ˚obtaining information on sexual orientation and sources of coverage for medical treatment (including, but not limited to, medicaid, medicare, ryan white hiv/aids program, other public funding, private insurance or health maintenance organization, no coverage) and obtaining and employing current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census block) for individuals in the national hiv surveillance systemmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 15clinically based electronic health record (ehr) systems, such as those used by the veterans health administration (vha) and kaiser permanente, capture all, or most, of the data elements needed to estimate the clinical hiv care indicators recommended by the committee. they also generally capture at least some of the information needed to estimate the indicators pertaining to mental health and substance abuse, but they do not routinely capture data needed to estimate the indicators pertaining to supportive services. another limitation of providerbased ehr systems is that individually each represents only one segment of the population of plwha in the united states (e.g., those who receive care in the vha system, kaiser permanente enrollees). other data systems represent larger proportions of plwha nationally (e.g., nhss, msis) and may contain information on mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program, msis), but they contain limited or no clinical data. the national health information network exchange is an example of a partnership between public and private entities to exchange health information for a variety of purposes. it could serve as a model for or a foundation upon which to build a broader data sharing partnership among public and private data systems both to permit better estimation of the indicators identied by the committee and to return information to private health care systems and providers for the purpose of improving health care for individuals with hiv. building upon existing data sharing partnerships would help to reduce costs associated with implementation of such partnerships for the exchange of information relevant to the provision of hiv care. recommendation 33. the department of health and human services, the department of veterans affairs, the indian health service, the federal bureau of prisons, and other relevant federal agencies should use existing data from private data systems, including data from electronic health records, to monitor the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act on improving hiv care. federal agencies also should share data pertaining to hiv care with private health care systems and providers to improve the quality of care for individuals with hiv. methods might include the development of a data sharing partnership between public and private data systems that include data pertaining to hiv care.barriers to the collection of hiv care datagrantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs are a vital source of hiv care and supportive services data, but are currently overburdened by the many reporting obligations they are required to fulll as a condition of program funding. the reporting requirements for core and supplemental monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshiv/aids programs administered by health departments are often project specic, even across related programming (e.g., hiv prevention and hiv/aids care), requiring staff to modify their reporting practices for each grant. reporting is further complicated by the fact that programs operate on different grant cycles so that reports for related programs are due at different times during the year. according to the presidential advisory council on hiv/aids, the current reporting requirements for grantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs have not resulted in a set of metrics by which to thoroughly monitor the hiv epidemic or to evaluate federal hiv/aids programs. a smaller number of metrics that are aligned with nhas goals could be used across federal agencies to monitor progress in managing the epidemic. as it was preparing this report, the committee learned that there is an effort under way by hhs to identify a set of hivrelated metrics to be used across funding agencies and reduce reporting burden for program grantees. the committee supports this current effort and recommends that it be maintained so that data needs can be periodically reprioritized based on changes in the hiv epidemic and to facilitate continued minimization of grantee reporting burden. recommendation 41. the department of health and human services should maintain and institutionalize the existing effort to streamline data collection and reduce reporting requirements for federally funded hiv/aids programs. this will allow for periodic reprioritization of data needs, based on changes in the hiv epidemic that occur over time, and ensure the continuous availability of data to effectively monitor hiv care while minimizing reporting requirements for grantees. the data reprioritization should involve health departments, hiv provider organizations, and federal agencies that are major funders of hiv/aids programs, including hhs, the department of veterans affairs, and the department of housing and urban development. providers of hiv care and supportive services contend with numerous federal laws and state statutes and regulations on the proper use and disclosure of patient information. although important to patient privacy, the often inconsistent nature of these protections, which leave the decision of whether or not to disclose requested patient information open to various interpretations, may result in discrepancies in data sharing and reporting across states and providers. such discrepancies may in˚uence the availability and quality of data needed to estimate indicators of hiv care and supportive services. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 17recommendation 42. the department of health and human services should issue guidance to the hiv care community to clarify what is permissible patient information to share given federal and state privacy laws. the role of health information technology and data system integration in the collection of hiv care dataincreased exchange of healthrelated information across providers of hiv care and supportive services has the potential to improve care coordination and longitudinal tracking of care. some integrated health care systems, such as the vha and kaiser permanente, effectively manage information across providers within their networks, but most plwha receive care and supportive services outside of these networks, and many receive care across multiple organizations. the committee identied local efforts in health information exchange that have resulted in improved monitoring of patient care and outcomes. however, these efforts have not been scaled broadly among entities serving plwha. recommendation 51. the department of health and human services should review existing mechanisms for the condential and secure exchange of health information to provide a platform to increase the exchange of such information among entities serving individuals with hiv. these entities may include, but are not limited to, state and local health departments, government agencies, and communitybased organizations funded to provide medical care, substance use and mental health services, and housing and other supportive services. interoperabilityšthe ability of different it systems and software applications to communicate, exchange, and use informationšis not fully possible in the united states at this time due to a lack of infrastructure to support it. for the most part, the various sources of care and care coverage for plwha have their own health it systems with disparate architectures and vocabularies, posing a challenge to the exchange of data across systems. recommendation 52. the department of health and human services and the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology should provide technical assistance and policy guidance to state and local health departments, clinical providers, and other agencies serving individuals with hiv to improve the interoperability of data systems relevant to monitoring hiv care and supportive services. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 monitoring hiv care in the united statesefcient analysis of hiv care indicators and dissemination of data by federal agenciesestimation of the committee™s recommended indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services will often require combining data from multiple data systems. making valid inferences about the indicators across different populations and over time using data from multiple data systems presents a range of analytic and logistical challenges. such challenges will change over time and will have to be reevaluated periodically. recommendation 61. at least once every 2 years, the department of health and human services should reevaluate mechanisms for combining data elements to estimate key indicators of hiv care and access to supportive services, analyze the combined data, and identify and address barriers to the efcient analysis of such data, including relevant statistical methodologies. to facilitate this process, hhs should engage a center of excellence representing broad areas of expertise that include information technology, statistical methodologies for combining data, and data system content.information on the indicators recommended by the committee will be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, including policy makers, health departments, hiv care providers, patients, and researchers. the disseminated information can be used in numerous waysšfrom informing policy decisions to supporting the development of research projectsšthat have the potential to improve hiv care quality. recommendation 62. the department of health and human services should report to the public at least once every 2 years on indicators of hiv care and access to supportive services to foster improvements in the quality of hiv care and in monitoring progress toward meeting the goals of the national hiv/aids strategy.the reporting interval of at least once every 2 years allows for regular reporting of the indicator data to monitor the nhas while minimizing reporting burden and associated costs. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.191introductionin september 2010, the white house ofce of national aids policy (onap) commissioned the institute of medicine (iom) to convene a committee of experts to assess available public and private data systems that capture hiv care information; investigate ways to maximize the usefulness of, and recommend approaches for supplementing, existing data systems; and provide recommendations for the most critical data and indicators to help gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) and the patient protection and affordable care act (aca, p.l. 111148) on hiv care. the committee was asked to address seven additional questions in its response to this charge, which are as follows: 1. what are the best sources of data (and which data elements should be used) from public and private hiv care databases to assess core indicators related to continuous care and access to supportive services, such as housing, for people living with hiv? a. what data collection items need to be revised or reconsidered in existing databases of care and services provided to people living with hiv and in demographic data about populations receiving these services? are there proposed changes that can provide necessary data without adding additional burden to data collection? b. what is the difference between claims data and clinical data found in medical records and do these differences encompass gaps in measures for hiv care? monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 monitoring hiv care in the united states2. what similar data collection or standardization efforts are currently under way by public agencies or private industry that should be tapped? 3. how do we regularly obtain data (core indicators) that capture the care experiences of people living with hiv without substantial new investments? 4. what situations may impose barriers to the collection of core indicators? a. what policies, reimbursement issues or reporting issues need to be addressed to collect necessary data? b. how can data be collected in a way that will not signicantly increase provider burden?5. how can federal agencies efciently analyze care indicators and disseminate data to improve hiv care quality?6. what models or best practices in data system integration can be gleaned from public agencies or private industry to make existing data systems and core indicators interoperable? a. which among these models or combination of models would be most cost effective?7. how should health information technology (including electronic medical records) be utilized and congured in order to improve the collection of comprehensive data describing the care experiences of people living with hiv?the committee to review data systems for monitoring hiv care was formed to carry out this study. the 17member committee comprises experts in clinical hiv care, mental health, health services research, private health insurance, health policy, housing policy, the ryan white hiv/aids program, biostatistics, epidemiology, health disparities, and biomedical informatics (see appendix a, biographical sketches of committee members). this is the rst of two reports to be prepared by this committee. in a forthcoming report, also requested by onap, the committee will address the broad question of how to obtain national estimates that characterize the health care of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) in the united states. the second report will include discussion of challenges and best practices from previous large scale and nationally representative studies of plwha as well as other populations. study contextthe number of plwha in the united states is increasing every year in large part due to the availability of effective antiretroviral therapy (art), monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 21which has allowed plwha to live longer and healthier lives (cdc, 2011b), and to a steady number of new hiv infections occurring each year. nearly 1.2 million individuals age ˛13 were living with hiv infection (both aids and nonaids cases) at the end of 2008, the most recent year for which national prevalence data are available (cdc, 2011c). the total prevalent cases represent a 6.5 percent increase in the number of plwha from the estimate for 2006 (cdc, 2008, 2011c). despite overall improvements in survival, there continue to be many challenges to curbing the hiv epidemic. for example, an estimated 50,000 people in the united states were newly infected with hiv each year from 2006 through 2009 (prejean et al., 2011), and approximately 16,000 people with aids die each year (cdc, 2011c). many plwha remain undiagnosed; 20 percent of the prevalent cases estimated for 2008 were among those whose infection was undiagnosed. the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) estimates that 77 percent of people who are diagnosed are linked to care within 3 to 4 months and that only 51 percent are retained in ongoing care (cdc, 2011c). art can help to reduce the level of hiv virus in the blood, sometimes to viral suppression (i.e., to an undetectable level), resulting in improved health outcomes for plwha and reduced risk of hiv transmission (cohen et al., 2011; granich et al., 2009).1 yet, only 19œ28 percent of plwha are virally suppressed (gardner et al., 2011). the evolving and often complex health care needs of plwha highlight the importance of making available continuous and coordinated quality hiv care. it is estimated that by 2015, more than half of plwha in the united states will be 50 or older (effros et al., 2008; justice, 2010). with improved survival and the aging of the population of plwha, there is a need for care models that address changing patterns of comorbidity that include increasing rates of chronic ﬁnonaidsﬂ conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension, certain cancers, and psychosocial comorbidities, and the in˚uence of hiv infection and longterm treatment on the etiology and progression of disease (chu and selwyn, 2011; justice, 2010; mugavero et al., 2011; shiels et al., 2011). hiv care should also be oriented to address the full range of care and supportive service needs of plwha so that they may better manage their hiv infection. hiv disproportionately impacts populations with care and supportive service needs that, when unmet, reduce access and adherence to hiv care and treatment (robertson et al., 2004; weaver et al., 1 being in hiv care may help to reduce risk of hiv transmission in ways besides having a reduced viral load as a result of being on antiretroviral therapy (art). for example, provider counseling and linkage to supportive services may help to promote behaviors (e.g., consistent use of art, safer sex, use of clean syringes) that reduce risk of hiv transmission (parashar et al., 2011; sikkema et al., 2010).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 monitoring hiv care in the united states2009). the provision of wraparound services such as case management, mental health services, substance abuse treatment, and transportation and housing assistance for plwha improves linkage and retention in care (ashman et al., 2002; mugavero et al., 2011). to help reduce disparities among subgroups of plwha, care should also be responsive to the diversity of the population by taking into account demographic variables such as sex, gender, age, socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity, and sexual orientation (bhavan et al., 2008; bogart et al., 2010; christopoulos et al., 2011; moore, 2011). to monitor and improve hiv care and address care disparities, data on the care experiences of plwha have to be collected and analyzed. several organizations, such as the new york state department of health aids institute, kaiser permanente, the veterans health administration, and the ryan white hiv/aids program (a federally funded program, administered by the health resources and services administration (hrsa), which is considered a payer of last resort for lowincome, uninsured, and underinsured plwha), have developed measures to assess the quality of their hiv care delivery (horberg et al., 2010). however, these efforts have not been coordinated, resulting in several unaligned measures of hiv care quality. development of a more standard set of measures that could be applied across a variety of care delivery platforms would allow for better comparisons and longitudinal tracking of care (horberg et al., 2010).2 sources of care and coverage for plwha are important to consider for assessing the impact of the insurance reform that is occurring as a result of the aca (described later in this chapter) on hiv care. an analysis of data from a convenience sample of 20,555 plwha attending highvolume hiv care sites participating in the hiv research network showed that medicaid was the source of insurance at rst outpatient visit for the largest proportion of patients (32 percent) followed by the ryan white hiv/aids program (24 percent). commercial health insurance and medicare were the source of insurance at rst outpatient visit for 17 percent and 14 percent of patients, respectively (table 11) (fleishman and gebo, 2012).3 a recent analysis of older data from the medical monitoring project 2 recognizing the need for aligned hiv care quality measurement, in 2007 the national committee for quality assurance in partnership with the american medical association, hrsa, and the infectious diseases society of america and hiv medicine association established ﬁa single set of aligned hiv quality measures for care processes and intermediate outcomes for external accountability and individual quality improvementﬂ (horberg et al., 2010). chapter 2 describes these measures in more detail. 3 data are from care sites located in baltimore, maryland; tampa, florida; dallas, texas; new york, new york (three sites); rochester, new york; philadelphia, pennsylvania; detroit, michigan; san diego, california; oakland, california; and portland, oregon. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 23(mmp), a national survey of the health care experiences and needs of adult plwha receiving medical care in the united states, showed that 84 percent of participants (3,040 of 3,643) had one or more types of health insurance coverage during the 12 months prior to the survey. of those with health insurance, 45 percent had medicaid, 37 percent had private health insurance or coverage through a health maintenance organization, and 30 percent had medicare (blair et al., 2011).4 there will likely be growth over the next few years in the number of plwha on medicare as a result of the aging of this population and aca provisions related to the medicare part d drug benet (described later in this chapter). continuous access to medications is an important component of hiv care. as noted above, art is vital to help plwha achieve and maintain viral suppression and thereby improve health outcomes and reduce hiv transmission (cohen et al., 2011; granich et al., 2009). continuous access to and adherence to art also may decrease the occurrence of hiv drug resistance (gardner et al., 2010; sethi et al., 2003). the aids drug assistance program (adap), a component of the ryan white hiv/aids program administered by states to cover the costs of food and drug administration (fda)approved prescription drugs, is a common source of prescription drug coverage for lowincome plwha. adaps provided medications to more than 135,000 clients in 2010 (nastad, 2011). in the mmp survey described previously, adaps were the primary method of payment for prescription medications for 25 percent of participants. medicaid or medicare and private health care coverage were the primary method of payment for 41 percent and 25 percent of participants, respectively (blair et al., 2011). 4 survey respondents could select more than one source of health insurance coverage (blair et al., 2011).table 11 insurance at first outpatient visit for patients attending adult care sites in the hiv research network, cy2010 insurancenumber of patients (%)commercial 3,580 (17)medicaid 6,652 (32)medicare 2,946 (14)dual (medicaid and medicare) 970 (5)uninsured (self pay) 544 (3)ryan white 4,955 (24)other/unknown 908 (4)total number of patients20,555source: fleishman and gebo (2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthe national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care actonap is tasked with coordinating efforts of the federal government to reduce the number of hiv infections in the united states (onap, 2011a). noting the continuing challenges to curbing the domestic hiv epidemic, onap released its nhas in july 2010. the primary goals of the nhas are to (1) reduce the number of people who become infected with hiv; (2) increase access to care and optimize health outcomes for plwha; and (3) reduce hivrelated health disparities (onap, 2010). the nhas identies action steps for each of the three primary goals and identies quantitative targets to be achieved by 2015 (see box 11).5because increased coordination and collaboration among hiv care programs is necessary to meeting the goals of the nhas, the strategy also includes an objective to achieve a more coordinated national response to the epidemic among federal, state, territorial, local, and tribal governments (onap, 2010). as described in the iom report crossing the quality chasm: a new health care system for the 21st century, the u.s. health care system as currently structured is uncoordinated and inefcient. care providers often operate as silos ﬁproviding care without the benet of complete information about the patient™s condition, medical history, services provided in other settings, or medications prescribed by other cliniciansﬂ (iom, 2001). hiv care in particular is provided through a patchwork of payers with different eligibility requirements that cause many plwha to shift in and out of eligibility for care coverage over the course of their illness (iom, 2005, 2011b). better coordination and communication across hiv providers and programs could improve continuity of care for plwha, who often have complex, longterm treatment and supportive service needs (mugavero et al., 2011). the work of this iom committee is named in the operational plans for the nhas as one of the key activities that onap is undertaking ﬁto address gaps in data collection, analysis, and integration of the care and treatment experiences of people living with hivﬂ within the nhas goal to achieve a more coordinated national response to the hiv epidemic (onap, 2011b).the nhas is intended to complement the implementation of the aca (onap, 2011b). if implemented as originally designed, the aca will pro5 in addition, an overview of the operational plans for lead agencies implementing the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas), including the departments of health and human services and its subagencies, housing and urban development, justice, labor, veterans affairs, and the social security administration, was released in february 2011 (onap, 2011b). the report outlines key activities that agencies are undertaking for each of the three nhas goals as well as to increase coordination of hiv programs and improve mechanisms to monitor and report on progress toward achieving national goals. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 25vide health coverage to over 30 million uninsured citizens by 2021 (cbo, 2011), including many plwha, and will establish private insurance market regulations. a few of the changes from the aca that are likely to impact plwha are as follows: ˚expansion of the medicaid program: the medicaid program, currently the largest single source of care coverage for people with hiv, will eliminate current categorical eligibility requirements such as being pregnant or disabled. coverage will be expanded to include all nonmedicare eligible individuals with incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (fpl) beginning in 2014. people living with hiv who meet the new income threshold will no longer have to wait for an aids diagnosis or other diagnosis of disability to become eligible for medicaid (kff, 2011; nastad, 2010).6˚phasing out the medicare part d prescription drug coverage gap: medicare part d prescription drug benet recipients must pay outofpocket for the full cost of prescription drugs while in a coverage gap (i.e., between the time recipients and their drug plans have spent a certain amount of money for covered medications and the time catastrophic coverage begins).7 prior to the aca, plwha on art were likely to have expenditures within the coverage gap unless they were receiving lowincome subsidies (kff, 2006). the aca gradually phases down the coverage gap so that by 2020, beneciaries will be responsible for 25 percent of the costs for brand name and generic drugs while in the coverage gap (cms, 2012; kff, 2011), making medications more affordable to plwha who have medicare part d drug coverage. in addition, starting in 2011, adap prescription drug benets began counting toward enrollees™ medicare part d ﬁtrueoutofpocketﬂ (troop) spending limit, which determines when catastrophic coverage begins. this change will shift some of the costs of prescription drugs from adap to medicare (hrsa, 2010). ˚increased private health insurance access and consumer protections: the aca will increase access to private health insurance and protect beneciaries from being denied coverage and other unfavor6 as of april 2010, states had the option to phase in expansion of medicaid to the newly eligible as long as the state does not offer coverage to (1) individuals with higher income before those with lower income or (2) to parents, unless their children are enrolled in medicaid or other coverage. a costneutrality requirement for the expansion of medicaid to nondisabled persons with hiv through a waiver process (i.e., that it cost the federal government no more than it would have with the waiver) has been a barrier to states taking up this option (nastad, 2010). 7 up to $4,700 in outofpocket costs in 2012 (cms, 2012). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 monitoring hiv care in the united statesbox 11 national hiv/aids strategy action steps and targets reducing new hiv infections action stepsconcentrated.effective, evidencebased approaches. targetsby 2015,sions in relation to the number of people living with hiv, by 30 percent. who know their serostatus. increasing access to care and improving health outcomes for people living with hivaction stepscoordinated quality care when they are diagnosed with hiv.providers of clinical care and related services for people living with hiv. those who have challenges meeting their basic needs, such as housing.targetsby 2015,within 3 months of their hiv diagnosis from 65 to 85 percent. in care (at least two visits for routine hiv medical care in 12 months at least 3 months apart) from 73 to 80 percent.permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 27able industry practices. beginning in 2010, private health insurers were no longer able to deny coverage to children with preexisting conditions such as hiv/aids (kff, 2011). in 2014, a guaranteed availability of insurance provision ensures the issuance and renewability of health insurance regardless of health status, and without increased premiums, for people with preexisting conditions. in the meantime, temporary preexisting insurance plans with subsidized premiums are available to adults with a preexisting medical condition who have been uninsured for at least 6 months (kff, 2011). also starting in 2014, states will set up health insurance exchanges designed to make health coverage easier to buy and more affordable. premiums for insurance will be offered on a sliding scale for people at 133 to 400 percent of the fpl who are not eligible for medicaid based on income. private insurance companies could no reducing hivrelated health disparities and health inequitiesaction stepscommunities.targetsby 2015,detectable viral load by 20 percent. able viral load by 20 percent.load by 20 percent. achieving a more coordinated national response to the hiv epidemic in the united statesment and between federal agencies and state, territorial, local, and tribal governments.achieving national goals.box 11 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 monitoring hiv care in the united stateslonger cancel or rescind coverage (except in the case of fraud) or impose a lifetime cap on the amount of coverage an individual can receive starting in 2010 (hhs, 2011b; kff, 2011).8 ˚expansion of coverage for preventive health services: as of september 2010, the aca requires new private health insurance plans to cover the cost of preventive services that have been determined by the u.s. preventive services task force (uspstf) to have high or moderate certainty of substantial or moderate net (population) benet (uspstf, 2010) and of immunizations recommended by the advisory committee on immunization practices (cdc, 2011a). the aca also requires coverage for an annual wellness visit under medicare, eliminates cost sharing for recommended preventive services covered by medicare, and gives state medicaid programs nancial incentives to cover preventive services (cassidy, 2010). preventive services recommended by the uspstf that are of particular interest to plwha include screening examinations for sexually transmitted infections (stis), certain cancers, depression, diabetes and other conditions, as well as several vaccinations (uspstf, 2010).9 in response to recommendations outlined in the iom report clinical preventive services for women: closing the gaps (iom, 2011a), in august 2011 the u.s. department of health and human services (hhs) announced new guidelines for health insurers and health plans specifying that women receive certain preventive services without copayment, coinsurance, or deductible. the guidelines, which go into effect in august 2012 with changes becoming effective for most new health plans on january 1, 2013, build on the aca provisions to increase access to preventive services for all americans. the new guidelines require full coverage for hiv screening and counseling for all sexually active women, human papillomavirus (hpv) testing, sti counseling, 8 it is important to note that while some of the provisions of the patient protection and affordable care act (aca) apply to all health plans, certain requirements (e.g., coverage of preventive services without cost sharing) are not applicable to a grandfathered plan as long as the plan or insurance coverage remains a grandfathered plan. a grandfathered health plan is a group health plan or insurance coverage in which an individual was enrolled on march 23, 2010, the date the aca was enacted.9 furthermore, an ﬁessential benets packageﬂ that is planned to go into effect in 2014 would require all qualied health benets plans to offer at least the benets in the package, which will include items and services in the following 10 categories: (1) ambulatory patient services, (2) emergency services, (3) hospitalization, (4) maternity and newborn care, (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment, (6) prescription drugs, (7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, (8) laboratory services, (9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management, and (10) pediatric services, including oral and vision care (kff, 2011; h.r. 3590, sec 1302).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 29and fdaapproved contraceptive methods and counseling, among other services (hhs, 2011a). ˚expansion of care capacity at community health centers: community health centers (chcs), including federally qualied health centers (fqhcs),10 are an important source of care for plwha who may be isolated from traditional forms of medical care (e.g., undocumented and recent immigrants,11 people living in rural areas), as well as people who are low income, uninsured, and members of racial and ethnic minority groups. to increase access to preventive care and primary health care, the aca provides funding to increase the service capacity of chcs/fqhcs from 20 million to 40 million patients by 2015 (mckay, 2011). as noted in the operational plans for the nhas, federal agencies and their state, local, and community partners need to ensure that hiv health care providers and plwha are included in initiatives to improve quality of care and integration of care services as the aca is implemented (onap, 2011b). the aca will help to address several features of the current health system that restrict access to care and care coverage for plwha.12 this will occur by expanding access to medicaid, medicare (prescription drug coverage), and private insurance programs, as well as by increasing access to preventive services and bolstering support to chcs. it is important to 10 federally qualied health centers (fqhcs) include health centers funded under section 330 of the u.s. public health service (phs) act; fqhc ﬁlookalikes,ﬂ or fqhclas, that have been identied by the health resources and services administration and certied by the centers for medicare and medicaid services (cms) as meeting the denition of ﬁhealth centerﬂ under section 330; and outpatient health programs or facilities operated by tribal organizations. 11 some qualied immigrants are not eligible for medicaid until they have been in the united states for 5 years (cms, 2012).12 while preparing this report, the committee was mindful that provisions of the aca that would impact access to care for plwha may not be implemented as originally planned. however, the indicators and data systems identied by the committee in this report to monitor the impact of the aca on hiv care remain valid even if the aca is not fully implemented. indeed the committee™s charge was to identify indicators to gauge the impact on hiv care not only of the aca but also of the nhas, for which implementation plans developed by applicable federal agencies currently are underway. furthermore, many states have already expanded access to health insurance for their residents in response to aca provisions, and states may maintain these changes even in the absence of nationallevel reforms. for example, the aca allowed states the option to begin phasing in medicaid expansion to cover nonelderly individuals with income up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( fpl) beginning in april 2010, and many states have done so. the committee™s recommended indicators could be used to monitor improvements in hiv care within states over time as a result of these changes, even if such changes do not occur nationally. the indicators are also applicable to statespecic policies, such as shifts to medicaid managed care, and new york™s current medicaid redesign, which will include a new payment structure.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 monitoring hiv care in the united statesnote that changes resulting from the aca will not benet all plwhašfor example, undocumented immigrants who are ineligible for many key provisions of the legislation.the ryan white hiv/aids program is an example of an effective integrated model of care for plwha. primary and specialty care as well as psychosocial services are coordinated within a single ﬁmedical home.ﬂ therefore, the ryan white hiv/aids program model of care helps to overcome challenges posed by the fragmented health care system that may impede retention in care for many plwha (gallant et al., 2011). care for many plwha will likely shift from the ryan white hiv/aids program to medicaid as the aca expands medicaid to cover adults who were previously uninsured. however, the ryan white hiv/aids program and other safety net providers will continue to ll gaps in medical and social services not covered by medicaid. the ryan white hiv/aids program also will continue to be an important source of care and supportive services for plwha who remain uninsured under the aca (such as undocumented immigrants). the role of health information technology and data system integrationwhen applied appropriately, health information technology (health it) can help to improve health care quality, prevent medical errors, reduce health care costs, and increase administrative efciencies (hhs, 2011c; iom, 2001). the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, a key component of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 (arra, p.l. 1115) , has allowed hhs to establish several programs to improve health care delivery through investment in health it, such as electronic health records (ehrs) (hhs, 2011d). for example, incentive funds authorized under the arra are helping eligible primary care as well as medical and surgical specialists with high ehr implementation costs that have been an obstacle to their widespread use (hogan and kissam, 2010). the health it infrastructure being established as a result of the hitech act is key to carrying out goals of the aca to improve quality of care through expanded measurement and reporting, reduce costs and improve efciency of care delivery and administrative processes, and improve access to care and coverage (buntin et al., 2010). although the government investment in health it is encouraging, implementation has thus far occurred at a slow pace. for health it to be used to its fullest capabilities to monitor hiv care, several barriers to adoption and utilization in settings that provide care and services to plwha have to be addressed. these include costs and stafng needed to implement and maintain it applications, privacy and condentiality concerns, and a variety of other factors described in more detail later in this report. most immonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 31portantly, the benets of health it cannot fully be realized without system interoperability or an infrastructure that supports the secure exchange of health information across providers, including physician practices, insurance providers, hospitals, and other entities (edwards et al., 2010).13 to a large extent, the health it systems currently employed in clinician and provider ofces capture patient information in different ways (e.g., using different terminology standards) and thus cannot ﬁtalkﬂ to each other. the existence of heterogeneous hiv data systems makes understanding interoperability essential. the exchange of health information across care sites is especially important for plwha who may transition across programs throughout the course of their illness (as previously described) and see different types of providers for the management of hiv and comorbid conditions. the committee™s approach to its chargethe committee reviewed information from a number of sources during the course of its deliberations, including the scientic literature, previous iom reports, and presentations by experts invited to speak with the committee on topics pertaining to its charge. as described in greater detail in the following chapters, the committee also reviewed existing hiv care indicators and measures of hiv care quality to inform its selection of core indicators. the committee requested information from individuals who work with various sources of data on hiv care and supportive services about the information collected to identify the best sources of data for estimating indicators. the committee reviewed data systems that are hiv specic (e.g., epidemiologic studies of plwha), as well as data systems that are not hiv specic (e.g., medicaid, medicare, private health insurance data systems) that include data relevant to monitoring hiv care. consistent with the nhas objective to increase access to care and improve health outcomes for plwha, the committee focused on identifying core indicators and data systems to track linkage and access to appropriate hiv care and related supportive services among diagnosed plwha. the committee also considered how indicators could be used to monitor hivrelated health disparities. reducing the occurrence of new hiv infections, another nhas objective, is critical to curbing the hiv epidemic in the united states. however, this report does not identify indicators and data systems to monitor reductions in new hiv infections because the committee interpreted its charge to apply to the population of plwha with diagnosed 13 in health care, interoperability refers to the ability of different information technology systems and software applications to communicate; to exchange data accurately, effectively, and consistently; and to use the information that has been exchanged (hhs, 2008).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshiv infection. in addition, the committee chose to focus this report on adult plwha, although the core indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health and substance abuse could be applied to adolescents as well.14 as the committee was preparing this report, there was a concurrent effort under way by hhs to identify domain areas from which standardized indicators can be identied to monitor federally funded hiv/aids prevention, treatment, and care services.15 the project was motivated by a need to develop a common set of metrics to streamline the collection of data to measure nhas objectives and reduce reporting requirements for grantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs (forsyth et al., 2011; valdiserri and forsyth, 2011). because the aims of the hhs effort overlapped with the charge to the committee to identify core indicators to gauge the impact of the nhas and aca on hiv care, the committee deemed it necessary to include the hhs effort in its information gathering. hhs representatives who are familiar with the hhs effort were invited to one of the committee™s meetings to discuss the types and sources of indicators under consideration. the committee also received periodic updates on hhs™s progress over the course of the study. providers of hiv care and supportive services are required to meet many reporting obligations related to compliance with federal grants, disease surveillance, and other activities. these reporting obligations require substantial staff time and may constrain provider capacity to engage in other activities such as the provision of hiv care and supportive services (iom, 2010, 2011b). taking into account the ongoing effort by hhs to streamline data reporting requirements for hhs grantees, the committee made an effort to be parsimonious in its identication of core indicators to gauge the impact of the nhas and aca on improvements in hiv care. report organizationchapter 2 of this report addresses the parts of the committee™s statement of task that pertain to data elements and core indicators related to continuous care and access to supportive services for plwha. the relative merits of each type of data are discussed, as well as whether the differences among data types (in particular, claims data and clinical data) encompass 14 although new cases of hiv in children (i.e., individuals under age 13) continue to occur, their frequency has diminished substantially with the implementation of routine hiv screening of pregnant women and the provision of art to hivinfected pregnant women, which greatly reduces the risk of mothertochild transmission (branson et al., 2006; cdc, 2002). 15 as of january 24, 2012, these domain areas included hiv+ diagnosis; early hiv diagnosis; initial linkage to care; sustained engagement in care; initiation of antiretroviral treatment; viral load suppression; and housing (personal communication, andrew forsyth, department of health and human services, january 24, 2012). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 33gaps in measures for hiv care. the chapter also presents the committee™s choice of core indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive services and identies and recommends the most critical data and indicators to gauge the impact of the nhas and the aca. chapter 3 discusses sources of data for estimating the core indicators identied in chapter 2, considers ways to maximize their usefulness, and recommends approaches for supplementing current data systems to gauge the impact of the nhas and the aca on hiv care. chapter 3 also discusses similar data collection and standardization efforts that should be utilized, as well as how to regularly obtain data to capture the care experiences of plwha without substantial new investments. chapter 4 discusses potential barriers to the collection of the data needed to estimate the core indicators recommended by the committee, including policy, reimbursement, and reporting issues that must be addressed to collect the necessary data. the chapter also considers how core indicator data can be collected without signicantly increasing provider burden. chapter 5 discusses ways in which health it can be utilized and congured to improve the collection of hiv care data, as well as models and best practices in data system integration to make existing data systems that capture hiv care data interoperable. chapter 6 describes how federal agencies can efciently analyze indicators of hiv care and disseminate data to improve the quality of hiv care. each chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations pertaining to aspects of the statement of task discussed in that chapter. referencesashman, j. j., r. conviser, and m. b. pounds. 2002. associations between hivpositive individuals receipt of ancillary services and medical care receipt and retention. aids care 14(suppl 1):s109s118. bhavan, k. p., v. n. kampalath, and e. t. overton. 2008. the aging of the hiv epidemic. current hiv/aids reports 5:150158.blair, j. m., a. d. mcnaghten, e. l. frazier, j. skarbinski, p. huang, and j. d. heffelnger. 2011. clincial and behavioral characteristics of adults receiving care for hiv infectionšmedical monitoring project, united states, 2007. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(20):117.bogart, l. m., g. wagner, f. h. galvan, and d. banks. 2010. conspiracy beliefs about hiv are related to antiretroviral treatment nonadherence among african american men with hiv. journal of acquired immune deciency syndrome 53(5):648655.branson, b. m., h. h. handseld, m. a. lampe, r. s. janssen, a. w. taylor, s. b. lyss, and j. e. clark. 2006. revised recommendations for hiv testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in healthcare settings. morbidity and mortality weekly report 55(rr14):117.buntin, m. b., s. h. jain, and d. blumenthal. 2010. health information technology: laying the infrastructure for national health reform. health affairs 29(6):12141219.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 monitoring hiv care in the united statescassidy, a. 2010. preventive services without cost sharing. new private health plans must pay for screenings and other preventive services. will the benets outweigh the costs? http://www.healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/brief.php?briefid=37 (accessed february 29, 2012).cbo (congressional budget ofce). 2011. cbo™s analysis of the major health care legislation enacted in march 2010. http://www.cbo.gov/publication/25155 (accessed february 29, 2012).cdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 2002. hiv testing among pregnant womenšunited states and canada, 19982001. morbidity and mortality weekly report 51(45):10131016.cdc. 2008. new estimates of u.s. hiv prevalence, 2006. cdc fact sheet. october.cdc. 2011a. acip recommendations. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/aciplist.htm (accessed february 29, 2012). cdc. 2011b. hiv surveillancešunited states, 19812008. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(21):689693.cdc. 2011c. vital signs: hiv prevention through care and treatmentšunited states. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(47):16181623.christopoulos, k. a., m. das, and g. n. colfax. 2011. linkage and retention in hiv care among men who have sex with men in the united states. clinical infectious diseases 52(suppl 2): s214s222.chu, c., and p. selwyn. 2011. an epidemic in evolution: the need for new models of hiv care in the chronic disease era. journal of urban health: bulletin of the new york academy of medicine 88(3):556566.cms (centers for medicare & medicaid services). 2012. closing the coverage gapšmedicare prescription drugs are becoming more affordable. http://medicare.gov/publications/pubs/pdf/11493.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).cohen, m. s., y. q. chen, m. mccauley, t. gamble, m. c. hosseinipour, n. kumarasamy, j. g. hakim, j. kumwenda, b. grinsztein, j. h. s. pilotto, s. v. godbole, s. mehendale, s. charjvalertsak, b. r. santos, k. h. mayer, i. f. hoffman, s. h. eshelman, e. piwowarmanning, l. wang, j. makhema, l. a. mills, g. de bruyn, i. sanne, j. eron, j. gallant, d. havlir, s. swindells, h. ribaudo, v. elharrar, d. burns, t. e. taha, k. nielsensaines, d. celentano, m. essex, and t. r. fleming. 2011. prevention of hiv1 infection with early antiretroviral therapy. new england journal of medicine 365:493505.edwards, a., i. hollin, j. barry, and s. kachnowski. 2010. barriers to crossinstitutional health information exchange: a literature review. journal of healthcare information management 24(3):2234.effros, r. b., c. v. fletcher, k. gebo, j. b. halter, w. r. hazzard, f. m. horne, r. e. huebner, e. n. janoff, a. c. justice, d. kuritzkes, s. g. nayeld, s. f. plaeger, k. e. schmader, j. r. ashworth, c. campanelli, c. p. clayton, b. rada, n. f. woolard, and k. p. high. 2008. aging and infectious diseases: workshop on hiv infection and aging: what is known and future research directions. clinical infectious diseases 47(4):542553.fleishman, j., and k. gebo. 2012. hiv research network. report to the committee. january 27. forsyth, a., a. lansky, and r. wolitski. 2011. achieving the vision of the nhas: an update of echpp and 12 cities activities. powerpoint presentation before the committee. washington, dc, september 1.gallant, j. e., a. a. adimora, j. k. carmichael, m. horberg, m. kitahata, e. b. quinlivan, j. l. raper, p. selwyn, and s. b. williams. 2011. essential components of effective hiv care: a policy paper of the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america and the ryan white medical providers coalition. clinical infectious diseases 53(11):10431050.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 35gardner, e. m., k. h. hullsiek, e. e. telzak, s. sharma, g. peng, w. j. burman, r. d. macarthur, m. chesney, g. friedland, s. b. mannheimer, and t. beirn. 2010. antiretroviral medication adherence and classspecic resistance in a large prospective clinical trial. aids 24(3):395403.gardner, e. m., m. p. mclees, j. f. steiner, c. del rio, and w. j. burman. 2011. the spectrum of engagement in hiv care and its relevance to testandtreat strategies for prevention of hiv infection. clinical infectious diseases 52:793800. granich, r. m., c. f. gilks, c. dye, k. m. de cock, and b. g. williams. 2009. universal voluntary hiv testing with immediate antiretroviral therapy as a strategy for elimination of hiv transmission: a mathematical model. lancet 373(9657):4857.hhs (department of health and human services). 2008. the national alliance for health information technology report to the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology on dening key health information technology terms. http://cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8 (accessed may 23, 2012).hhs. 2011a. affordable care act ensures women receive preventive services at no additional cost. news release. http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2011pres/08/20110801b.html (accessed february 29, 2012).hhs. 2011b. how the affordable care act helps people living with hiv/aids: 2011 and beyond. http://www.healthcare.gov/news/factsheets/2011/11/hivaids11092011a.html (accessed may 22, 2012).hhs. 2011c. health information technology: understanding hipaa privacy. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/healthit/index.html (accessed february 29, 2012).hhs. 2011d. hitech programs. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/community/healthithhsgovhitechprograms/1487 (accessed february 29, 2012).hogan, s. o., and s. m. kissam. 2010. measuring meaningful use. health affairs 29(4): 601606.horberg, m. a., j. a. aberg, l. w. cheever, p. renner, e. o™brien kaleba, and s. m. asch. 2010. development of national and multiagency hiv care quality measures. clinical infectious diseases 51(6):732738.hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2010. letter to ryan white hiv/aids program grantees. november 23. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/pinspals/adaptroopltr1011.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).iom (institute of medicine). 2001. crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. washington, dc: national academy press.iom. 2005. public financing and delivery of hiv/aids care: securing the legacy of ryan white. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2010. hiv screening and access to care: exploring barriers and facilitators to expanded hiv testing. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011a. clinical preventive services for women: closing the gaps. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011b. hiv screening and access to care: exploring the impact of policies on access to and provision of hiv care. washington, dc: the national academies press.jha, a. k., d. doolan, d. grandt, t. scott, and d. w. bates. 2008. the use of health information technology in seven nations. international journal of medical informatics 77(12):848854.justice, a. c. 2010. hiv and aging: time for a new paradigm. current hiv/aids reports 7(2):6976.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 monitoring hiv care in the united stateskff (kaiser family foundation). 2006. the role of part d for people with hiv/aids: coverage and costs of antiretrovirals under medicare drug plans. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/7548.pdf (accessed january 18, 2012). kff. 2011. focus on health reform: summary of the new health reform law. publication number 8061.mckay, e. g. 2011. hiv and health care reform: implications for safety net clinics. http://www.regionalprimarycare.org/spotlightonhealthreform/documents/policyandpracticehealthreformhivclinics21811.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).moore, r.d. 2011. epidemiology of hiv infection in the united states: implications for linkage and retention in care. clinical infectious diseases 52(suppl 2):s208s213.mugavero, m. j., w. e. norton, and m. s. saag. 2011. health care system and policy factors in˚uencing engagement in hiv medical care: piecing together the fragments of a fractured health care delivery system. clinical infectious diseases 52:s238s246.nastad (national alliance of state and territorial aids directors). 2010. hiv/hepatitis health reform watch. volume 3, august 9. http://www.nastad.org/docs/public/ infocus/2010811health%20reform%20watch%20volume%203.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).nastad. 2011. national adap monitoring project annual report. may. http://www.nastad.org/files/0200352011%20nastad%20national%20adap%20monitoring%20 project%20annual%20report.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).onap (white house ofce of national aids policy). 2010. national hiv/aids strategy for the united states. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/les/uploads/nhas.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).onap. 2011a. about onap. http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/onap/about (accessed february 29, 2012).onap. 2011b. implementing the national hiv/aids strategy: overview of agency operational plans. http://aids.gov/federalresources/policies/nationalhivaidsstrategy/nhasoperationalplanoverview.pdf (accessed february 29, 2012).parashar, s., a. k. palmer, n. o™brien, k. chan, a. shen, s. coulter, j. s. montaner, and r. s. hogg. 2011. sticking to it: the effect of maximally assisted therapy on antiretroviral treatment adherence among individuals living with hiv who are unstably housed. aids behavior 15(8):16121622. prejean, j., r. song, a. hernandez, r. ziebell, t. green, f. walker, l. s. lin, q. an, j. mermin, a. lansky, and h. i. hall. 2011. estimated hiv incidence in the united states, 20062009. plosone 6(8):e17502.robertson, m. j., r. a. clark, e. d. charlebois, j. tulsky, h. l. long, d. r. bangsberg, and a. r. moss. 2004. hiv seroprevalence among homeless and marginally housed adults in san francisco. american journal of public health 94(7):12071217.sethi, a. k., d. d. celentano, s. j. gange, r. d. moore, and j. e. gallant. 2003. association between adherence to antiretroviral therapy and human immunodeciency virus drug resistance. clinical infectious diseases 37(8):11121118.shiels, m. s., r. m. pfeiffer, m. h. gail, h. i. hall, j. m. li, a. k. chaturvedi, k. bhatia, t. s. uldrick, r. yarchoan, j. j. goedert, and e. a. engels. 2011. cancer burden in the hivinfected population in the united states. journal of the national cancer institute 103(9):753762.sikkema, k. j., m. h. watt, a. s. drabkin, c. s. meade, n. b. hansen, and b. w. pence. 2010. mental health treatment to reduce hiv transmission risk behavior: a positive prevention model. aids behavior 14(2):252262.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 37uspstf (u.s. preventive services task force). 2010. uspstf a and b recommendations. list of preventive services that have a rating of a or b that are relevant for implementing the affordable care act. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsabrecs.htm (accessed february 29, 2012).valdiserri, r., and a. forsyth. 2011. dhhs/ohap consultation on hiv/aids core indicators, data streamlining, and federal reporting requirements. washington, dc, september 19.weaver, m. r., c. j. conover, r. j. proescholdbell, p. s. arno, a. ang, k. k. uldall, and s. l. ettner. 2009. costeffectiveness analysis of integrated care for people with hiv, chronic mental illness and substance abuse disorders. journal of mental health policy and economics 12(1):3346.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.392indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive servicesthis chapter addresses the committee™s charge to ﬁprovide recommendations for the most critical data and indicators to gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) and the patient protection and affordable care act (aca) in improving hiv/aids careﬂ in the united states (statement of task). the chapter presents the committee™s choice of core and additional indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to supportive services, such as housing, for people living with hiv/aids (plwha); the process by which the committee identied and prioritized the indicators; the committee™s rationale for selecting each indicator; and the data (elements) needed to measure the indicators. the committee recognizes the importance of efforts to increase access to hiv testing and the number of hivinfected individuals who are aware of their serostatus (iom, 2010, 2011b,c), as well as the need to reduce the transmission of hiv through efforts to reduce risk behaviors among all persons. based on its statement of task, however, the committee focused its attention on linkage and access to and provision of appropriate hiv care and related supportive services for people already diagnosed with hiv/aids.11 although the committee did not focus on indicators specically related to reducing the transmission of hiv by people in care for hiv (e.g., condom use), some indicators, such as those related to undetectable viral load, also promote transmission reduction. preliminary results from a large hiv prevention trials network randomized clinical trial (hptn 052) indicate that early use of antiretroviral therapy (art) in plwha reduces sexual transmission of hiv to an uninfected partner by 96 percent (cohen et al., 2011). likewise, the committee did specically address the use of art to reduce mothertochild transmission in pregnant women with hiv as part of the prenatal care provided to hivinfected pregnant women.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthe chapter also discusses different types of data relevant to patient care and their usefulness for evaluating the continuity (and quality) of hiv care and access to supportive services. the relative merits of each type of data are discussed, as well as whether the differences among data types (in particular claims data and clinical data) ﬁencompass gaps in measures for hiv careﬂ (statement of task question 1b). the chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations for ﬁthe most critical data and indicators for gauging the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy (onap, 2010) and the patient protection and affordable care act [p.l. 111148] in improving hiv/aids care.ﬂindicators of clinical hiv care and access to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesthe institute of medicine (iom) letter report leading health indicators for healthy people 2020 (iom, 2011d, p. 8) dened the term ﬁindicatorﬂ as ﬁa measurementﬂ and ﬁleading health indicatorsﬂ as ﬁquantitative expressions of healthrelated concepts that re˚ect major public health concerns.ﬂ for the purposes of the present report, indicators of hiv care and access to supportive services are dened as quantitative expressions (measurements) pertaining to the state of hiv care and the availability of supportive services for plwha (and subgroups thereof) in the united states. ﬁcore indicatorsﬂ are those indicators deemed by the committee to be fundamental both to assessing the extent to which persons diagnosed with hiv are connected to appropriate medical care, are maintained in care over time, and have access to needed supportive services in the united states and to gauging the impact of the nhas and the aca in improving hiv/aids care.indicators may include process measures and outcome measures. process measures pertain to processes of care, such as regular visits for routine care, lab tests and screening performed, and therapies initiated. outcome measures pertain to the actual health outcomes or status of patients. mortality and morbidity are ultimate outcome measures for tracking access to quality hiv care for people diagnosed with hiv. intermediate outcome measures include cd4+ tcell counts (cd4 counts) and plasma hiv rna levels (viral loads), which re˚ect disease progression and infectivity. process measures are important indicators of quality of care and treatments received, which research has shown are directly associated with good clinical outcomes (kitahata, 1996; kitahata et al., 2000, 2003; landon et al., 2005). for example, regular monitoring of cd4 counts implies goodquality hiv care, with the expectation of good outcomes.indicators often are dened in terms of a percentage, proportion, or other relative measure and are not synonymous with the data elements monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 41necessary to assess them. multiple data elements may be required to generate an indicator. for example, ﬁthe proportion of plwha in the united states who have a cd4+ cell count above xﬂ is an indicator, while the data needed to assess that indicator are cd4 counts (specically the number of people with a cd4+ cell count above x) and the total number of hivinfected individuals in the united states.backgrounda number of important sets of performance measures (horberg et al., 2010), health objectives (hhs, 2010), and indicators (pepfar, 2009) related to hiv screening and care have been developed or revised in recent years. the nhas also identies several specic targets, in addition to its three general goals of ﬁreducing the number of people who become infected with hiv; increasing access to care and optimizing health outcomes for people living with hiv; and reducing hivrelated health disparitiesﬂ (onap, 2010, p. 1). these sources provide a basis for the committee™s development of a set of indicators for measuring hiv care and access to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services in the united states (appendix table 21).2hiv care quality measuresmichael horberg and colleagues (2010) describe the development of a set of 17 performance measures for hiv care (table 21), most of which have been endorsed by the national quality forum (nqf), a nonprot organization that sets national consensus standards on performance in health care (see nqf, 2011a).the measures represent a consensus among members of a working group of experts convened by the national committee for quality assurance, in conjunction with the health resources and services administration (hrsa), the physician consortium for performance improvement of the american medical association, and the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america. the effort to produce a single set of 2 all indicators considered by the committee are populationaggregated individual measures, such as the proportion linked to care within 3 months of diagnosis and mortality rate. the committee recognizes the importance of systemlevel indicators, such as the structural dimensions of system comprehensiveness, capacity, integration, and accessibility described in the health resources and services administration (hrsa) system assessment project (conviser, 2007). systemlevel indicators are important because they are related to getting diagnosed individuals linked to, engaged in, and retained in care. however, the committee understood its charge to be recommendations for indicators to measure the quality as well as the continuity of hiv care received by plwha in the united states.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 monitoring hiv care in the united statestable 21 hiv care quality measuresmeasurelevel of  care  impactedalevel of evidencebprocess of care 1. retention in care (seen at least twice annually at least 60 days apart)plevel ii and qm 2. cd4+ cell count measurement (measured at least twice annually)plevel ii and qmscreening 3. gonorrhea/chlamydia screening (at least once)plevel ii 4. syphilis screening (annually)plevel ii and qm 5. injection drug use screening (annually)plevel ii 6. highrisk sexual behavior screening (annually)plevel i and qm 7. tuberculosis screening (at least once)plevel i and qm 8. hepatitis b screening (at least once)plevel iii and qm 9. hepatitis c screening (at least once)plevel iii and qmimmunization10. in˚uenza immunization (annually)blevel iii11. pneumococcal immunization (at least once)blevel ii and qm12. hepatitis b vaccination rst dose received (if appropriate)plevel ii and qm13. hepatitis b vaccination series completed (if appropriate)slevel ii and qmprophylactic therapy14. pcp prophylaxis if cd4+ cell count <200 cells/µlblevel i and qmart prescription15. appropriately prescribed artplevel i and qmviral control (at least 6 months postart initiation)16. achieving maximal viral control if prescribed artslevel ii and qm17. achieving maximal viral control if prescribed art or treatment plan documentation if maximal viral control not achievedplevel ii and qmnote: art, antiretroviral therapy; pcp, pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia.alevels of care are as follows: p, physician; s, system; b, both.blevels of evidence are as follows: i, evidence from ˛1 randomized controlled trial; ii, evidence from ˛1 clinical trial, multiple cohort studies, or multiple times series or dramatic results of uncontrolled experiments; iii, expert opinion only; qm, previous quality measure data indicating gaps in care.source: adapted from horberg et al., 2010, table 1.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 43national performance standards for hiv care was precipitated by a proliferation of hiv performance measures developed by different bodies over a number of years (horberg et al., 2010)3 and heeds the call from the 2004 iom report measuring what matters: allocations, planning, and quality assessment for the ryan white care act for a standard set of quality measures that are applicable across the range of delivery systems (iom, 2004). most of the performance measures endorsed by nqf are process measures. research has shown that patients who receive more routine ofce visits; appropriate initiation and prescription of antiretroviral therapy (art); and appropriate screenings, prophylaxis, and immunizations have better outcomes than those who do not (kitahata, 1996; kitahata et al., 2000, 2003; landon et al., 2005).4 however, other factors (e.g., untreated nonhiv comorbidities, including mental illness; contextual factors such as food and/or housing insecurity) can result in poorer outcomes even under conditions of the most expert care and perfect treatment adherence. for this reason, outcome measures (e.g., the results of cd4 counts, mortality) are more denitive markers of successful management of hiv disease, although even with outcome indicators there are numerous factors that can affect hiv quality care and may not be able to be assessed. in addition, despite their usefulness, outcome measures generally are more difcult to obtain than process measures, although the increasing use of electronic health records (ehrs) has signicantly advanced the collection of health outcomes data.taken together, process measures and outcome measures provide a strong basis for the development of associated hiv care indicators and are important for assessing the impact of the nhas and aca in improving hiv/aids care in the united states. with appropriate care and treatment, hiv is a chronic disease with long disease progression time. policies that improve hiv care may have an immediate impact on some process indicators (such as frequency of cd4 testing), but a delayed impact on certain outcome indicators (particularly mortality and secondary infections). the goal of any public health intervention is to improve outcomes, but process indicators can provide early feedback about whether the policy guiding 3 see, e.g., new york state department of health aids institute, hiv quality of care program, (nysdhai, 2011); veterans health administration, hivqueri (bozzette et al., 2000); kaiser permanente (horberg et al., 2011); ryan white program, hrsa, hiv/aids bureau, hivqual (hrsa, 2011a,b).4 studies such as these suggest that provider experience in caring for plwha improves quality of care and patient outcomes. as the number of individuals with hiv who are in care continues to increase, and with the evolution of hiv as a chronic condition, there will be a continued need for hiv care to move away from infectious disease (hiv) specialists toward nonspecialist primary care providers who have experience in treating hiv patients (iom, 2011c). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthat intervention works. this may be especially important for particular subpopulations of plwha, for whom conditions may moderate the effect of a given intervention. for example, a particular group might be linked to care sooner and receive more quality care, but have less change in mortality (compared to other groups) due to chronic housing and social service needs or even different sets of hivrelated risk environments or risk clusters.process indicators also can provide insights into why a policy is or is not working. if mortality remains the same despite improvements in certain areas (e.g., linking people to care, routine cd4 testing, appropriate art initiation), the collection of additional process indicators may highlight other areas that need to be addressed (e.g., screening and immunization for certain coinfections).healthy people 2020 objectiveshealthy people 2020 is the most recent incarnation of an initiative begun more than 30 years ago to identify databased objectives for improving health among americans (hhs, 2011a). healthy people 2020 identies 18 objectives relating to hiv: 14 relate to hiv prevention, testing, and diagnosis, and 4 relate to health care, survival, and death following diagnosis (hhs, 2010). in keeping with the committee™s focus on hiv care following diagnosis, three of the latter four objectives (hiv.9, hiv.10, and hiv.12), in addition to one pertaining to mothertochild transmission (hiv.8), served as a basis for associated hiv care indicators (see box 21). pepfar indicatorsindicators developed by the u.s. president™s emergency plan for aids relief (pepfar) provided another basis for the indicators recommended by the committee. originally authorized by the u.s. congress in 2003 and reauthorized in 2008, pepfar is an unprecedented federal government investment to address the hiv/aids epidemic around the world. now a cornerstone of president obama™s global health initiative, pepfar provides support for national programs and strategies in more than 85 host countries to treat adults and children currently living with hiv/aids and to reduce the transmission of hiv (pepfar, 2011). pepfar has developed a set of essential reported indicators to gather information for planning, monitoring, and management purposes (pepfar, 2009).the pepfar indicators that pertain to the treatment of plwha and the provision of supportive services, such as food assistance, also provided a basis for the committee™s development of core indicators related to continuous care and access to supportive services for plwha in the united states (box 22).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 45nhas goalsas discussed in chapter 1, the nhas lists three primary goals: (1) reduction of hiv transmission; (2) increased access to care and optimized health outcomes for plwha; and (3) reduction of hivrelated health disparities (onap, 2010, p. 1). within these three general goals, the nhas identies a number of specic measurable objectives to be met by 2015. of particular interest for the committee™s work are the specic targets pertaining to increased access to hiv care, improved health outcomes, and reduced hivrelated health disparities.the nhas (onap, 2010, p. 21) lists three targets regarding increased access to care:˚increase the proportion of newly diagnosed patients linked to clinical care within 3 months of their hiv diagnosis from 65 to 85 percent. ˚increase the proportion of ryan white hiv/aids program clients who are in continuous care (at least two visits for routine hiv box 21 healthy people 2020 summary of objectives: hivdiagnosis of hiv infection and aids [hiv1œhiv7] hiv8. reduce the number of perinatally acquired hiv and aids cases death, survival and medical healthcare after diagnosis of hiv infection and aids sion to aids hiv10. increase the proportion of hivinfected adolescents and adults who receive hiv care and treatment consistent with current standardshiv11. increase the proportion of persons surviving more than 3 years after a diagnosis with aidshiv12. reduce deaths from hiv infection monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 monitoring hiv care in the united statesmedical care in 12 months at least 3 months apart) from 73 to 80 percent. ˚increase the percentage of ryan white hiv/aids program clients with permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. (this serves as a measurable proxy of [onap™s] efforts to expand access to [u.s.] department of housing and urban development [hud] and other housing supports to all needy people living with hiv.)although the nhas does not specify it explicitly, the text makes clear that the continuous care target for ryan white clients serves as a measurable proxy of efforts to ensure that all diagnosed hivinfected persons are maintained in care (onap, 2010, pp. 2325).the nhas (onap, 2010, p. 31) also lists three targets in support of the goal of reducing hivrelated health disparities:box 22 pepfar essential reported indicatorspreventionp1.2.d number of hivpositive pregnant women who received antiretrovirals to reduce risk of mothertochild transmissioncarec2.1.d number of hivpositive adults and children receiving a minimum of one clinical servicec2.4.d percentage of hivpositive patients who were screened for tuberculosis (tb) in hiv care or treatment settingsc2.5.d percentage of hivpositive patients in hiv care or treatment (preart or art) who started tb treatmentc5.1.d number of eligible clients who received food and/or other nutrition servicestreatmentt1.2.d number of adults and children with advanced hiv infection receiving art [current]monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 47˚increase the proportion of hivdiagnosed gay and bisexual men with undetectable viral load by 20 percent. ˚increase the proportion of hivdiagnosed blacks with undetectable viral load by 20 percent. ˚increase the proportion of hivdiagnosed latinos with undetectable viral load by 20 percent.as discussed in more detail later, these six specic strategy targets provided the basis for several of the indicators recommended by the committee. since the issue of continuity of care clearly is not limited to ryan white hiv/aids program clients, the continuityofcare indicator identied by the committee is directed toward the general population of plwha but can also be applied to ryan white hiv/aids program clients or any other subpopulation. the same is true for the indicators relating to permanent housing and undetectable viral load.selection of indicators of hiv care and access to supportive servicesin addition to the hivrelated performance measures, health objectives, indicators, and nhas goals discussed in the preceding sections, the committee™s selection of core indicators ﬁto gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act in improving hiv/aids careﬂ (statement of task) was informed by the identication of two overarching goals for the provision of hiv care: (1) to optimize health outcomes for plwha and (2) to reduce the risk of transmitting the virus to others. these goals of hiv care are best achieved through full engagement of plwha in clinical hiv care, as depicted in figures 21 and 22.primary barriers to optimal outcomes for plwha include late diagnosis, delayed linkage to care, poor retention in care, delayed initiation of art, and poor adherence to art (i.e., discontinuing or intermittent art), as well as untreated nonhiv comorbidities and unmet basic needs (castilla et al., 2002; gardner et al., 2011; justice, 2006; lo et al., 2002). figure 23 shows the number of people lost to care at various points along the care continuum. identication of benchmarks and points at which diagnosed plwha are lost along the continuum of engagement in hiv care from diagnosis to death served as a basis for the committee™s selection of process and outcome indicators of quality clinical hiv care. throughout its deliberations, the committee, in keeping with its charge to recommend indicators that ﬁcapture the care experiences of people living with hiv without substantial new investmentsﬂ and mindful of the need not to increase reporting burden unduly, sought to balance the numerous facets of quality hiv care against the need for parsimony in its selection of core indicators; monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 monitoring hiv care in the united statesfigure 21bitmappedpoor qualityfigure 21 continuum of engagement in care.source: cheever, 2007.testingdiagnosisprimary caretreatmentvirologic suppressionnew figure 22figure 22 continuum of hiv care arrow.source: adapted from das, 2011.hence, the core indicators re˚ect more general aspects of clinical hiv care, while more specic aspects are included in the additional indicators. in addition, the committee was specically asked to address indicators related to access to supportive services, such as housing. consideration of signicant mediators of continuous engagement and optimal health outcomes in hiv care, including receipt of needed mental health and substance abuse services, homelessness and housing instability, food insecurity, and lack of transportation needed to access medical and supportive services, informed the committee™s selection of core and additional indicators in these areas. a recent series of iom reports discusses policies, facilitators, and barriers surrounding expanded hiv testing and access to care (iom, 2010, 2011b,c). the present report focuses on adults who have been diagnosed with hiv and on indicators pertaining to the provision of hiv care and supportive services from diagnosis forward. although the indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health and substance abuse are targeted toward adults, they apply to adolescents (˛13 years) as well. there are tens of thousands of new diagnoses annually among the group of individuals monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 4913 and older, with the highest rates between the ages of 20 and 49 years (cdc, 2012, table 1a).5 in contrast, the use of art to reduce or prevent perinatal transmission of the virus has resulted in a relatively small number of newly diagnosed pediatric hiv cases in the united states each year. in 2008, 218 children under the age of 13 were diagnosed with hiv; by 2010, the number had dropped to 185 (cdc, 2012, table 1a). although some of the indicators, such as screening for sexually transmitted infections (stis) and mental health and substance use disorders, generally do not apply to children under the age of 13, others, such as mortality rate, apply equally to all ages; indicators that re˚ect treatment guidelines apply to children as well, once they are adapted to re˚ect pediatric guidelines for hiv care (hhs, 2011e).the indicators crafted by the committee re˚ect the current science and guidelines for the practice of hiv care at the time of writing. although the specic details of the indicators (e.g., threshold cd4+ cell counts) may evolve over time as the science and practice of hiv care changes, the prin5 although there is a low rate of new hiv diagnoses among 13 to 14yearolds (cdc, 2012, table 1a), adolescents 13 and older fall within the same treatment guidelines as adults (hhs, 2011d) and therefore are included in the group. in addition, the current centers for disease control and prevention hiv screening guidelines also focus on individuals age 13 and older (branson et al., 2006).1,106,400874,056655,542437,028262,217209,7731,178,350941,950725,302480,395426,590328,4750200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,0001,200,0001,400,000hivinfectedhivdiagnosedlinked to hiv careretained in hiv careon artsuppressed viral load (200 copies /ml)population of people living withhiv/aids in the united statesgardnermmwr19%28%100%40%100%79%59%24%80%62%41%36%figure 23 engagement in hiv care cascade.source: adapted from cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 monitoring hiv care in the united statesciples embodied in the indicators (e.g., early diagnosis, linkage and retention in care, timely initiation of art) continue to pertain.6core indicators related to clinical hiv carediagnosisthe rst benchmark along the continuum of hiv care is diagnosis. although the number of persons diagnosed with hiv earlier in the course of their infection has increased (cdc, 2009), there is evidence that many plwha continue to be diagnosed late. for example, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) estimates that in 2009 32 percent of all hiv cases reported by 46 states with condential namebased reporting received a diagnosis of aids less than 12 months after their initial hiv diagnosis (cdc, 2012, table 10a). cdc also estimates that approximately 20 percent of plwha in the united states are unaware that they have hiv (cdc, 2011a,b),7 putting them at risk for being diagnosed late, by which time symptoms may have already developed and treatment may not be as effective. given the importance of care and treatment for improving health outcomes, timely diagnosis is a crucial rst step in the provision of quality hiv care. in addition, research shows that individuals who are aware that they have hiv are less likely to transmit the virus to others (pinkerton et al., 2008).at the time of hiv diagnosis, patients should be evaluated to assess the stage of the disease and establish a baseline to help determine management plans and goals (hhs, 2011d, p. 4), including the need for mental health and substance abuse treatment and supportive services. newly diagnosed patients also should receive recommended testing and screening, including cd4 and viral load testing, screening for concurrent infections and antiretroviral (arv) drug resistance, and routine laboratory tests (aberg et al., 2009, p. 662, table 5; hhs, 2011d, p. 4; kaplan et al., 2009).6 the committee considered guidelines for hiv treatment in its development of the indicators for clinical hiv care, including the u.s. department of health and human services guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in hiv1infected adults and adolescents, dated october 14, 2011, that were current at the time the report went to press (hhs, 2011d). a revised version of the guidelines was issued march 27, 2012, and readers may wish to take account of the revised guidelines when considering the indicators.7 michael campsmith and colleagues (2010) used an extended backcalculation approach based on the number of hiv diagnoses by calendar year and disease severity (i.e., whether the individual received an aids diagnosis in the same calendar year as the hiv diagnosis) to estimate the total number of infections (known diagnosed cases plus estimated undiagnosed cases). they then subtracted the estimated number of deaths (obtained from national hiv/aids surveillance data) to arrive at an estimated prevalence of undiagnosed cases (232,700 95% ci = 221,200244,200).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 51cd4 count at diagnosis provides a baseline against which subsequent tests can be compared. along with the presence or absence of an aids dening illness, it serves as an indicator of the health status of the individual at hiv diagnosis. higher cd4 counts at diagnosis indicate better health status and a shorter time between infection and diagnosis. early diagnosis results in better health outcomes and decreased likelihood of viral transmission.the committee recommends the following indicator as a measure of the health status of individuals at diagnosis and the timeliness of diagnosis.˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsthe indicator also can be used as a measure of the success of testing efforts within a population: an increase in the rate of early diagnosis indicates more successful testing efforts. aggregate measures, such as median cd4 counts at diagnosis, also may be used to track the success of expanded testing efforts within a given population, with higher median cd4 counts being indicative of more people being tested sooner following infection.linkage to and continuity of caretimely linkage to care following diagnosis is the second benchmark in hiv care. currently only 64 to 77 percent of individuals newly diagnosed with hiv are linked to hiv care within 3 to 4 months of diagnosis (see cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011; marks et al., 2010; torian and wiewel, 2011). a study of timelimited case management intervention focused on linkage to hiv care demonstrated improved linkage to care over the standardofcare arm, which received only passive referral to a local hiv care provider in addition to information about hiv and local care resources (gardner et al., 2005). the more quickly newly diagnosed individuals enter hiv care, the better their health outcomes are apt to be. art may be initiated more promptly, with an attendant reduction in viral load, which leads to improved health outcomes and a reduction in hiv transmission. in addition, prompt receipt of prevention services, such as screening and treatment for stis and mental health and substance use disorders, risk reduction counseling and behavioral interventions, assistance with partner notication, and housing assistance and other supportive services, is important for reducing transmission of the virus and improving health outcomes among plwha (cdc, 2010b; crepaz, et al., 2006; kamb et al., 1998; shain et al., 1999; weinhardt et al., 1999; wolitski et al., 2005). the nhas sets a target of linkage to care within 3 months of diagnosis (onap, 2010, p. 21), as does cdc™s hiv prevention strategic plan (cdc, monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 monitoring hiv care in the united states2007). although newly diagnosed plwha ideally would be linked to care within 1 month of diagnosis, the 3month time frame is more realistic and dovetails with existing literature and public health goals.given the importance of timely linkage to hiv care in optimizing health outcomes of plwha and in reducing transmission of the virus, the committee recommends the following core indicator.˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisretention in or continuity of care is another key aspect of engagement in hiv care. as previously noted, regular ofce visits for ongoing care, appropriate initiation and monitoring of art, and monitoring of cd4 and viral load levels, as well as provision of recommended screening, prophylaxis, and treatment for comorbid conditions, are important for ensuring optimal health outcomes for hivinfected individuals. missed visits during the rst year of care are associated with an increasing risk of death as the number of missed visits increases (giordano et al., 2007; mugavero et al., 2009; park et al., 2007). given that approximately 50 percent of diagnosed plwha are not engaged in regular care (cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011; giordano et al., 2007), increasing the proportion of diagnosed hivinfected individuals in continuous care is important to the success of the nhas.measuring continuity of care requires specifying what constitutes appropriate ongoing care. however, clinical care guidelines may not be consistent and may also evolve over time to re˚ect updates in clinical practice. hiv care quality measures recommend hivinfected patients be seen at least twice within a 12month period, at least 60 days apart, and receive cd4 testing at least once every 6 months (horberg et al., 2010). with regard to ryan white hiv/aids program clients, the nhas denes continuous care as at least two visits within a 12month period at least 3 months apart (onap, 2010, p. 21). regular hivrelated laboratory tests, such as cd4 and viral load testing, provide evidence of continuity of clinical hiv care (perkins et al., 2008). u.s. department of health and human services (hhs) guidelines recommend cd4 and viral load testing every 3 to 6 months prior to initiating art and extend the interval to every 6 to 12 months in clinically stable patients with a suppressed viral load on art (hhs, 2011d, p. i). although not directly representative of ofce visits, because patients may have ofce visits in addition to those associated with laboratory testing or receive laboratory testing independent of an ofce visit, regular monitoring of patients™ cd4 and viral load levels can serve as proxies for care visits when evaluating continuity of care.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 53the committee recommends the following core indicator for tracking retention in hiv care.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)improvements in linkage to and retention in care are particularly important for a number of subpopulations of plwha that are at heightened risk for delayed entry into and poor retention in care, although the atrisk groups do not re˚ect consistent racial, ethnic, or sex differences (chain fact sheet, 2004; dennis et al., 2011; meditz et al., 2011; mugavero et al., 2007), because the individuals affected often vary with local resources and considerations. however, groups of particular concern, including homeless and unstably housed individuals, hivinfected adolescents, those living in rural areas of the south, and some racial or ethnic minorities, are often burdened with a set of complex social factors such as a lack of resources (denning and dinenno, 2010); fears about their hiv status being revealed and the resultant stigma and discrimination (sayles et al., 2009); or distrust of the medical system (bogart et al., 2010; whetten et al., 2006a).quality of hiv carequality of hiv care is distinct from continuity of care, since a patient might be seen regularly but not receive quality hiv carešthat is, care in accordance with accepted practice guidelines or measures. a number of the indicators identied by the committee could serve to measure quality of care as well as linkage to and continuity of care. for example, regular monitoring of patients™ cd4 and viral load levels (discussed in the previous section) can provide information about their continuity of care, as well as about the quality of their hiv care. the core indicators that relate to quality of care and health outcomes are presented in the following discussion.cd4 and viral load testing as process measures, cd4 and viral load testing in accordance with recommended guidelines not only demonstrate continuity of care but also are acceptable indicators of quality hiv care. regular cd4 testing improves health outcomes in plwha by permitting providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to initiate art, assess immunologic response to art, and assess the need for initiation or discontinuation of prophylaxis for opportunistic infections (ois) (hhs, 2011d, p. 7). regular viral load testing is also important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease, particularly therapeutic response in individuals on art (hhs, 2011d, p. 9). decreased viral load, or monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 monitoring hiv care in the united statesundetectable viral load in individuals on art, is associated with improved health outcomes and reduced transmission of the virus.the appropriate number and intervals for ﬁregularﬂ cd4 and viral load testing vary with the health status and needs of each individual. hhs guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in hiv1infected adults and adolescents recommend testing every 3 to 6 months, with additional testing at the time of art initiation or modication (hhs, 2011d, pp. 610).8 the interval between tests may be increased to every 6 to 12 months for clinically stable individuals on art with viral suppression. for the purpose of tracking the impact of the nhas and the aca on hiv care in the united states, the committee chose to dene regular testing as two or more tests in the preceding 12 months. although the committee recognizes that one test per year could serve as a minimum standard to identify individuals who clearly have fallen out of care, in most cases it would be inappropriate to consider this frequency of testing to be indicative of optimal treatment.accordingly the committee recommends the following core indicators for regular cd4 and viral load testing.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 months ˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months art initiation and adherence appropriate initiation of art, the third benchmark of quality hiv care, is crucial to increased longevity and reduced morbidity among plwha and important for reducing transmission of the virus to others (hhs, 2011d). for this reason, a signicant measure of the quality of hiv care is the proportion of plwha who are started on the correct drug regimen at the appropriate time. although approximately 77 to 80 percent of individuals being treated with art have an undetectable viral load, many plwha are not on art (cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011). according to estimates, only 24 to 36 percent of plwha are receiving art and only 19 to 28 percent of plwha overall have an undetectable viral load (cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011). as indicated in figure 23, the gap lies in undetected cases of hiv infection, inadequate linkage to and retention in care for those who are diagnosed, and delayed or absent initiation of art.the current hhs guidelines (hhs, 2011d, p. 27) specify that indi8 the guidelines also recommend viral load testing 2 to 8 weeks following art initiation or modication and, if needed, every 4 to 8 weeks thereafter until suppression to <200 copies/ml (hhs 2011d, p. 6).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 55viduals with a cd4+ cell count below 350 cells/mm3 or those who have a history of an aidsdening illness should be started on art. the guidelines further recommend that art be initiated in people whose cd4+ cell counts are between 350 and 500 cells/mm3, but the hhs panel was divided on whether to recommend art for patients with cd4+ cell counts greater than 500 cells/mm3. in formulating a core indicator for initiation of art, the committee followed the hhs panel™s recommended threshold of 500 cells/mm3.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on artinitial results from the hiv treatment prevention network™s hptn 052 clinical trial funded by the national institutes of health indicate that early initiation of art in plwha reduces sexual transmission of hiv in serostatusdiscordant couples by 96 percent (cohen et al., 2011). in an august 2011 letter to hhs secretary kathleen sebelius, the presidential advisory council on hiv/aids (pacha) emphasized the importance of these ﬁtreatment as preventionﬂ ndings, stating that ﬁhhssupported hiv clinical treatment guidelines must be revised to re˚ect these ndingsﬂ (pacha, 2011). if hhs were to revise its guidelines according to pacha™s recommendation, the committee would support similar revision of its artinitiation indicator. movement toward universal treatment for plwha has begun. the san francisco and, more recently, new york city departments of health now recommend initiation of art regardless of individuals™ cd4 count (charlebois et al., 2011; nyc dohmh, 2011). if a policy of universal treatment becomes widespread, a more appropriate indicator of art initiation would be the time from diagnosis to art initiation.with the advent of more potent antiretroviral drugs, the goal of art is durable virologic suppression, the fourth benchmark of quality hiv care. adherence to a prescribed antiretroviral drug regimen is an important factor in successful treatment with art. failure to take antiretroviral medications as prescribed not only decreases the drugs™ effectiveness in reducing individuals™ viral load but also may increase the risk of hiv transmission to others and may lead to the emergence of arvresistant strains of the virus, undermining the durability of the present drug regimens. people on art may fail to take their drugs as prescribed for a variety of reasons, including inability to pay for the medications, undesirable side effects, serious mental illness, lack of food, stigma, and forgetfulness. it is important to work with nonadherent patients to identify and address the causes of nonadherence (cooperman et al., 2012; de bruin et al., 2010; henderson et al., 2011; hhs, 2011d, pp. 122125; reisner et al., 2009; simoni et al., 2006, 2010).although adequate adherence is an important factor in achieving viral monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 monitoring hiv care in the united statessuppression, viral suppression itself is the most important outcome measure for successful art. hivinfected individuals with a viral load below the level of detection experience signicantly improved health outcomes (hhs, 2011d, p. 9). in addition, as reinforced by the results of the hptn 052 clinical trial, individuals with virologic suppression are much less likely to infect others (cohen et al., 2011). current estimates indicate that 13 to 20 percent of individuals on art still have a detectable viral load (cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011). imperfect viral load suppression among treated individuals motivates the committee™s identication of the following core indicator of successful treatment with art. ˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionthis indicator serves not only as a measure of the status of the epidemic in terms of optimal health outcomes and decreased risk of hiv transmission but also as a surrogate measure of treatment adherence and the prescription of effective drug regimens. an alternate indicator would be the time from diagnosis to virologic suppression.additional outcome indicators in aggregate, cd4 and viral load test results provide information about the status of the epidemic nationally or in specic subpopulations or geographic areas. although virologic suppression is the primary outcome indicator for individuals on art, the committee recommends two additional outcome indicators for monitoring the provision of quality hiv care to plwha.maintaining a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating ois and cancers among plwha (hhs, 2011d, pp. 2831). since 64 to 76 percent of plwha currently are not on art (cdc, 2011c; gardner et al., 2011), the following indicator serves as an outcome measure for this group, as well as for those who are on art, but have not achieved virologic suppression.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count 350 cells/mm3if a large number of previously undiagnosed individuals with latestage hiv disease entered care, the cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 indicator might drop, suggesting poor system performance. however, this change could be interpreted correctly in the full context of all the indicators.mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 57with hiv infection and serves as another aggregatelevel measure of hiv care. mortality among plwha should be inversely related to the quality of overall care delivered. to avoid the difculties inherent in identifying and reporting which deaths among plwha resulted directly or indirectly from hiv infection, the committee recommends the use of allcause mortality in the following indicator. ˚˚allcause mortality rate among people with diagnosed hiv infectiontaken together, the committee recommends the preceding indicators as core indicators related to continuous and quality clinical care for plwha. core indicators pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services, such as housing, that affect the health outcomes of plwha are discussed in the following section.core indicators related to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesa number of factors, including mental health symptoms and disorders, substance abuse, lack of wellbeing, and poor quality of life, as well as difculty securing and maintaining basic needs of housing, food, and access and transportation to medical care and supportive services, have been shown to have a signicant, negative impact on the health status and health outcomes of plwha (see, e.g., conviser and pounds, 2002a,b; gaynes et al., 2007; kidder et al., 2007; leaver et al., 2007; lo et al., 2002; pence, 2009; royal et al., 2009; stall et al., 2003; weiser et al., 2009a,b). the committee identied screening and treatment for mental health and substance use disorders, as well as access to needed housing, food, and transportation assistance, to be sufciently important facilitators of improved health outcomes for plwha to recommend as indicators of hiv care. obtaining data to estimate these indicators, especially those pertaining to supportive services, poses challenges different from those that attend the clinical hiv care indicators, nevertheless they are amenable to objective quantication. mental health and substance abusesubstantial evidence indicates that mental health symptoms and disorders, including neurocognitive disorders, and substance use disorders are signicantly increased in people with hiv (see hinkin et al., 2002; lansky et al., 2009; milloy et al., 2010; owelarsson et al., 2009; who, 2008), and these disorders affect treatment adherence to antiretroviral medications (ettenhofer et al., 2009; hinkin et al., 2002; tucker et al., 2003; waldropvalverde et al., 2006) and continuity of care, secondary transmission, and monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 monitoring hiv care in the united statesoverall health outcomes (samet et al., 2007; ulett et al., 2009; zaller et al., 2007). for this reason, screening hivinfected patients for mental health and substance use symptoms and disorders is essential to providing care that will lead to the best health outcomes.ﬁmental health disordersﬂ refers to a broad range of conditions that might affect treatment and health outcomes for plwha, including anxiety and mood (e.g., depression) disorders, psychoses, and subthreshold conditions (i.e., mental conditions not meeting full diagnostic criteria for mental disorders). mental health symptoms refer to conditions of psychological distress, which may be acute or chronic and are known to be related to negative health outcomes. moderate to severe depression is particularly prevalent among plwha and is associated with failure to access art, failure to adhere to art, increased morbidity and mortality, and potentially increased hivrelated risk behavior (crepaz and marks, 2002; horberg et al., 2008; kalichman, 2000; kumar and encinosa, 2010; penzak et al., 2000). the prevalence of hivassociated neurocognitive disorders is greater than 50 percent, and perhaps higher in older hiv patients (valcour et al., 2011), making agespecic analysis of relevant indicators particularly informative. even mild symptomatic cognitive impairment is associated with nonœcentral nervous system (nonœcns) morbidity and overall hiv mortality (vivithanaporn et al., 2010). early detection and treatment of depression, psychological distress, and cognitive impairment among plwha are important because they often negatively impact daily routine functioning and the ability to efcaciously adhere to medication routines. in addition, symptomatic impairment, whether mild neurocognitive disorder or asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment, has been linked to allcause mortality (valcour et al., 2011). more serious hivrelated neurocognitive disorders can result in dementia, which can also impede good health outcomes without necessary interventions. mental health disorders and symptoms can be associated with hiv in two ways: rst, individuals with mental health disorders may be at greater risk for acquiring, as well as transmitting, hiv; second, hivinfected individuals are at greater risk for developing neurocognitive disorders. in addition, hivinfected patients, as they live longer and age, increasingly have high rates of medical comorbidity associated with the normal aging process as well as side effects from their art (bisson et al., 2003; goulet et al., 2007). there is evidence as well that mental health and neurocognitive disorders are increased among older plwha (justice et al., 2004; valcour et al., 2011), making screening especially important for this subpopulation. although some hivrelated cognitive disorders have decreased in incidence or severity with the use of art, the overall prevalence is increased among older plwha.with evidence mounting that mental health and neurocognitive disormonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 59ders are common in spite of art, screening for depression and other mental health disorders as well as changes in cognition and the accompanying functional impairments may be an important factor in achieving sufciently high adherence rates to maintain undetectable viral load and immunologic competency. since many medical comorbidities, such as hepatitis c (and other) infection in the central nervous system (cns), endocrine disorders, advanced cerebrovascular disease, and medications, can cause cognitive changes, the screening for medical causes of cognitive dysfunction is also imperative in order to maximize health outcomes. although complete mental health and neuropsychological testing often are not clinically available outside of academic hiv treatment centers, a number of userfriendly screening tools are available for use in the clinic to help identify patients who should be referred to specialty services or for more extensive evaluation. basic screening tools include the nineitem patient health questionnaire (phq9) for depression (pzer, 2011), the modied hiv dementia scale (aetc, 2011, figure 1) and the culture neutral international dementia scale (sacktor et al., 2005, figure 1), the montreal cognitive assessment scale (moca, 2011), and the exit 25 for severe cognitive disorders (uthsc, 2011).unhealthy substance abuse or misuse behaviors, such as chronic and heavy intake of alcohol and illicit drug use, particularly injection drug use, are signicantly related to the acquisition of hiv infection and for some plwha serve as a way to cope with and manage hivrelated symptoms (brion et al., 2011). heavy and chronic abuse of alcohol and other substances is also signicantly related to increased risk of acquiring new hiv infections, since they can impair judgment and reduce inhibitions, potentially resulting in unsafe sex and other hivrelated transmission risk behaviors. substance abuse is also linked with poorer health outcomes for hivinfected individuals (carrico, 2011), complicates health care outcomes, and decreases adherence to art regimens. in a prospective cohort study of 140 hivinfected patients at a county hospital hiv clinic during the year following initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart), carol golin and colleagues (2002) found that nearly all of the patients™ adherence levels were suboptimal and that interventions that assessed and treated substance abuse and incorporated assistance with antiretroviral adherence were more likely to result in optimal care levels. not only can substance use negatively affect treatment adherence and hence outcomes (tucker et al., 2003); the use of certain substances, such methamphetamine, also has been shown to increase hiv viral replication in animal models (gavrilin et al., 2002) and to increase neuronal damage and cognition impairment in humans (langford et al., 2003; rippeth et al., 2004). judith cook and colleagues (2008) found that the use of crack cocaine was associated with a faster progression of hiv.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 monitoring hiv care in the united statesrecent studies have found that multidisciplinary approaches to care that address psychiatric conditions and substance abuse and its sequelae, such as hepatitis c coinfection, resulted in improved access to and retention in care and better uptake rates of initiation of art (litwin et al., 2005; palepu et al., 2006; sherer et al., 2002). screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (sbirt) and alcohol, smoking, and substance involvement screening test (assist) are userfriendly screening tools that permit early diagnosis and intervention in alcohol and drug use disorders in hiv and other health care settings (babor et al., 2007; humeniuk et al., 2008; samhsa, 2011). other tools such as the alcohol use disorders identication test (audit) or cage (an acronym derived from its four questions that stands for ﬁcut down,ﬂ ﬁannoyed,ﬂ ﬁguilty,ﬂ and ﬁeyeopenerﬂ) questions also can be used to screen for alcohol dependency (niaaa, 2005). use of such tools in conjunction with a complete alcohol and drug history, including overthecounter and alternative medicines as well as illicit drugs, is vital for increasing optimal antiretroviral treatment, reducing secondary hiv transmission, elucidating cognitive changes, and identifying individuals who might benet from specialized adjunct treatment in addition to the management of their hiv disease.the committee recommends two core indicators relating to mental health and substance abuse.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 days˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 daysstudies have shown that referrals for mental health and substance abuse services that can be accessed in a short period of time after they have been recommended have some of the best outcomes and high levels of patient satisfaction (kowal et al., 2011). in cities such as baltimore and san francisco, treatment on demand for substance use has been instituted to reduce the human and economic harm associated with alcohol and illicit drug use and to increase the benets of better treatment (drug strategies, 2000; friedmann et al., 2003; sears et al., 2009). detroit found that treatment on demand reduced homicides and larceny and resulted in high rates of patient satisfaction (trent, 2004). the committee considered receipt of specialty mental health and substance abuse services within 30 days of referral, with urgent cases being seen as soon as possible, to re˚ect optimal care because it is anticipated that individuals with sufciently severe mental health or substance use disorders to merit referral should receive those monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 61services in a short window of time to reduce the likelihood of suboptimal adherence to art and to decrease the risk for secondary transmission of hiv infection (and preventable new infections). however, the committee concluded that receipt of specialty services within 60 days was more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time frame. housing, food security, and transportationassessment of food and housing needs and referral to appropriate services are essential to improving hiv care, improving health outcomes, and reducing health disparities among the hivinfected population (anema et al., 2009; mcmahon et al., 2011; reily et al., 2011; weiser et al., 2009a,b). studies suggest that as many as half of all persons diagnosed with hiv in the united states will face homelessness or experience an unstable housing situation at some point over the course of their illness (aidala et al., 2007; song, 1999). estimates indicate that 140,000 plwha currently are in need of housing assistance (nahc, 2012). needs assessments have found that rates of food insecurity and nutritional needs range from 20 to more than 50 percent among samples of plwha in medical care or social service settings, with rates higher among plwha who are not in care.for the purpose of this report, ﬁhousing instabilityﬂ refers to homelessness, imminent risk of homelessness, and unstable housing as dened for reporting in hud™s homeless management information systems (hmis), which are used by all jurisdictions receiving hud funding to address homelessness and risk of homelessness (hud, 2010). the broad distinction is between persons who have stable, permanent housing in the community and individuals or families who lack the resources or support networks to retain or obtain permanent housing. guidance is provided for classifying housing status in four categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular nighttime residence, staying in an emergency shelter);9 imminently losing housing (e.g., being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no housing options identied); unstably housed and atrisk of losing housing (e.g., temporarily doubled up with others, moving frequently for economic reasons); and stably housed (hud, 2010, pp. 5456). hud currently is taking the lead in interagency efforts to develop a common vocabulary of homelessness and to standardize housing status questions among several 9 this category is based on the mckinneyvento homeless assistance act (42 u.s.c. 11302, sec. 103) denition of homelessness, as amended by the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing (hearth) act of 2009 (p.l. 11122, div. b, sec. 1003). hud issued its nal rule for the denition of homelessness on december 5, 2011 (federal register 76[233]:7594476019).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 monitoring hiv care in the united statesfederal agencies, including hhs (e.g., centers for medicare and medicaid services, hrsa) and the department of veterans affairs.ﬁfood insecurityﬂ refers to the u.s. department of agriculture (usda) denition as ﬁlimited or uncertain availability of nutritionally adequate and safe foods or limited or uncertain ability to acquire acceptable foods in socially acceptable waysﬂ (ers, 2009, citing anderson, 1990). since 2006, the usda has applied four classications to the range of food (in)security. high food security means ﬁno reported indications of foodaccess problems or limitationsﬂ; marginal food security means ﬁone or two reported indicationsštypically of anxiety over food sufciency or shortage of food in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or food intakeﬂ; low food security means ﬁreports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and very low food security means ﬁreports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced food intakeﬂ (ers, 2011). persons who are classied with low and very low food security are considered food insecure (ers, 2011).housing instability, food insecurity, and other supportive service needs affect hiv outcomes in direct and indirect ways. lack of shelter or severely inadequate housing increases exposure to infectious agents, allergens, and neurotoxins that compromise health (shaw, 2004). poor nutrition affects the ability to maintain healthy body weight and increases the risk or complicates the management of other chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and cancer. in addition, some arvs need to be taken with food, and diarrhea, which is often associated with homelessness, is associated with underabsorbtion of arvs (brantley et al., 2003; bushen et al., 2004; dillingham et al., 2011).as the nhas points out, persons who face daily challenges meeting their basic needs for housing and food are much less likely to maintain a stable hiv treatment regimen (onap, 2010, p. 28). housing instability is one of the major factors limiting access to and maintenance in hiv care and adherence to treatments (aidala et al., 2007; ghose et al., 2011; kidder et al., 2007; leaver et al., 2007). persons who are food insecure are also less likely to be in care, stay in care, or be adherent to treatment than their counterparts whose food and nutrition needs are met (anema et al., 2009; ashman et al., 2002; riley et al., 2011).whether via physiological or psychosocial mechanisms, homelessness or unstable housing is associated with lower cd4 counts, higher viral loads, and higher rates of comorbidities among plwha, controlling for a wide range of individual and medical care variables (clementsnolle et al., 2008; kidder et al., 2007; knowlton et al., 2006; legrand et al., 2010). homelessness has been an independent predictor of mortality in all studies that have investigated the impact of housing status on the survival of monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 63hivinfected persons (lieb et al., 2002; mcmahon et al., 2011; riley et al., 2005a,b; schwarcz et al., 2009; walley et al., 2008). food insecurity also is associated with poor clinical outcomes and higher mortality in the united states, as well as in lowresource countries (campa et al., 2005; hendricks and gorbach, 2009; kalichman et al., 2010; mcmahon et al., 2011; vogenthaler et al., 2010; weiser et al., 2009a,b).however, research has also shown that addressing the need for housing and other supportive services is both effective and costeffective for improving health care access and health outcomes of hivinfected people. a systematic review of 17 housingrelated studies (leaver et al., 2007) found a signicant positive association between increased housing stability and better healthrelated outcomes, including connection to hiv medical care and adherence to treatment. in a randomized trial commissioned by the cdc and hud, provision of rental assistance was associated with reduced emergency room use and improved mental health and clinical health outcomes for hivinfected clients (wolitski et al., 2010). food and nutrition programs have improved adherence to and the effectiveness of hiv medications among foodinsecure patients. nonmedical supportive services including food assistance can serve to attract clients who need other services and can facilitate their entry into and maintenance in hiv medical care (see ashman et al., 2002; conover and whettengoldstein, 2002; conviser, 2007; conviser and pounds, 2002a,b; messeri et al., 2002).another crucial supportive service for many plwha is transportation. lack of reliable transportation has long been recognized as limiting access to and utilization of medical care, especially the use of prevention services and medical monitoring of chronic conditions (see, e.g., arcury et al., 2005; baldwin et al., 2004; littenberg et al., 2006; valet et al., 2009). lack of transportation is a major barrier to regular and timely health care visits for plwha as well, especially in rural areas where distances to providers are often very long and public transportation is absent (conover and whettengoldstein, 2002; hrsa, 2009; napravnik et al., 2006; reif et al., 2005; sarnquist et al., 2011; stewart et al., 2011).in rural areas, particularly in the southern united states, which accounts for almost 70 percent of all rural cases of hiv, transportation can be a signicant barrier to care, including quality hivrelated medical services (arcury et al., 2005; cohn et al., 2001; hrsa, 2009; kempf et al., 2010). hiv care providers can be as much as 2 hours away in rural west virginia and as much as 200 miles away in parts of montana (nrha, 2006). long travel hours, inclement weather, and lack of travel resources may be critical issues for plwha in rural areas and need to be addressed for these individuals to achieve timely linkage to and continuity of care (krawczyk et al., 2006b; weis et al., 2010). transportation concerns are especially important in southern states because the greatest number of new infections in african monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 monitoring hiv care in the united statesamericans, particularly women, is occurring there (mays et al., 2011). studies of hiv in the south have indicated the need for transportation, particularly since some individuals seek care further from their neighborhoods in order to avoid stigma and discrimination (mays et al., 2011; reif et al., 2005; vermund et al., 2010).transportation issues often pose barriers to appropriate care for plwha in urban areas as well. services research in boston (lo et al., 2002), chicago (kenagy et al., 2003), detroit (andersen et al., 2007), minneapolisœst. paul (othieno, 2007), new york city (halkitis et al., 2008; messeri et al., 2002), and several multisite studies covering diverse geographic areas (ashman et al., 2002; cunningham et al., 1999; rumptz et al., 2007) has shown that transportation needs are consistently associated with failure to keep scheduled medical appointments and generally worse engagement with hiv primary care. medicaid beneciaries and ryan white hiv/aids program clients may be eligible for transportation assistance for medical visits. however, costs are seldom fully covered and there are other medical transportation barriers as well. public transportation may have restricted coverage and times of operation, require long walks or some other form of transport to bus stops or transit stations, and have long wait times in potentially inclement weather. transportation services for medically fragile or wheelchairbound individuals may be limited, and clients often face scheduling challenges. reliance on social networks for help with transportation to hiv care or services may be closed to plwha due to stigma and fear of disclosure associated with visits for hiv care or services (hrsa, 2009).routine assessment of transportation needs and provision of transportation assistance are effective for promoting timely entry into care and retention in care for persons living with hiv (ashman et al., 2002; chin et al., 2009; conover and whettengoldstein, 2002; messeri et al., 2002; rumptz et al., 2007). transportation assistance also facilitates appropriate followthrough and use of mental health and substance abuse services (whetten et al., 2006b). because their transportation needs tend to be greater, assistance with transportation shows greater impact on medical care outcomes among hivinfected women, ethnic minorities, and recently incarcerated individuals (andersen et al., 2007; burks et al., 2011; halkitis et al., 2010; kenagy et al., 2003; sarnquist et al., 2011; scheyett et al., 2010). medical and social service providers recognize transportation assistance as an effective mechanism for promoting retention in care for plwha (amico, 2011).given the importance of adequate housing, food, and transportation to the health outcomes of plwha, the committee identied three core indicators related to access to services that promote housing stability, food security, and transportation. tracking the proportion of plwha who monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 65require assistance to meet their needs in these areas provides information about whether available services are meeting those needs. the committee recommends the following indicators.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 monthsadditional indicators related to clinical hiv carein addition to the core indicators for hiv care, the committee identied a number of additional indicators, based on other, more granular, process measures, that provide a comprehensive measure of the quality of hiv care (appendix table 21). testing and screening for concurrent infections in addition to cd4 and viral load testing, individuals newly diagnosed with hiv should receive a complete medical workup (aberg et al., 2009; hhs, 2011d), including testing for tuberculosis (tb); stis, in particular, syphilis, as well as gonorrhea and chlamydia (by nucleic acid amplication test); and hepatitis b and c. testing for these concurrent infections is important because hivinfected individuals may be more likely to transmit hiv and other stis to others and because comorbid conditions are more likely to affect the health of plwha. for this reason, the committee identied the following additional indicators pertaining to testing and screening.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had a documented tuberculosis screening test with results interpreted at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had documented chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screenings at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with hiv infection who have had hepatitis b screening performed at least once since hiv diagnosis or for whom there is documented immunitymonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 monitoring hiv care in the united states˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had hepatitis c screening performed at least once in the preceding 12 months.the time frame specied for repeat testing or screening varies among diseases and the risk of infection. sti screening is recommended annually for sexually active individuals. hepatitis b screening is recommended only once since diagnosis because immunity is conferred either by previous infection or by vaccination subsequent to a negative screening test, precluding the need for repeat screening. routine testing or screening should continue to be administered at appropriate intervals in accordance with recommended treatment guidelines (cdc, 2010b) and recognized performance measures (horberg et al., 2010; nqf, 2011b).plwha also should receive recommended screening and routine primary care in accordance with accepted practice guidelines (see, e.g., aberg et al., 2009). in particular, quality hiv care should include monitoring for a number of cooccurring, chronic medical conditions associated with hiv infection or treatment, including hyperlipidemia, diabetes, osteoporosis, renal disease, cancers, and depression. plwha are at increased risk for such conditions, and as hivinfected individuals live longer, screening, monitoring, and treatment of these chronic conditions have become increasingly important elements of hiv care. although the committee recognizes the importance of screening, monitoring, and treating such conditions in the provision of quality hiv care, it did not include indicators related to these practices, since the number of cooccurring conditions made specication of indicators for every condition impracticable and the practice guidelines for the conditions are the same for individuals with and without hiv. oral health is another important aspect of care for plwha. oral problems can be caused by either a weakened immune system or by certain types of art, resulting in discomfort; potential difculty with eating, maintenance of good nutrition, and adherence to art; and potential psychosocial problems (chapple and hamburger, 2000; coulter et al., 2002; nysdhai, 2001). appendix table 23 lists some of the cooccurring conditions most commonly associated with hiv, along with their etiologic cofactors and references to published guidelines for optimal management.immunizations and prophylaxis appropriate immunizations and prophylaxis are other important elements of quality hiv care. the effect of hiv infection on the immune system places plwha at greater risk for serious complications of seasonal in˚uenza, pneumococcal pneumonia, and the occurrence of ois, including pneumocystis pneumonia, tb, and viral hepatitis. immunosuppression in monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 67plwha increases susceptibility to ois, which not only increase morbidity and mortality among plwha but also may cause an increase in hiv viral load, thereby further weakening the immune system (lawn et al., 2001). although the use of art greatly reduces the risk of acquiring ois (candiani et al., 2007; kaplan et al., 2000; ledergerber et al., 1999), plwha should receive appropriate immunizations and prophylactic measures in accordance with recommended guidelines to maximally protect individuals against ois and their sequelae (aberg et al., 2009; kaplan et al., 2000, 2009). because of the large number of ois, the committee chose not to develop indicators specic to oi prophylaxis, opting instead to emphasize the importance of following established guidelines for the management of ois (kaplan et al., 2009).the committee did, however, identify the following indicators pertaining to recommended immunizations for plwha (hhs, 2009; horberg et al., 2010; kaplan et al., 2009, p. 77).˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received an in˚uenza immunization during the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a pneumococcal immunization at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a hepatitis b vaccination, or who have documented immunitythe need for revaccination varies with the effectiveness of the vaccine at preventing future infection.additional indicators for art initiation in addition to providing guidance for initiating art based on cd4 count (one of the core indicators recommended by the committee), hhs guidelines specify that art should be initiated in patients with hivassociated nephropathy and in patients coinfected with hepatitis b virus (hbv) when treatment for hbv is indicated (hhs, 2011d, pp. 27, 30).10 the guidelines also recommend initiation of art in patients with active tb within 2 to 4 weeks of starting treatment for tb for patients with cd4+ cell counts ˝500 cells/mm3, and 8 weeks for those with cd4+ cell counts >500 cells/mm3 (hhs 2011d, p. 118). the guidelines further specify that combination art should be initiated in pregnant women with hiv (regardless of cd4 count) to help 10 guidance for initiation of art in response to hepatitis c coinfection is more ambiguous (hhs, 2011d, pp. 114116; kaplan et al., 2009, p. 89; shafran, 2007).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68 monitoring hiv care in the united statesprevent mothertochild transmission of hiv (hhs, 2011d, pp. 27, 32; 2011f, p. 8). in conjunction with caesarian instead of vaginal delivery and avoidance of breastfeeding, the use of art during pregnancy has reduced the rate of perinatal hiv transmission from 2530 percent to less than 2 percent (cdc, 2006).in keeping with the hhs guidelines, the committee identied the following additional indicators for the initiation of art. ˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicted), or active tuberculosis who are not on art˚˚proportion of pregnant women with diagnosed hiv infection who are not on artarv resistance testingthe hhs guidelines also indicate that arv drug resistance testing should be performed prior to the initiation of art, or if previously performed, repeat testing should be considered (hhs, 2011d, p. 11). a 2006 study showed that 15 percent of individuals newly diagnosed with hiv experience antiretroviral drug resistance (wheeler et al., 2010), which is one barrier to effective treatment. drug resistance testing prior to the initiation of art helps to determine the appropriate treatment regimen and therefore improves health outcomes and reduces viral transmission. hhs guidelines (hhs, 2011d, p. 42) list additional factors that in˚uence selection of individual art regimens, including the presence or absence ofcomorbid conditions (e.g., cardiovascular disease, chemical dependency, liver disease, psychiatric disease, renal diseases, or tuberculosis); potential adverse drug effects; potential drug interactions with other medications; pregnancy or pregnancy potential; . . . gender and pretreatment cd4 count if considering nevirapine (nvp); hlab*5701 testing if considering abacavir (abc); coreceptor tropism assay if considering maraviroc (mvc); patient adherence potential; and convenience (e.g., pill burden, dosing frequency, and food and ˚uid considerations).since the decision about which art regimen is appropriate varies among patients and would be impossible to quantify and because new therapies may be developed, the best measure of whether appropriate therapy has been prescribed is the individual™s response to it. nevertheless, the importance of arv drug resistance testing as a rst step in selecting an art regimen led the committee to identify the following indicator of quality hiv care.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 69˚˚proportion of artnaïve people with diagnosed hiv infection who receive drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to art initiationadditional indicators related to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesunlike the additional clinical hiv care indicators, which supplement the core indicators by tracking other important aspects of hiv care, the additional indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services are directly related to the core indicators in that they track identication of plwha who have a need for those services through annual screening.˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were screened for mental health disorders at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were screened for substance use disorders at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for housing at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for food or nutrition at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for transportation at least once during the preceding 12 monthssumming uptaken together, the core and additional indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services identied by the committee provide a means for assessing the impact of public health policies across the hiv care continuum. figure 24 shows the continuum of care arrow depicted in figure 22 with the indicators mapped to it.appendix table 22 also maps the indicators (and the related data elements) to the continuum of care and indicates which indicators relate to outcome measures, process measures, or both. appendix table 21 provides a summary of the indicators, including the data elements (and proxy/alternative data elements) needed to estimate them and a brief rationale for each.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70 linkageengagement/retention proportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsin the past 12 monthssince diagnosisproportion who received 2 or more cd4 testsproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for influenzaproportion who received 2 or more viral load testsproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for tuberculosisproportion screened for hepatitis bproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumoniaproportion who received drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with a measured cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicted), or active tuberculosis who are not on artproportion of hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral loadallcause mortality rateproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisengagement/retention proportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with an unmet need for housingfood or nutritiontransportationproportion screened for mental health disorders at least once in preceding 12 monthsproportion screened for substance use disorders at least once in preceding 12 monthsproportion assessed for need forhousingfood or nutritiontransportationproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months with cd4+ cell count 350proportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)figure 24 continuum of hiv care arrow mapped to indicators for hiv care and supportive services.source: adapted from das, 2011.note: indicators written in bold text correspond to the committee™s recommended core indicators; the indicators written in italics correspond to the additional indicators identied by the committee. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 71healthrelated disparitiesas indicated by the nhas targets (box 11), subpopulations of plwha, including ryan white hiv/aids program clients, black americans, latinos, and gay and bisexual men, are of particular interest when evaluating hiv care. other important subpopulations include additional vulnerable populations of race and ethnicity, sex and gender, age, lower socioeconomic status, high mobility, and those in certain geographic areas. signicant disparities exist among racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities with respect to hiv risk, incidence, and access to and continuity of care and treatment (espinoza et al., 2008; gebo et al., 2005; hall et al., 2008; mays et al., 2011; prejean et al., 2008, 2011; robison et al., 2008). several studies report differences in the quality of care received by racial and ethnic minorities compared to whites (garland et al., 2010; korthuis et al., 2008). differences exist in the care experiences of these groups, including differences in access to health care services; differences in the presentation of health care information and advice as a function of patientprovider interactions; and perceived bias and discrimination, although the mechanisms of how these work are not well understood (baicker et al., 2004; cooperpatrick et al., 1999; doescher et al., 2001; johnson et al., 2004a,b; schneider et al., 2002). blacks are more likely to receive care from health care facilities that have fewer clinical resources and to have longer travel times to care; they also are less likely to see the same provider in followup care visits (doescher et al., 2001; probst et al., 2007). in studies comparing the care experiences of african americans and whites, african americans rate their care visits as less participatory and more dominated by their provider (johnson et al., 2004b).in addition to race and ethnicity, an individual™s country of origin and citizenship status are factors that may be related to hivrelated disparities. for example, in 2006, almost onequarter of all new hiv infections in latinos living in the united states were among puerto ricans. this nding may indicate a higher risk of hiv for puerto ricans or higher rates of hiv detection. puerto ricans may have had higher rates of testing secondary to higher rates of health insurance and access to health care when compared to other subpopulations of latinos (garland et al., 2010). latinos from mexico and central america have been found to have higher rates of late diagnosis of hiv infection (garland et al., 2010). research has shown that foreignborn or unacculturated latinos are less likely to have been tested for hiv, not only because of less access to health care but also due to a lack of knowledge about hiv as a disease (chen et al., 2010).evidence also suggests that culturally and linguistically specic care increased adherence to treatment among latinos, which then signicantly improved cd4 counts and decreased viral loads (oh et al., 2009; silverberg monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72 monitoring hiv care in the united stateset al., 2009; sullivan et al., 2007). good results with adherence have been noted with urban foreignborn latinos from mexico and central america when culturally appropriate care was delivered by bicultural and bilingual health care staff (enriquez et al., 2008). it therefore appears that knowledge of linguistic and cultural differences among subpopulations of plwha can make a difference in the design of appropriate care approaches that can aid in adherence.age, sex, and geographic location are other demographic characteristics associated with disparities in hiv care. studies have reported disparities in the receipt of haart by age (agwu et al., 2011; wohl et al., 2011). women, racial minorities, and people without private health insurance are less likely to keep an initial appointment for hiv care and therefore are less likely to establish care (mugavero et al., 2007). another study suggests that although white women with hiv began art sooner than other groups, there is some evidence that women tended to have a higher incidence of hivrelated and aidsdening illnesses than men, with nonwhite women experiencing higher morbidity than those in other groups (meditz et al., 2011). the study also showed a correlation between geographic location (southern united states) and higher morbidity. there is some evidence that the socioeconomic position of nonwhite women in the south is a determinant of increased morbidity in that group (aziz and smith, 2011; meditz et al., 2011).to the extent that lower socioeconomic status plays a role in racial, ethnic, and gender disparities in access to hiv care and better outcomes, implementation of the aca may be expected to reduce disparities by increasing access to health care within certain of those subpopulations. medicaid provides coverage for 47 percent of plwha estimated to be receiving regular medical care, making it the largest single source of coverage for hiv care in the united states (kates, 2011). by raising the income threshold to qualify for medicaid coverage to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, the aca will signicantly increase access to medicaid, with an anticipated increase in health care utilization and improved health outcomes (finkelstein et al., 2011). however, undocumented and recent immigrants will remain ineligible for medicaid coverage, which may increase health disparities by citizenship. all of the indicators identied by the committee for tracking clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services can be applied to specic subpopulations of plwha to evaluate and track disparities among those groups. for example, several indicators and subpopulations are specically targeted in the nhas under the primary goal of reducing hivrelated disparities and health inequities (onap, 2010, p. 1). the nhas species targets for increasing the proportion of plwha with an undetectable viral load among black americans, latinos, and gay monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 73and bisexual men by 2015 (onap, 2010, p. 31; see also box 11). indicators specic to these nhas targets can be generated by applying the relevant core indicator identied by the committeešthat is, the proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionšto these subpopulations.˚˚proportion of black americans with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚proportion of latinos with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚proportion of gay and bisexual men with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionother indicators, such as a continuityofcare indicatoršthat is, the proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)šcould be applied to these and other subpopulations of interest. for example, applying the continuityofcare indicator to the population of ryan white hiv/aids program clients would generate the information to track the nhas target of increasing ﬁthe proportion of ryan white hiv/aids program clients who are in care (at least 2 visits for routine hiv medical care in 12 months at least 3 months apart) from 73% to 80%ﬂ by 2015 (onap, 2010, p. 21). similarly, applications of the committeeidentied indicators to different racial or ethnic, foreignborn, gender, and socioeconomic subpopulations would be of interest as well. access to quality hiv care also varies based on geographic area of residence, in terms of rural, urban, and suburban populations and region of the country (south, northeast, midwest, etc.) (krawczyk et al., 2006a,b; reif et al., 2005). people in rural areas, for example, have a more difcult time accessing appropriate hiv care. barriers to accessing hiv care for people in rural areas include greater stigma regarding hiv infection; increased fear of hiv status being disclosed; reduced availability of local hivknowledgeable providers; and difculty traveling to obtain hiv care elsewhere (heckman et al., 1998; mays et al., 2011; ohl et al., 2010; reif et al., 2005; schur et al., 2002; vermund et al., 2010). barriers to accessing quality hiv care can result in poorer health outcomes for plwha in rural areas. a recent study of individuals initiating hiv care within the veterans health administration (vha) found that delayed entry into care monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 monitoring hiv care in the united statesaccounted for higher mortality among plwha in rural areas compared to those in urban areas, although, once in care, care utilization was equivalent between the two groups (ohl et al., 2010). plwha in the southern united states also have been shown to be less apt to initiate treatment than those from other regions of the country. lower socioeconomic status may play a role in these differences (krawczyk et al., 2006a,b; meditz et al., 2011; weis et al., 2010).indicators for tracking health disparities in rural areas (and different geographic regions) can be derived from those identied by the committee. examples of such indicators include the following:˚proportion of people living in rural areas and newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosis˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are living in rural areas and have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are living in rural areas who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)equivalent framing of any of the other indicators pertaining to hiv care and needed services in terms of different subpopulations of plwha would help to inform both the evaluation and the impact of policies on disparities in those areas as well.data elements to gauge the impact of the nhas and the acathe committee identied three general groups of data elements for gauging the impact of the nhas and the aca in improving hiv care. although the data elements identied include those needed to estimate the previously discussed indicators that capture the care experiences of plwha, the lists are not identical. the committee recognized some data elements, such as stigma, discrimination, and patient satisfaction with care, to be important but did not recommend related indicators because of the difculties in dening, objectively quantifying, and measuring those elements.11 the three groups of data identied by the committee are health 11 although obtaining data to estimate indicators for housing, food, and transportation poses challenges, those needs are objectively quantiable using standardized denitions such as those provided in the text. by contrast, experiences of stigma, discrimination, and satisfaction with care are not quantiable in the same way.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 75care data, including data on diagnoses, test results, and health care service utilization; data pertaining to access to housing, food, and transportation; and demographic data, which, as in the case of zip code, can provide information regarding risk environment, permitting those areas to be targeted in terms of linkage of care, sti services, and the like. health care data inform indicators related to linkage to and continuity of care, as well as quality of care. data pertaining to supportive services inform indicators related to access to those services. demographic and other personal data inform indicators related to payer sources and disparities (racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities; geographic) in hivrelated health care.the following section provides an introduction to the primary types of health care, supportive services, and demographic data and lays the foundation for the later discussion of the data elements necessary for assessing each of the indicators identied by the committee. types of datathe health, service utilization, and demographic data elements needed to assess the indicators are found in several general data types, including claims data, clinical data, surveillance and vital records data, and survey or interview data. relevant data may be used for nancial, legal, or epidemiologic purposes, such as billing thirdparty payers, certifying birth or death, and disease tracking to establish public health interventions, as well as the provision of individual patient care.claims dataclaims data, also known as billing data, are records of interactions between patients and various parts of the health care system designed to solicit reimbursement from private or public thirdparty payers (e.g., private health insurance, medicare, medicaid). these data include patientidentiable demographic data (e.g., patient address, sex, date of birth), diagnosis and procedure codes, claims for laboratory tests and other types of studies, and some claims for prescription drugs.there are numerous advantages to the use of claims data for health care research and the evaluation of performance measures (ferver et al., 2009; jollis et al., 1993). they represent a large quantity of data that is relatively easy and inexpensive to obtain. the large amount of data is especially useful for compiling information on rare conditions and may facilitate the identication of trends or practices that would otherwise be missed. some claims data systems include demographic information, such as income level and employment status, that is not generally available from other health care data systems. claims data also are, or easily can be made, anonymous and hence can be used without patient authorization. the anonymity of the monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdata also make claims data particularly good source of data pertaining to sensitive diagnoses such as hiv/aids or mental illness. claims data also are available electronically, which facilitates their use for research.claims data have a number of disadvantages as well. one major disadvantage is that claims data are designed for billing and not for use in health care research (ferver et al., 2009; jollis et al., 1993). only the data necessary to le the claim are captured, which leaves the data lacking in sufcient clinical detail to be maximally useful in research on health outcomes for example. there is a single international classication of diseases, ninth revision (icd9) code for prostate cancer, for example, which indicates the diagnosis but provides no information as to the stage of the disease at the time of diagnosis or treatment (see, e.g., west et al., 2010). likewise, claims data cannot directly provide information on disease progression, treatment failure, or treatment intention (e.g., therapeutic or palliative) (jollis et al., 1993). with respect to hiv, for example, claims data may provide reasonable information on how many cd4 and viral load tests are performed in a given period, but they will not provide information on the results of those tests and so are not of use in identifying treatment failure or tracking the effect of various therapeutic interventions on cd4 counts and viral load over time. for chronic conditions the ﬁdate of onsetﬂ may be listed as the date of service at each subsequent visit or the visit may be attributed to one medical problem (diagnosis) when several in fact are present. similarly, several procedures may be ﬁbundledﬂ into a single claim (ferver et al., 2009).since the purpose of claims data is to generate reimbursement, there is a nancial disincentive to capture any data that are not directly related to that end (ferver et al., 2009). if itemizing diagnoses or procedures will not increase the amount of reimbursement, there is no incentive to do so; indeed, the additional reporting time required creates a disincentive. this may be especially problematic for patients with multiple comorbid conditions, including hiv. similarly, data on procedures not submitted for reimbursement may not be captured. for example, data on hiv testing may be underrepresented if the test kits are paid for by a health department. conversely, there is an increased incentive to include tests and procedures that can be reimbursed, which also must be taken into account when interpreting the data.another signicant disadvantage of using claims data for research is how labor intensive it can be to analyze the data. it often requires someone with strong training in data management to perform the necessary recoding and data manipulation. for example, the rows of data may be patient records and some patients have multiple records (rows). extensive recoding is needed to reformat the data into the patient or episode level. in addition, it may be necessary to use sample records (e.g., rather than analyzing all medicaid records) because it would be too computationally taxing to run monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 77all of the data. again, this type of sampling requires someone with very strong technical skills. other disadvantages arise with claims data as well. coding inaccuracies of various types may render the data problematic for research purposes. not only may typographical coding errors occur, but misunderstandings about diagnoses and incorrect or misreported diagnoses also may occur. in addition, questionable billing practices can lead to inaccurate coding or ﬁupcodingﬂ in order to increase reimbursement in certain cases (ferver et al., 2009). all of these factors are potentially problematic for the use of claims data to generate estimates of the percentage of individuals with a specic condition or receiving certain tests or procedures.clinical dataclinical data are collected for or pertain directly to the health and welfare of individual patients. the primary source of clinical data is individuals™ personal health records compiled by health care providers during the course of caring for those individuals. health records include information on individuals™ health status, ndings from physical examinations, and information on individuals™ medical history. the records also document diagnoses, tests or studies that are ordered and the results, diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, medications prescribed, when medication was administered (for inpatients), information on allergies or side effects, and the like. health records also may contain information concerning consultations and referrals. health records commonly include certain demographic information, such as address, date of birth, sex, and insurance status. however, certain types of demographic information, including race and ethnicity, gender identity, and sexual orientation, may not be recorded at all; may be based on provider observation rather than patient selfreport; or may be reported or recorded in different ways, making it difcult to code uniformly. in addition, medical records generally do not include information on individuals™ socioeconomic position (e.g., income, wealth, education) (krieger, 1992).medical records provide more detailed information, such as laboratory test and treatment results, than that available through claims data and hence are preferable for use in health care research, especially research focusing on quality of care and health outcomes. in addition, clinical data are apt to give a more accurate picture than claims data of patients™ health status (roos et al., 1991; tang et al., 2007).although medical records may provide more detailed and comprehensive information about the health care received by specic individuals, they also have a number of disadvantages from a research perspective. one problem lies in the accuracy and completeness of the health record. clinimonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 monitoring hiv care in the united statescians vary not only in their accuracy regarding diagnoses but also in the accuracy and completeness of the information they elicit and record from a patient™s medical history and physical examination (roos et al., 1991). nevertheless, there is good reason to believe that the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the clinical information are greater than found in claims data (roos et al., 1991).other difculties involve the extraction of pertinent data from patient health records and the challenge of linking individuallevel data across providers for patients with multiple providers (e.g., primary care provider, hiv specialist, mental health provider). this process can be labor intensive, expensive, and time consuming, which makes claims data an attractive surrogate for medical records data in health care research. the increased use of ehrs, especially following enactment of the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 (p.l. 1115), has simplied the process of data extraction, although challenges remain for extraction as well as for data linking and system interoperability across providers. integrated care systems with comprehensive ehrs, such as kaiser permanente (kp) and the vha, avoid these challenges to a certain extent. ehrs can pose other difculties as well, such as system failures, decreased interdisciplinary communication, and overreliance on checkboxes (in lieu of critical thinking) (nih, ncrr, 2006).despite such potential drawbacks, ehrs also can improve the quality of documentation, increase the accuracy of shared information, and improve patient safety (e.g., through checking for possible drug interactions) (tang et al., 2007). use of ehr data for quality measurement also reduces provider burden by reusing clinical data already being entered as part of patient care (tang et al., 2007). however, providers™ notes remain as ﬁfree textﬂ that needs to be combed to nd pertinent pieces of clinical information. this information extraction may be done manually, adding time and expense to the project as well as potentially introducing inaccuracies from errors during the extraction process. in some cases, it also is possible to mechanize the extraction of data from free text.pharmacy records are a source of data on prescriptions that have been lled. although claims data may also provide this information, pharmacy data are available even when patients lack prescription drug coverage. although lling a prescription does not ensure that the medication actually is being taken or taken as directed, there is some correlation between rell data and treatment adherence (pladevall et al., 2004). as is the case with claims data, the extraction of personlevel (rather than recordlevel) data is technically difcult. people may visit multiple pharmacies, which would make it difcult to compile data at the patient level. in addition, there is apt to be variation in the use and interoperability of electronic record systems. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 79the challenges may be mitigated, but not eliminated, for pharmacies that are integrated into health care systems such as kp or the vha.surveillance and vital records datadisease registries and surveillance systems, such as the cdc™s national hiv surveillance system (nhss), a populationbased registry of individuals diagnosed with hiv in the united states (cdc, 2010a), are useful sources of certain health and demographic data. such populationbased registries serve epidemiologic and public health functions, permitting the tracking of a disease™s prevalence and incidence over time and within specied geographic areas. disease registries and surveillance systems include demographic and health data relevant to their function, including, for example, disease diagnosis and staging, risk factors, individual™s name, address, age, sex, and race and ethnicity. in addition, some hiv surveillance systems include selected clinical test results and drug treatment information. since the nhss and state and local hiv surveillance systems as a group are inclusive of the majority of individuals diagnosed with hiv in the united states and contain a wealth of information relevant to hiv care, they are important sources of data on plwha.vital records, which include information on births and deaths, are another source of data. of particular interest for hiv care are mortality data on plwha. although vital records systems may have developed procedures for uniform reporting on cause of death, challenges to the accuracy of cause of death information persist. whether the proximate cause of death is attributable to a secondary or tertiary cause of interest, such as hiv, may be subject to diagnostic or reporting errors or not recorded at all. for this reason, allcause mortality may provide a more accurate measure of mortality with in a population diagnosed with a particular disease. survey and interview datasurveys or interviews are additional sources of data that can be used to evaluate health care quality and outcomes. welldesigned surveys can be used to help track and identify trends in health insurance, health services, hospitalizations, cost, access, and quality of care; to capture patients™ experiences with their health care services; and to evaluate the ability of the nation™s health system to meet the public™s health needs (nchs, 2012). in addition, they can be used as tools in clinical care to assist providers in delivering needed health services and as quality measurement tools to assess clinical performance (kassbartelmes, 2002).there are a number of advantages to using surveys for data collection (marsden and wright, 2010). a welldesigned sampling scheme allows data monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80 monitoring hiv care in the united statesgathering on a good crosssectional snapshot of all residents, including those who are not in care (i.e., those who are by denition excluded from clinical and administrative data sets). surveys also permit collection of data on indicators or variables that are not recorded in claims, clinical, surveillance, or other types of data (e.g., barriers to accessing care) and systematic assessment of data elements that providers may not uniformly report (e.g., socioeconomic position, educational attainment) for all patients. questions can be tailored to t information needs (e.g., a consistent measure of homelessness, food security, or education, rather than relying on the different ways in which clinicians may collect that information in their clinical records). in addition, interviews can elicit qualitative data about complex issues that are hard to quantify objectively, such as stigma, discrimination, or reasons some subpopulations are less likely to access care. new surveys can be elded to collect data on emerging issues, and longterm trends can be assessed using panel data.there are disadvantages to the use of surveys and interviews as well (marsden and wright, 2010). losses to followup and nonresponse, which may be more common among hardtoreach populations such as those who are homeless or unstably housed or struggling with mental health or drug use problems, may introduce bias and compromise the representativeness of results. in addition, it may be difcult to collect accurate selfreported data for a variety of reasons, including forgetfulness and reluctance to disclose sensitive information (although some survey modes such as computerassisted questionnaires may help in that regard). finally, primary data collection can be costly and labor intensive, although there are ways to make it less so (e.g., adding modules to existing surveys such as the national health and nutrition examination survey, contracting with companies that have existing sample pools).summarythe differences between clinical data such as test results and claims data can result in gaps in measures of hiv care. claims data provide information about the number of plwha who are in care and the frequency with which they are seen, although it may not always be possible to gauge whether a visit for an unrelated health concern also included hiv care, nor are claims data designed to measure care quality. claims data also can yield information about what tests and other procedures are being provided to an individual and the frequency with which they are being done. however, claims data provide no information on the results or outcomes of the tests or procedures. similarly claims data or pharmacy records may provide information about whether prescriptions for art medications are being monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 81lled and at what interval, but such information serves only as a proxy for data on treatment adherence.claims data provide important, although potentially incomplete, information about quality of hiv care with regard to continuity of care (frequency of visits), provision of appropriate screening and monitoring (types and frequency of laboratory tests), and, to a certain extent, timely initiation and prescription of appropriate art (medical and pharmacy records). such data are important for assessing whether plwha are receiving quality hiv care. other factors, such as substance use, mental health disorders, housing instability, and food insecurity, can negatively affect health outcomes even when individuals receive and adhere to quality hiv care and treatment. for this reason, clinical data pertaining to health outcomes, such as lower viral loads and higher cd4 counts, are important for tracking the overall success of hiv care in improving health outcomes for plwha and controlling the epidemic. such clinical data (e.g., cd4 count results) also are currently needed to supplement other types of data when assessing the timeliness of art initiation.data from surveys and interviews can ll additional data gaps by providing information on hardtoreach populations, such as homeless individuals and plwha who are not in care, and permitting collection of data not routinely collected by health care providers, such as need for and access to supportive services and subjective experiences of stigma and discrimination and satisfaction with care providers.for these reasons, different types of data (e.g., claims, clinical, surveillance, survey) are needed to estimate the core indicators related to continuous, quality clinical hiv care and access to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services for people living with hiv and hence to assess the impact of the nhas and the aca in terms of improving care for plwha. because the data needed to estimate the indicators identied by the committee are likely to come from different sources, attention to the use of consistent denitions (e.g., homelessness, food insecurity, race, ethnicity, gender) in the collection of data is important. data elements for assessing indicatorsappendix table 21 lists the data elements needed to estimate each of the indicators identied by the committee. many of the data elements are used to estimate more than one indicator, making the total number of required data elements fewer than it might initially appear. in some cases, suitable proxies may exist that can be substituted for the specied data elements when they cannot be obtained from a specic data system of interest. the following sections discuss the data elements in groups pertaining to their use. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdenominatorsall of the indicators rely on the population of plwha or a subpopulation thereof (e.g., a clinical marker of some type, such as art or pregnancy status) for their denominators. the goal is to select as comprehensive and nationally representative a population of plwha as possible when assessing indicators for the full population of plwha in the united states. discussion of the current availability of nationally representative data for the population of plwha in the united states follows in chapter 3. similarly, when assessing indicators for specic subpopulations of plwha, the goal, again, is to begin with as comprehensive and nationally representative a population as possible and then to apply the limiting element, such as race or ethnicity, to the group.as noted, blacks, latinos, gay and bisexual men, and ryan white hiv/aids program clients are subpopulations specically identied in nhas targets. additional subpopulations of interest include other racial and ethnic groups, women, individuals living in rural areas or different geographic areas, individuals of varying socioeconomic position or levels of acculturation, and individuals with different payer status. demographic data needed to assess the application of indicators to such subpopulations include race and ethnicity; gender identity; sexual orientation; zip code or other identier for current geographic area of residence; payer status (e.g., private, medicaid, medicare, va, ryan white hiv/aids program); socioeconomic position; and level of acculturation (e.g., primary language spoken). these data can be collected, based on individual selfreport, in clinical records, surveys, and administrative records for claims or program eligibility records.one difculty faced in evaluating, tracking, and reporting on the quality of the care and treatment of these subpopulations is the lack of data collected on a number of these demographic characteristics. although data systems relating to hiv care generally capture data on age, sex assigned at birth, and certain information on race and ethnicity and current area of residence, many fewer capture complete information on payer status, sexual minority status, gender identity, nativity status, and primary language preferred.it is important that complete data on both race and ethnicity be collected not only to evaluate and track health disparities but also because of the essential role they play in clinical care decisions. for example, latinos, african americans, american indians, and some subpopulations of asian and pacic islanders are at higher risk for diabetes and its complications than are whites, raising concerns about the use of some arvs with higher associations of metabolic syndromes. in a small study of 43 artnaïve latinos, latinos were found to have greater unfavorable changes in metabolic monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 83parameters and body composition in response to art initiation than either blacks or whites (gibert et al., 2009). also since some latinos present late in the course of the hiv disease continuum, they are more likely to have ois related to their countries of origin (garland, 2010).standardization of the collection of data on race and ethnicity is important to permit the collection and sharing of this information across federal agencies and other bodies. in 1997, the ofce of management and budget (omb) issued revised minimum standards for the collection of race and ethnicity data, specifying ve racial (american indian or alaska native, asian, black or african american, native hawaiian or other pacic islander, and white) and two ethnic (hispanic or latino; not hispanic or latino) categories in an effort to increase standardization of race and ethnicity data in administrative reporting and statistical activities within federal agencies (omb, 1977, 1997b). in addition, omb encourages the collection of more granular data on ethnicity when they can be aggregated back to the minimum categories (omb, 1997a). this effort has improved the collection of such data within many health information systems, but not all nonfederal data collection activities use these categories (iom, 2009) or even require the collection of data on race and ethnicity. in addition, there may be differences in the way these data are collected. for example, race may be collected by providers based on their observations, which can differ from a patient™s description of his or her race. furthermore, omb does not specify standardized collection of more granular data, for example, pertaining to country of origin, which is important for clinical decision making and nuanced monitoring of health disparities.in response to section 4302 of the aca, new hhs guidance on data collection standards for race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status, effective october 31, 2011, set minimum standards for the collection of such data in populationbased health surveys conducted or sponsored by hhs (hhs, 2011g). the hhs data standards mandate the collection of more granular data on race and ethnicity as specied in the guidance, as well as the collection of data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and english prociency as a measure of primary language. the guidance also recommends the wording for collection of data on the specic language spoken at home should an agency wish to collect such data.12hhs is also in the process of developing a national progression plan to integrate the collection of data on sexual orientation and gender identity into its national surveys (hhs, 2011c,g) and to collect data on socioeconomic status. collection of standardized demographic data on gender 12 the guidance includes a data standard for the collection of disability status, which might apply to plwha in cases when the disease process results in one or more of the disabling conditions specied. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84 monitoring hiv care in the united statesidentity and sexual orientation is important to track access to, and quality of, hiv care among sexual minority subpopulations of plwhašfor example, by estimating the proportion of gay and bisexual men with an undetectable viral load as specied in the nhas (onap, 2010, p. 31). a 2011 iom report assessing the current state of knowledge about the health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people provides working denitions of gender identity and sexual orientation (iom, 2011a, pp. 2529). ﬁgender identity refers to a person™s basic sense of being a man or boy, a woman or girl, or another gender (e.g., transgender, bigender, or gender queerša rejection of the traditional binary classication of gender)ﬂ (iom, 2011a, p. 25). ﬁ[s]exual orientation refers to an enduring pattern of or disposition to experience sexual or romantic desires for, and relationships with, people of one™s same sex, the other sex, or both sexesﬂ (i.e., homosexual, heterosexual, bisexual) (iom, 2011a, p. 27). although useful and important, these categories will not capture the group of msm who do not selfidentify as homosexual or bisexual or gender different. for this reason, the collection of data on sex of sexual partner(s) is also important.minimizing the burden of data collection is an important consideration, but it must be balanced against the importance of the information for clinical decision making and the evaluation and monitoring of treatment and care, which may differ in quality based on many of the aforementioned demographic data elements. the committee supports the hhs efforts to increase the scope and granularity of demographic data collected in national populationbased health surveys and recommends that the expanded data collection standards be extended to all hhssponsored data collection activities to the extent practicable.although omb and hhs standards apply to federal data collection, private health insurance plans vary in their collection of these data. kp, discussed in more detail in chapter 3, collects data on race and ethnicity and sexual orientation. although the data are incomplete, kp is actively working to complete the missing data (kp response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011). the ingenix normative health information database®, which includes claims from private commercial insurance plans, selffunded employer group health plans, and medicare advantage plans, also contains data on race and ethnicity, but the data are incomplete. these data are available for 50 to 94 percent of private commercial and selffunded employer group beneciaries, depending on plan, but no information on race and ethnicity is available for medicare advantage plans. ingenix does not capture data on sexual orientation (ingenix response to iom request for information, april 27, 2011). the healthcore integrated research database (hird®), which includes longitudinal administrative claims data representing commercially insured members of 15 blue cross blue shield health plans across the united states, does not contain data on monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 85race and ethnicity or sexual orientation. although the hiv/aids epidemic has disproportionately affected traditionally disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, who are generally covered by public insurance, the reduction in work disability with the advent of art makes employerbased insurance an increasingly relevant source of information on plwha. as such, the routine collection of standardized data on race and ethnicity, as well as sexual orientation and gender identity, by private insurers would facilitate their usefulness for tracking changes in access to and the provision of hiv care. core indicators for clinical hiv carethe data elements required to assess the core indicators for clinical hiv care are date of hiv diagnosis, date of rst visit for hiv care, dates of subsequent routine hiv care visits, dates and results of ongoing cd4 and viral load tests, date of diagnosis of aids or aidsdening condition (if applicable), dates of art initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of drugs, and date of death. most of these data are available through surveillance or claims data systems, although some clinical data might have to be obtained from patient medical records.the date of rst visit for hiv care may be difcult to obtain. claims data capture ofce visits for hiv care if they are coded as such, but data sources generally only capture the date an individual was rst seen for hiv care within a given system, not the rstever date of hiv care (see chapter 3 for additional discussion). individuals™ medical records may contain the approximate date of rst hiv care, but the information is apt to be incomplete, and the process of mining it is time consuming.the date of rst cd4 and viral load tests may be used as a proxy for the date of rst visit for hiv care. one difculty with this approach arises when the tests are not recorded on the same date that the rst appointment occurred. for the purpose of measuring linkage to care, however, the difference of a day or two between the date of the rst visit and the test date is seldom important. a more signicant problem occurs when the tests are ordered at the time of diagnosis. in this case, the rst cd4 or viral load test date is less likely to re˚ect linkage to care. although the date of rst visit for hiv, as well as lab test dates, can be obtained from claims data, the lab test dates also are available from surveillance data, which may make them preferable since most of the other data elements required to assess the core indicators can be obtained from surveillance data as well (see chapter 3).as indicated in chapter 3, a number of data systems collect information for a specied reporting period. in such cases, yes/no documentation of cd4 or viral load tests, use of art, or diagnosis of aids within the reporting period can be used if specic test, prescription, or diagnosis dates monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86 monitoring hiv care in the united statesare not available. documentation of cd4 or viral load tests also may serve as a proxy for hiv care visits to indicate continuity of care.outside of medical records, in particular ehrs, obtaining data on art initiation is challenging, because it requires linking evidence of art prescription or dispensing with cd4 test results. when specic dates for cd4 counts and art prescription or dispensing are not available, some combination of results using the most recent cd4 test within the reporting period and yes/no documentation of whether the individual is on art within the reporting period can be used.additional indicators for clinical hiv careassessment of the additional indicators for hiv care requires a number of the same data elements needed to assess the core hiv care indicators: date of hiv diagnosis, cd4 test results at diagnosis or rst visit for hiv care, date of art initiation, and dates of art prescription or dispensing. data elements that are specic to the additional hiv care indicators include dates and results of tb tests; dates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screenings; date of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunity; dates of hepatitis c tests; dates of in˚uenza immunizations; date of pneumococcal immunization; and date of hepatitis b vaccination or date of documented immunity. test or screening and immunization dates (or a close proxy) may be obtained from either clinical or claims databases. the information needed is documented evidence that the specied screenings and immunizations took place after hiv diagnosis and, where relevant, at the appropriate intervals. clinical data on tb test results and documentation of hepatitis b immunity would have to be obtained from medical records or, in the case of tb, possible linkage with public health surveillance systems.other data elements needed to assess additional indicators relating to art include dates of drug resistance testing, diagnosis or test results for hivrelated nephropathy, and pregnancy test results (or documentation of pregnancy). dates or evidence of drug resistance testing may be obtained from claims databases, but diagnosis of nephropathy and documentation of pregnancy are not available from claims data. yes/no documentation of these conditions may be obtained from other administrative data systems, as well as from ehrs or other medical records. evidence of concurrent art usage is needed as well to evaluate the relevant indicators. core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesdata elements for assessing the core indicators for mental health and substance abuse include dates of mental health screening, as well as dates monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 87of diagnosis or referral and rst visit for mental health services, and the equivalent dates for substance abuse screening, referral, and rst visit for services. referral dates for mental health and substance use disorders are not readily available outside of ehrs and other medical records, and dates of rst treatment may be difcult to acquire because individuals may be referred to outside providers or the services may be ﬁcarved outﬂ (i.e., feeforservice, provided by a different managed care plan than the rest of the individual™s medical care, or paid out of pocket). suitable proxies for estimating the relevant indicators include evidence of assessment for mental health or substance abuse disorders and any visits for treatment services during the same reporting period. pharmacy data showing evidence of prescriptions relevant to the treatment of mental health or substance abuse disorders also may serve as a proxy for receipt of care for these conditions. as discussed in chapter 4, privacy laws may pose particular challenges for obtaining data to estimate the core indicators for access to mental health and substance abuse services. data elements for assessing the core indicators for supportive services include housing and food security status (e.g., as previously dened) and need for transportation services to access medical care and related services. obtaining data to estimate the indicators for supportive services is particularly challenging since most data systems related to hiv care do not capture this type of data and have no reporting requirement in these areas. evidence of reported need for (or access to) housing, food, or transportation assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about housing instability, food insecurity, or unmet transportation need is not available. surveys are promising vehicles for obtaining data to estimate the supportive services indicators.additional indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesthe additional indicators pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services for housing, food, and transportation assistance involve documentation of assessment of need for relevant treatment or supportive services. if assessment dates are not available, then yes/no documentation of assessment (e.g., within a specied reporting period) would be a suitable proxy.additional data elements of interestas previously noted, the committee identied several data elements that re˚ect important aspects of the care experiences of plwha but are not required to estimate the indicators related to continuous hiv care and acmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88 monitoring hiv care in the united statescess to supportive services. these additional data elements include access to dental care, emergency department or inpatient use, sexual risk behaviors, and partner hiv status (see appendix table 32f).other data elements pertain to individuals™ experience of discrimination or stigma as plwha (sengupta et al., 2011), individuals™ level of satisfaction with their hiv care experience, and individuals™ assessment of their healthrelated quality of life (hhs, 2011a,b). such experiences are important to the success of treatment and health outcomes of plwha, since they can affect the willingness of individuals to enter and remain in care and adhere to art (see, e.g., valdiserri, 2002). they also may affect individuals™ mental state and the likelihood that they will initiate or continue substance use (mays and cochran, 2001).stigma and discrimination, along with numerous other factors (e.g., housing instability, food insecurity), are major sources of chronic stress, which can precipitate or exacerbate mental health and substance use disorders. stress also can compromise immunological functioning and may alter the progression of hiv disease. studies of hiv samples have conrmed the relevance of stressin˚uenced biomarkers in physiological mechanisms of hiv (glover et al., 2010; kopnisky et al., 2004; kumar et al., 2003). for example, norepinephrine, a neurotransmitter of the autonomic nervous system released in response to stress, has been shown to accelerate hiv replication (chipimo et al., 2011; cole, 2008; miles et al., 2011).the nhas highlights hiv stigma and discrimination, calling for a reduction of stigma and discrimination against plwha as one of its action steps (onap, 2010, p. 35). data on subjective experiences such as these are difcult to quantify objectively, however, which complicates the collection and meaningful application of data in these areas. surveys and interviews can be particularly effective collection tools for this type of data, which can be used to supplement data obtained from clinical and administrative sources.conclusions and recommendations˚measures of continuous hiv care as well as access to and quality of care can be monitored by a limited number of core indicators. primary challenges to optimal outcomes for plwha include late diagnosis, delayed linkage to care for hiv, poor retention in care, delayed initiation of art, and poor adherence to art (i.e., discontinuing or intermittent art), as well as untreated nonhiv comorbidities and unmet basic needs. core indicators can measure the extent to which these challenges are being addressed across the monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 89care continuum and can be used to gauge the impact of the nhas and the aca in improving hiv/aids care in the united states. recommendation 21. the department of health and human services should use the following core indicators13 to assess the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act on improving hiv/aids care and access to supportive services for individuals with hiv: core indicators for clinical hiv care˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aids˚˚proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosis˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection13 the rationale for each of the indicators is summarized in appendix table 21.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90 monitoring hiv care in the united states core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 days14˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 days15˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months˚the differences among clinical, claims, and other types of data can result in gaps in measures for hiv care. both clinical and claims data are needed to provide a complete picture of the quality of hiv care. data from surveys and interviews can ll additional data gaps by providing information on hardtoreach populations, such as homeless individuals and plwha who are not in care, and permitting collection of data not routinely collected by health care providers, such as need for and access to supportive services, and data on subjective experiences, such as hiv stigma and discrimination. various types of data are needed to estimate the core indicators related to continuous, quality hiv care and access to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services for people living with hiv, and hence to assess the impact of nhas and aca on improving hiv/aids care.˚demographic data are essential to fully understanding hiv care challenges especially among groups disproportionately affected 14 receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time frame. urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.15 see footnote 14.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 91by the hiv epidemic. many of these crucial data elements, such as gender identity, sexual orientation, sexual risk behaviors, geographic marker of residence, income, primary means of reimbursement for medical services, and level of acculturation as re˚ected in primary language, are not routinely collected. other data elements such as race and ethnicity often are not collected with a sufcient level of detail to make nuanced distinctions among the health needs of different racial and ethnic groups. new hhs guidance, effective october 31, 2011, on minimum data collection standards for race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status mandates the collection of more granular data on race and ethnicity, as well as the collection of data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and english prociency as a measure of primary language. these standards apply to all national population health surveys sponsored or conducted by hhs. hhs is also in the process of developing a national progression plan to integrate the collection of data on sexual orientation and gender identity into hhs national surveys and to collect data on socioeconomic status. recommendation 22. the department of health and human services and the ofce of management and budget should continue to expand the demographic data elements to be captured by federal data systems relevant to hiv care to permit calculation of the indicators for subgroups of the population of people with diagnosed hiv infection, including, but not limited to, the following: ˚˚age˚˚race˚˚ethnicity˚˚sex (assigned at birth)˚˚˚gender identity (e.g., male, female, transgender [maletofemale, femaletomale], bigender, gender queer)˚˚sexual orientation (e.g., heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual)˚˚˚current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census block)˚˚income or poverty level˚˚˚primary means of reimbursement for medical services (including medicaid, medicare, ryan white hiv/aids program, private insurance or health maintenance organization, no coverage)monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92 monitoring hiv care in the united states in addition, hhs should, to the extent practicable, extend its expanded data collection standards beyond national populationbased health surveys to all hhssponsored data collection activities.referencesaberg, j. a., j. e. kaplan, h. libman, p. emmanuel, j. r. anderson, v. e. stone, j. m. oleske, j. s. currier, and j. e. gallant. 2009. primary care guidelines for the management of persons infected with human immunodeciency virus: 2009 update by the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america. clinical infectious diseases 49(5):651681.aetc (aids education and training centers). 2011. hivassociated dementia and other neurocognitive disorders. http://www.aidsetc.org/aidsetc?page=cg802dementia (accessed december 16, 2011).agwu, a. l., j. a. fleishman, p. t. korthuis, g. k. siberry, j. m. ellen, a. h. gaur, r. rutstein, and k. a. gebo. 2011. disparities in antiretroviral treatment: a comparison of behaviorallyhivinfected youth and adults in the hiv research network. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 58(1):100107.aidala, a. a., g. lee, d. m. abramson, p. messeri, and a. siegler. 2007. housing need, housing assistance, and connection to hiv medical care. aids and behavior 11(6 suppl):101115.amico, k. r. 2011. standard of care for antiretroviral therapy adherence and retention in care from the perspective of care providers attending the 5th international conference on hiv treatment adherence. journal of the international association of physicians in aids care 10(5):291296.andersen, m., e. hockman, g. smereck, j. tinsley, d. milfort, r. wilcox, t. smith, c. connelly, l. adams, and r. thomas. 2007. retaining women in hiv medical care. journal of the association of nurses in aids care 18(3):3341.anderson, s. a. 1990. core indicators of nutritional state for difcult to sample populations. journal of nutrition 120:1557s1600s.anema, a., n. vogenthaler, e. a. frongillo, s. kadiyala, and s. d. weiser. 2009. food insecurity and hiv/aids: current knowledge, gaps, and research priorities. current hiv/aids reports 6(4):224231.arcury, t. a., j. s. preisser, w. m. gesler, and j. m. powers. 2005. access to transportation and health care utilization in a rural region. journal of rural health 21(1):3138.ashman, j. j., r. conviser, and m. b. pounds. 2002. associations between hivpositive individuals™ receipt of ancillary services and medical care receipt and retention. aids care 14(suppl 1):s109s118.aziz, m., and k. y. smith. 2011. challenges and successes in linking hivinfected women to care in the united states. clinical infectious diseases 52(suppl 2):s231s237.babor, t. f., b. g. mcree, p. a. kassebaum, p. l. grimaldi, k. ahmed, and j. bray. 2007. screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (sbirt): toward a public health approach to the management of substance abuse. substance abuse 28(3):730.baicker, k., a. chandra, j. s. skinner, and j. e. wennberg. 2004. who you are and where you live: how race and geography affect the treatment of medicare beneciaries. health affairs (suppl variation, october):var3344, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.var.33.baldwin, l., s. h. taplin, h. friedman, and r. moe. 2004. access to multidisciplinary cancer care: is it linked to the use of breastconserving surgery with radiation for earlystage breast carcinoma? american cancer society 100(4):701709.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 93bisson, g., r. gross, v. miller, i. weller, a. walker, on behalf of the writing group. 2003. monitoring of longterm toxicities of hiv treatments: an international perspective. aids 17(17):24072417.bogart, l. m., g. wagner, f. h. galvan, and d. banks. 2010. conspiracy beliefs about hiv are related to antiretroviral treatment nonadherence among african american men with hiv. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 53(5):648655.bozzette, s. a., b. phillips, s. asch, a. l. gifford, l. lenert, t. menke, e. ortiz, d. owens, and l. deyton. 2000. quality enhancement research initiative for human immunodeciency virus/acquired immunodeciency syndrome: framework and plan. hivqueri executive committee. medical care 38(6 suppl 1):i60i69.branson, b. m., h. h. handseld, m. a. lampe, r. s. janssen, a. w. taylor, s. b. lyss, and j. e. clark. 2006. revised recommendations for hiv testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in healthcare settings. morbidity and mortality weekly report 55(rr14):117.brantley, r. k., k. r. williams, t. m. silva, m. sistrom, n. m. thielman, h. ward, a. a. lima, and r. l. guerrant. 2003. aidsassociated diarrhea and wasting in northeast brazil is associated with subtherapeutic plasma levels of antiretroviral medications and with both bovine and human subtypes of cryptosporidium parvum. brazilian journal infectious diseases 7(1):1622.brion, j. m., c. d. rose, p. k. nicholas, r. sloane, i. b. corless, t. g. lindgren, d. j. wantland, j. k. kemppainen, e. f. sefcik, k. m. nokes, k. m. kirksey, l. eller, m. j. hamilton, w. l. holzemer, c. j. portillo, m. r. mendez, l. m. robinson, s. moezzi, m. rosa, s. human, m. maryland, j. arudo, a. v. ros, t. p. nicholas, y. cuca, e. huang, c. bain, l. tyerviola, s. m. zang, m. shannon, a. peterslewis, and s. willard. 2011. unhealthy substanceuse behaviors as symptomrelated selfcare in persons with hiv/aids. nursing & health sciences 13(1):1626.burks, d. j., r. robbins, and j. p. durtschi. 2011. american indian gay, bisexual and twospirit men: a rapid assessment of hiv/aids risk factors, barriers to prevention and culturallysensitive intervention. culture, health & sexuality 13(3):283298.bushen, o. y., j. a. davenport, a. b. lima, s. c. piscitelli, a. j. uzgiris, t. m. silva, r. leite, m. kosek, r. a. dillingham, a. girao, a. a. lima, and r. l. guerrant. 2004. diarrhea and reduced levels of antiretroviral drugs: improvement with glutamine or alanylglutamine in a randomized controlled trial in northeast brazil. clinical infectious diseases 38(12):17641770.campa, a., z. yang, s. lai, l. xue, j. c. phillips, s. sales, j. b. page, and m. k. baum. 2005. hivrelated wasting in hivinfected drug users in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. clinical infectious diseases 41(8):11791185.campsmith, m. l., p. h. rhodes, h. i. hall, and t. a. green. 2010. undiagnosed hiv prevalence among adults and adolescents in the united states at the end of 2006. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 53(5):619624. candiani, t. m., j. pinto, c. a. cardoso, i. r. carvalho, a. c. dias, m. carneiro, and e. a. goulart. 2007. impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart) on the incidence of opportunistic infections, hospitalizations and mortality among children and adolescents living with hiv/aids in belo horizonte, minas gerais state, brazil. cadernos de saude publica 23(suppl 3):s414s423.carrico, a. w. 2011. substance use and hiv disease progression in the haart era: implications for the primary prevention of hiv. life sciences 88(2122):940947.castilla, j., p. sobrino, l. de la fuente, i. noguer, l. guerra, and f. parras. 2002. late diagnosis of hiv infection in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: consequences for aids incidence. aids 16(14):19451951.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94 monitoring hiv care in the united statescdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 2006. achievements in public health: reduction in perinatal transmission of hiv infectionšunited states, 19852005. morbidity and mortality weekly report 55(21):592597.cdc. 2007. goals and objectives of the cdc hiv prevention strategic plan: extended through 2010. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/reports/psp/pdf/psp.pdf (accessed december 19, 2011).cdc. 2009. late hiv testingš34 states, 1996. morbidity and mortality weekly report 58(24):661665.cdc. 2010a. hiv infection reporting. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/reporting.htm (accessed january 6, 2012).cdc. 2010b. sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010. morbidity and mortality weekly report 59(rr12):1110.cdc. 2011a. hiv in the united states. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/factsheets/pdf/us.pdf (accessed december 20, 2011).cdc. 2011b. hiv surveillancešunited states, 19812008. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(21):689729.cdc. 2011c. vital signs: hiv prevention through care and treatmentšunited states. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(47):16181623.cdc. 2012. diagnoses of hiv infection and aids in the united states and dependent areas, 2010. hiv surveillance report. volume 22. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2010report/index.htm (accessed march 21, 2012).chain (community health advisory & information network) fact sheet. 2004. factors associated with delayed care seeking among hivinfected individuals in new york city. http://www.nyhiv.com/pdfs/delayed%20entry%20fact%20sheetv7.pdf (accessed december 15, 2011).chapple, i. l. c., and j. hamburger. 2000. the signicance of oral health in hiv disease. sexually transmitted infections 76(4):236243.charlebois, e. d., m. das, t. c. porco, and d. v. havlir. 2011. the effect of expanded antiretroviral treatment strategies on the hiv epidemic among men who have sex with men in san francisco. clinical infectious diseases 52(8):10461049.cheever, l. w. 2007. engaging hivinfected patients in care: their lives depend on it. clinical infectious diseases 44(11):15001502.chen, n., e. erbelding, h. c. yeh, and k. page. 2010. predictors of hiv testing among latinos in baltimore city. journal of immigrant and minority health 12(6):867874.chin, j. j., m. botsko, e. behar, and r. finkelstein. 2009. more than ancillary: hiv social services, intermediate outcomes and quality of life. aids care 21(10):12891297.chipimo, p., m. tuba, and k. fylkesnes. 2011. conceptual models for mental distress among hivinfected and uninfected individuals: a contribution to clinical practice and research in primaryhealthcare centers in zambia. bmc health services research 11(january):7 (12 pages).clementsnolle, k., r. marx, m. pendo, e. loughran, m. estes, and m. katz. 2008. highly active antiretroviral therapy use and hiv transmission risk behaviors among individuals who are hiv infected and were recently released from jail. american journal of public health 98(4):661666.cohen, m. s., y. q. chen, m. mccauley, t. gamble, m. c. hosseinipour, n. kumarasamy, j. g. hakim, j. kumwenda, b. grinsztein, j. h. s. pilotto, s. v. godbole, s. mehendale, s. charjvalertsak, b. r. santos, k. h. mayer, i. f. hoffman, s. h. eshelman, e. piwowarmanning, l. wang, j. makhema, l. a. mills, g. de bruyn, i. sanne, j. eron, j. gallant, d. havlir, s. swindells, h. ribaudo, v. elharrar, d. burns, t. e. taha, k. nielsensaines, d. celentano, m. essex, and t. r. fleming. 2011. prevention of hiv1 infection with early antiretroviral therapy. new england journal of medicine 365:493505.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 95cohn, s.e., m. l. berk, s. h. berry, n. duan, m. r. frankel, j. d. klein, m. m. mckinney, a. rastegar, s. smith, m. f. shapiro, and s. a. bozzette. 2001. the care of hivinfected adults in rural areas of the united states. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 28(4):385392.cole, s. w. 2008. psychosocial in˚uences on hiv1 disease progression: neural, endocrine, and virologic mechanisms. psychosomatic medicine 70(5):562568.conover, c. j., and k. whettengoldstein. 2002. the impact of ancillary services on primary care use and outcomes for hiv/aids patients with public insurance coverage. aids care 14(suppl 1):s59s71.conviser, r. 2007. catalyzing system changes to make hiv care more accessible. journal of health care for the poor and underserved 18(3 suppl):224243.conviser, r., and m. b. pounds. 2002a. background for the studies on ancillary services and primary care use. aids care 14(suppl 1):s7s14.conviser, r., and m. b. pounds. 2002b. the role of ancillary services in clientcentred systems of care. aids care 14(suppl 1):s119s131.cook, j. a., j. k. burkemiller, m. h. cohen, r. l. cook, d. vlahov, t. e. wilson, e. t. golub, r. m. schwartz, a. a. howard, c. ponath, m. w. plankey, a. m. levine, and d. d. grey. 2008. crack cocaine, disease progression, and mortality in a multicenter cohort of hiv1 positive women. aids 22(11):13551363.cooperpatrick, l., j. j. gallo, j. j. gonzales, h. t. vu, n. r. powe, c. nelson, and d. e. ford. 1999. race, gender, and partnership in the patientphysician relationship. journal of the american medical association 282(6):583589.cooperman, n. a., m. heo, k. m. berg, x. li, a. h. litwin, s. nahvib, and j. h. arnsten. 2012. impact of adherence counseling dose on antiretroviral adherence and hiv viral load among hivinfected methadone maintained drug users. aids care:18. doi:10.1080/09540121.2011.644231.coulter, i. d., k. c. heslin, m. marcus, r. d. hays, j. freed, c. dermartirosian, n. guzmánbecerra, w. e. cunningham, r. m. andersen, and m. f. shapiro. 2002. associations of selfreported oral health with physical and mental health in a nationally representative sample of hiv persons receiving medical care. quality of life research 11(1):5770.crepaz, n., and g. marks. 2002. towards an understanding of sexual risk behavior in people living with hiv: a review of social, psychological, and medical ndings. aids 16(2):135139.crepaz, n., c. m. lyles, r. j. wolitski, w. f. passin, s. m. rama, j. h. herbst, d. w. purcell, r. m. malow, and r. stall, for the hiv/aids prevention research synthesis (prs) team. 2006. do prevention interventions reduce hiv risk behaviours among people living with hiv? a metaanalytic review of controlled trials. aids 20(2):143157.cunningham, w. e., r. m. andersen, m. h. katz, m. d. stein, b. j. turner, s. crystal, s. zierler, k. kuromiya, s. c. morton, p. st. clair, s. a. bozzette, and m. f. shapiro. 1999. the impact of competing subsistence needs and barriers on access to medical care for persons with human immunodeciency virus receiving care in the united states. medical care 37(12):12701281.das, m. 2011. intensifying hiv prevention in the communities where hiv is most heavily concentrated. powerpoint presentation at the 2011 national hiv prevention conference, atlanta, ga, august 15.de bruin, m., w. viechtbauer, h. p. schaalma, g. kok, c. abraham, and h. j. hospers. 2010. standard care impact on effects of highly active antiretroviral therapy adherence interventions: a metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. archives of internal medicine 170(3):240250.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdenning, p., and e. dinenno. 2010. communities in crisis: is there a generalized hiv epidemic in impoverished urban areas in the united states? abstract wepdd101 xviii international aids conference, vienna, austria, july 1823. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/resources/other/pdf/povertyposter.pdf (accessed january 9, 2012).dennis, a. m., s. napravnik, a. c. sena, and j. j. eron. 2011. late entry to hiv care among latinos compared with nonlatinos in a southeastern u.s. cohort. clinical infectious diseases 53(5):480487.dillingham, r., p. leger, c. a. beauharnais, e. miller, a. kashuba, s. jennings, k. dupnik, a. samie, e. eyma, r. guerrant, j. pape, and d. fitzgerald. 2011. aids diarrhea and antiretroviral drug concentrations: a matchedpair cohort study in port au prince, haiti. american journal of tropical medicine and hygiene 84(6):878882.doescher, m. p., b. g. saver, k. fiscella, and p. franks. 2001. racial/ethnic inequities in continuity and site of care: location, location, location. health services research 36(6 pt 2):7889.drug strategies. 2000. smart steps: treating baltimore™s drug problem. http://www.drugstrategies.com/pdf/baltimore.pdf (accessed may 17, 2012).enriquez, m., r. farnan, a. l. cheng, a. almeida, d. del valle, m. pulidoparra, and g. flores. 2008. impact of a bilingual/bicultural care team on hivrelated health outcomes. journal of the association of nurses in aids care 19(4):295301.ers (economic research service, u.s. department of agriculture). 2009. food security in the united states: measuring household food security. http://www.ers.usda.gov/brieng/foodsecurity/measurement.htm (accessed august 3, 2011).ers. 2011. food security in the united states: denitions of hunger and food security. http://www.ers.usda.gov/brieng/foodsecurity/labels.htm (accessed august 3, 2009).espinoza, l., h. i. hall, r. m. selik, and x. hu. 2008. characteristics of hiv infection among hispanics, united states, 20032006. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 49(1):94101.ettenhofer, m. l., c. h. hinkin, s. a. castellon, r. durvasula, j. ullman, m. lam, h. myers, m. j. wright, and j. foley. 2009. aging, neurocognition, and medication adherence in hiv infection. american journal of geriatric psychiatry 17(4):281290.ferver, k., b. burton, and p. jesilow. 2009. the use of claims data in healthcare research. open public health journal 2:1124.finkelstein, a., s. taubman, b. j. wright, m. bernstein, j. gruber, j. p. newhouse, h. allen, k. baicker, and the oregon health study group. 2011. the oregon health insurance experiment: evidence from the first year. national bureau of economic research, working paper 17190. cambridge, ma. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17190 (accessed january 6, 2012).friedmann, p. d., s. c. lemon, m. d. stein, and t. a. d™aunno. 2003. accessibility of addiction treatment: results from a national survey of outpatient substance abuse treatment organizations. health services research 38(3):887903.gardner, e. m., m. p. mclees, j. f. steiner, c. del rio, and w. j. burman. 2011. the spectrum of engagement in hiv care and its relevance to testandtreat strategies for prevention of hiv infection. clinical infectious diseases 52(6):793800.gardner, l. i, l. r. metsch, p. andersonmahoney, a. m. loughlin, c. del rio, s. strathdee, s. l. sansom, h. a. siegal, a. e. greenberg, s. d. holmberg, and the antiretroviral treatment access study (artas) study group. 2005. efcacy of a brief case management intervention to link recently diagnosed hivinfected persons to care. aids 19(4):423431.garland, j. m., a. s. andrade, and k. r. page. 2010. unique aspects of the care of hivpositive latino patients living in the united states. current hiv/aids reports 7(3):107116.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 97gavrilin, m. a., l. e. mathes, and m. podell. 2002. methamphetamine enhances cellassociated feline immunodeciency virus replication in astrocytes. journal of neurovirology 8(3):240249.gaynes, b. n., a. j. rush, m. h. trivedi, s. r. wisniewski, g. k. balasubramani, d. c. spencer, t. petersen, m. klinkman, d. warden, l. nicholas, and m. fava. 2007. major depression symptoms in primary care and psychiatric care settings: a crosssectional analysis. annals of family medicine 5(2):126134.gebo, k. a., j. a. fleishman, r. conviser, e. d. reilly, p. t. korthuis, r. d. moore, j. hellinger, p. keiser, h. r. rubin, l. crane, f. j. hellinger, and w. c. mathews. 2005. racial and gender disparities in receipt of highly active antiretroviral therapy persist in a multistate sample of hiv patients in 2001. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 38(1):96103.ghose, t., d. t. swendeman, and s. m. george. 2011. the role of brothels in reducing hiv risk in sonagachi, india. qualitative health research 21(5):587600.gibert, c. l., j. c. shlay, s. sharma, g. bartsch, g. peng, and c. grunfeld, for the terry beirn community programs for clinical research on aids and the international network for strategic initiatives in global hiv trials. 2009. racial differences in changes of metabolic parameters and body composition in antiretroviral therapynaive persons initiating antiretroviral therapy. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 50(1):4453.giordano, t. p., a. l. gifford, a. c. white, jr., m. e. suarezalmazor, l. rabeneck, c. hartman, l. i. backus, l. a. mole, and r. o. morgan. 2007. retention in care: a challenge to survival with hiv infection. clinical infectious diseases 44(11):14931499.glover, d. a., e. f. garciaaracena, p. lester, e. rice, and m. j. rothramborus. 2010. stress biomarkers as outcomes for hiv+ prevention: participation, feasibility and ndings among hiv+ latina and african american mothers. aids and behavior 14(2):339350.golin, c. e., h. liu, r. d. hays, l. g. miller, c. k. beck, j. ickovics, a. h. kaplan, and n. s. wenger. 2002. a prospective study of predictors of adherence to combination antiretroviral medication. journal of general internal medicine 17(10):756765.goulet, j. l., s. l. fultz, d. rimland, a. butt, c. gibert, m. rodriguezbarradas, k. bryant, and a. c. justice. 2007. aging and infectious diseases: do patterns of comorbidity vary by hiv status, age, and hiv severity? clinical infectious diseases 45(12):15931601.halkitis, p., j. palamar, and p. mukherjee. 2008. analysis of hiv medication adherence in relation to person and treatment characteristics using hierarchical linear modeling. aids patient care and stds 22(4):323335.halkitis, p. n., s. a. kupprat, and p. p. mukherjee. 2010. longitudinal associations between case management and supportive services use among black and latina hivpositive women in new york city. journal of women™s health 9(1):99108.hall, h. i., r. song, p. rhodes, j. prejean, q. an, l. m. lee, j. karon, r. brookmeyer, e. h. kaplan, m. t. mckenna, and r. s. janssen. 2008. estimation of hiv incidence in the united states. journal of the american medical association 300(5):520529.heckman, t. g., a. m. somlai, j. peters, j. walker, l. ottosalaj, c. a. galdabini, and j. a. kelly. 1998. barriers to care among persons living with hiv/aids in urban and rural areas. aids care 10(3):365375.henderson, k. c., j. hindman, s. c. johnson, r. j. valuck, and j. j. kiser. 2011. assessing the effectiveness of pharmacybased adherence interventions on antiretroviral adherence in persons with hiv. aids patient care and stds 25(4):221228.hendricks, k., and s. gorbach. 2009. nutrition issues in chronic drug users living with hiv infection. nida addiction science and clinical practice 5(1):1623.hhs (u.s. department of health and human services). 2009. recommended immunizations for hiv positive adults. http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentles/recommended immunizationsfsen.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshhs. 2010. healthy people 2020 summary of objectives. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/pdfs/hiv.pdf (accessed december 20, 2011).hhs. 2011a. about healthy people. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx (accessed december 19, 2011).hhs. 2011b. healthrelated quality of life and wellbeing. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/qolwbabout.aspx (accessed december 7, 2011).hhs. 2011c. improving data collection for the lgbt community. http://www.healthcare.gov/news/factsheets/2011/06/lgbt06292011a.html (accessed december 6, 2011).hhs. 2011d. panel on antiretroviral guidelines for adults and adolescents. guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in hiv1infected adults and adolescents. october 14. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/adultandadolescentgl002534.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).hhs. 2011e. panel on antiretroviral therapy and medical management of hivinfected children. guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in pediatric hiv infection. national institutes of health. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentles/pediatricguidelines.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).hhs. 2011f. panel on treatment of hivinfected pregnant women and prevention of perinatal transmission. recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant hiv1infected women for maternal health and interventions to reduce perinatal hiv transmission in the united states. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/perinatalgl.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).hhs. 2011g. u.s. department of health and human services implementation guidance on data collection standards for race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status. http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/aca/4302/index.pdf (accessed december 6, 2011).hhs. 2012. panel on antiretroviral guidelines for adults and adolescents. guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in hiv1infected adults and adolescents. march 27. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentles/lvguidelines/adultandadolescentgl.pdf (accessed may 18, 2012).hinkin, c. h., s. a. castellon, r. s. durvasula, d. j. hardy, m. n. lam, k. i. mason, d. thrasher, m. b. goetz, and m. stefaniak. 2002. medication adherence among hiv+ adults: effects of cognitive dysfunction and regimen complexity. neurology 59(12): 19441950.horberg, m. a., m. j. silverberg, l. b. hurley, w. j. towner, d. b. klein, s. bersoffmatcha, w. g. weinberg, d. antoniskis, m. mogyoros, w. t. dodge, r. dobrinich, c. p. quesenberry, and d. a. kovach. 2008. effects of depression and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor use on adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy and on clinical outcomes in hivinfected populations. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 47(3):384390.horberg, m. a., j. a. aberg, l. w. cheever, p. renner, e. o™brien kaleba, and s. m. asch. 2010. development of national and multiagency hiv care quality measures. clinical infectious diseases 51(6):732738.horberg, m., l. hurley, w. towner, r. gambatese, d. klein, d. antoniskis, w. weinberg, p. kadlecik, c. remmers, r. dobrinich, c. quesenberry, m. silverberg, and m. johnson. 2011. hiv quality performance measures in a large integrated health care system. aids patient care and stds 25(1):2128.hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2009. new strategies for rural care. hrsa care action (april). http://hab.hrsa.gov/newspublications/careactionnewsletter/april2009.pdf (accessed december 20, 2011).hrsa. 2011a. hab hiv performance measures. http://hab.hrsa.gov/deliverhivaidscare/habperformmeasures.html (accessed december 6, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 99hrsa. 2011b. hivqual continuous quality program. http://hab.hrsa.gov/deliverhivaids care/hivqual.html (accessed december 6, 2011).hud (u.s. department of housing and urban development). 2010. homeless management information system (hmis) data standards, revised notice. ofce of community planning and development, march. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdata standardsmarch2010.pdf (accessed december 9, 2011).humeniuk, r., v. dennington, and r. ali. 2008. world health organization assist phase iii study group. the effectiveness of a brief intervention for ilicit drugs linked to the alcohol, smoking, and substance involvement screening test (assist) in primary health care settings: a technical report of phase iii findings of the who assist randomized control trial. geneva, switzerland: world health organization.iom (institute of medicine). 2004. measuring what matters: allocation, planning, and quality assessment for the ryan white care act. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2009. race, ethnicity, and language data: standardization for health care quality improvement. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2010. hiv screening and access to care: exploring barriers and facilitators to expanded hiv testing. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011a. the health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people: building a foundation for better understanding. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011b. hiv screening and access to care: exploring the impact of policies on access to and provision of hiv care. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011c. hiv screening and access to care: health care system capacity for increased hiv testing and provision of care. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011d. leading health indicators for healthy people 2020. washington, dc: the national academies press.johnson, r. l., d. roter, n. r. powe, and l. a. cooper. 2004a. patient race/ethnicity and quality of patientphysician communication during medical visits. american journal of public health 94(12):20842090.johnson, r. l., s. saha, j. j. arbelaez, m. c. beach, and l. a. cooper. 2004b. racial and ethnic differences in patient perceptions of bias and cultural competence in health care. journal of general internal medicine 19(2):101110.jollis, j. g., m. ancukiewicz, e. r. delong, d. b. pryor, l. h. muhlbaier, and d. b. mark. 1993. discordance of databases designed for claims payment versus clinical information systems. implications for outcomes research. annals of internal medicine 119(8):844850.justice, a. c. 2006. prioritizing primary care in hiv: comorbidity, toxicity, and demography. topics in hiv medicine 14(5):159163.justice, a. c., k. a. mcginnis, j. h. atkinson, r. k. heaton, c. young, j. sadek, t. madenwald, j. t. becker, j. conigliaro, s. t. brown, d. rimland, s. crystal, and m. simberkoff. 2004. psychiatric and neurocognitive disorders among hivpositive and negative veterans in care: veterans aging cohort vesite study. aids 18(suppl 1):s49s59.kalichman, s. 2000. hiv transmission risk behaviors of men and women living with hivaids: prevalence, predictors, and emerging clinical interventions. clinical psychology: science and practice 7(1):3247.kalichman, s. c., c. cherry, c. amaral, d. white, m. o. kalichman, h. pope, c. swetsze, m. jones, and r. macy. 2010. health and treatment implications of food insufciency among people living with hiv/aids, atlanta, georgia. journal of urban health 87(4):631641.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100 monitoring hiv care in the united stateskamb, m. l., m. fishbein, j. m. douglas, jr., f. rhodes, j. rogers, g. bolan, j. zenilman, t. hoxworth, c. k. malotte, m. iatesta, c. kent, a. lentz, s. graziano, r. h. byers, and t. a. peterman, for the project respect study group. 1998. efcacy of riskreduction counseling to prevent human immunodeciency virus and sexually transmitted diseases: a randomized controlled trial. journal of the american medical association 280(13):11611167.kaplan, j. e., d. hanson, m. s. dworkin, t. frederick, j. bertolli, m. l. lindegren, s. holmberg, and j. l. jones. 2000. epidemiology of human immunodeciency virusassociated opportunistic infections in the united states in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. clinical infectious diseases 30(suppl 1):s5s14.kaplan, j. e., c. benson, k. h. holmes, j. t. brooks, a. pau, and h. masur. 2009. guidelines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections in hivinfected adults and adolescents: recommendations from cdc, the national institutes of health, and the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america. morbidity and mortality weekly report 58(rr4):1207.kassbartelmes, b. l. 2002. ahrq tools and resources for better health care. agency for healthcare research quality. http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/tools/toolsria.htm (accessed january 6, 2012).kates, j. 2011. medicaid and hiv: a national analysis. washington, dc: henry j. kaiser family foundation. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed january 11, 2012).kempf, m. c., j. mcleod, a. k. boehme, m. w. walcott, l. wright, p. seal, w. e. norton, j. e. schumacher, m. mugavero, and l. moneyham. 2010. a qualitative study of the barriers and facilitators to retentionincare among hivpositive women in the rural southeastern united states: implications for targeted interventions. aids patient care stds 24(8):51520.kenagy, g. p., n. l. linsk, d. bruce, r. warnecke, a. gordon, f. wagaw, and a. densham. 2003. service utilization, service barriers, and gender among hivpositive consumers in primary care. aids patient care and stds 17(5):235244.kidder, d. p., r. j. wolitski, s. royal, a. aidala, c. courtenayquirk, d. r. holtgrave, d. harre, e. sumartojo, and r. stall. 2007. access to housing as a structural intervention for homeless and unstably housed people living with hiv: rationale, methods, and implementation of the housing and health study. aids and behavior 11(6 suppl):149161.kitahata, m. 1996. physicians™ experience and survival in patients with aids. new england journal of medicine 335(5):349351.kitahata, m. m., s. e. van rompaey, and a. w. shields. 2000. physician experience in the care of hivinfected persons is associated with earlier adoption of new antiretroviral therapy. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 24(2):106114.kitahata, m. m., s. e. van rompaey, p. w. dillingham, t. d. koepsell, r. a. deyo, w. dodge, and e. h. wagner. 2003. primary care delivery is associated with greater physician experience and improved survival among persons with aids. journal of general internal medicine 18(2):95103.knowlton, a., j. arnsten, l. eldred, j. wilkinson, m. gourevitch, s. shade, k. dowling, and d. purcell. 2006. individual, interpersonal, and structural correlates of effective haart use among urban active injection drug users. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 41(4):486492.kopnisky, k. l., d. m. stoff, and d. m. rausch. 2004. workshop report: the effects of psychological variables on the progression of hiv1 disease. brain, behavior, and immunity 18(3):246261.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 101korthuis, p. t., s. saha, j. a. fleishman, m. m. mcgrath, j. s. josephs, r. d. moore, k. a. gebo, j. hellinger, and m. c. beach. 2008. impact of patient race on patient experiences of access and communication in hiv care. journal of general internal medicine 23(12):20462052.kowal, j., j. r. swenson, t. d. aubry, h. d. marchand, and c. macphee. 2011. improving access to acute mental health services in a general hospital. journal of mental health 20(1):514.krawczyk, c. s., e. funkhouser, j. m. kilby, and s. h. vermund. 2006a. delayed access to hiv diagnosis and care: special concerns for the southern united states. aids care 18(suppl 1):s35s44.krawczyk, c. s., e. funkhouser, j. m. kilby, r. a. kaslow, a. k. bey, and s. h. vermund. 2006b. factors associated with delayed initiation of hiv medical care among infected persons attending a southern hiv/aids clinic. southern medical journal 99(5):472481.krieger, n. 1992. overcoming the absence of socioeconomic data in medical records: validation and application of a censusbased methodology. american journal of public health 82(5):703710.kumar, v., and w. encinosa. 2010. effects of hiv medication complexity and depression on adherence to hiv medication. the patient: patientcentered outcomes research 3(1):5969.kumar, m., a. m. kumar, d. waldrop, m. h. antoni, and c. eisdorfer. 2003. hiv1 infection and its impact on the hpa axis, cytokines, and cognition. stress 6(3):167172.landon, b. e., i. b. wilson, k. mcinnes, m. b. landrum, l. r. hirschhorn, p. v. marsden, and p. d. cleary. 2005. physician specialization and the quality of care for human immunodeciency virus infection. archives of internal medicine 165(10):11331139.langford, d., a. adame, a. grigorian, i. grant, j. a. mccutchan, r. j. ellis, t. d. marcotte, and e. masliah. 2003. patterns of selective neuronal damage in methamphetamineuser aids patients. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 34(5):467474.lansky, a., a. drake, and h. t. pham. 2009. hivassociated behaviors among injectingdrug usersš23 cities, united states, may 2005february 2006. morbidity and mortality weekly report 58(13):329332. (reprinted in jama 302[4]:376377.)lawn, s. d., s. t. butera, and t. m. folks. 2001. contribution of immune activation to the pathogenesis and transmission of human immunodeciency virus type 1 infection. clinical microbiology reviews 14(4):753777.leaver, c. a., g. bargh, j. r. dunn, and s. w. hwang. 2007. the effects of housing status on healthrelated outcomes in people living with hiv: a systematic review of the literature. aids and behavior 11(6 suppl):85100.ledergerber, b., m. egger, m. opravil, a. telenti, b. hirschel, m. battegay, p. vernazza, p. sudre, m. flepp, h. furrer, p. francioli, and r. weber. 1999. clinical progression and virological failure on highly active antiretroviral therapy in hiv1 patients: a prospective cohort study. swiss hiv cohort study. lancet 353(9156):863868.legrand, a., y. yomb, m. bourrelly, n. lorente, and a. nkom. 2010. msm law in francophone africa and the ght against aids: the hypocrisy of certain countries. hiv/aids policy and law review 14(3):1317.lieb, s., r. g. brooks, r. s. hopkins, d. thompson, l. k. crockett, t. liberti, a. a. jani, j. p. nadler, v. m. virkud, k. c. west, and g. mclaughlin. 2002. predicting death from hiv/aids: a casecontrol study from florida public hiv/aids clinics. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 30(3):351358.littenberg, b., k. strauss, c. d. maclean, and a. r. troy. 2006. the use of insulin declines as patients live farther from their source of care: results of a survey of adults with type 2 diabetes. bmc public health 6 (july):198 (8 pages).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102 monitoring hiv care in the united stateslitwin, a. h., i. soloway, and m. n. gourevitch. 2005. integrating services for injection drug users infected with hepatitis c virus with methadone maintenance treatment: challenges and opportunities. clinical infectious diseases 40(suppl 5):s339s345.lo, w., t. macgovern, and j. bradford. 2002. association of ancillary services with primary care utilization and retention for patients with hiv/aids. aids care 14(suppl 1): s45s57.marks, g., l. i. gardner, j. craw, and n. crepaz. 2010. entry and retention in medical care among hivdiagnosed persons: a metaanalysis. aids 24(17):26652678.marsden, p. v., and j. d. wright, eds. 2010. handbook of survey research, 2nd edition. bingley, uk: emerald group publishing limited. mays, v. m., and s. d. cochran. 2001. mental health correlates of perceived discrimination among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults in the united states. american journal of public health 91(11):18691876.mays, v. m., r. maas, j. ricks, and s. d. cochran. 2011. hiv and african american women in the south: employing a populationlevel hiv prevention and interventions. in handbook of health psychology, second edition, edited by a. baum, t. revenson, and j. singer. london: psychology press.mcmahon, j., c. wanke, n. terrin, s. skinner, and t. knox. 2011. poverty, hunger, education, and residential status impact survival in hiv. aids behavior 15(7):15031511.meditz, a. l., s. mawhinney, a. allshouse, w. feser, m. markowitz, s. little, r. hecht, e. s. daar, a. c. collier, j. margolick, j. m. kilby, j. p. routy, b. conway, j. kaldor, j. levy, r. schooley, d. a. cooper, m. altfeld, d. richman, and e. connick. 2011. sex, race, and geographic region in˚uence clinical outcomes following primary hiv1 infection. journal of infectious diseases 203(4):442451.messeri, p. a., d. m. abramson, a. a. aidala, f. lee, and g. lee. 2002. the impact of ancillary hiv services on engagement in medical care in new york city. aids care 14(suppl 1):s15s29.miles, m. s., m. r. isler, b. b. banks, s. sengupta, and g. corbiesmith. 2011. silent endurance and profound loneliness: socioemotional suffering in african americans living with hiv in the rural south. qualitative health research 21(4):489501.milloy, m. j., t. kerr, r. zhang, m. tyndall, j. montaner, and e. wood. 2010. inability to access addiction treatment and risk of hiv infection among injection drug users recruited from a supervised injection facility. journal of public health 32(3):342349.moca (montreal cognitive assessment). 2011. the montreal cognitive assessment. http://www.mocatest.org/ (accessed december 16, 2011).mugavero, m. j., c. castellano, d. edelman, and c. hicks. 2007. late diagnosis of hiv infection: the role of age and sex. american journal of medicine 120(4):370373.mugavero, m. j., h. y. lin, j. h. willig, a. o. westfall, k. b. ulett, j. s. routman, s. abroms, j. l. raper, m. s. saag, and j. j. allison. 2009. missed visits and mortality among patients establishing initial outpatient hiv treatment. clinical infectious diseases 48(2):248256.nahc (national aids housing coalition). 2012. hopwa 2013 budget request: nahc recommends $380 million. http://nationalaidshousing.org/pdf/2013hopwaneedpaper.pdf (accessed january 9, 2012).napravnik, s., j. j. eron, jr., r. g. mckaig, a. d. heine, p. menezes, and e. quinlivan. 2006. factors associated with fewer visits for hiv primary care at a tertiary care center in the southeastern u.s. aids care 18(suppl 1):s45s50.nchs (national center for health statistics). 2012. about health care surveys. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/aboutdhcs.htm (accessed june 7, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 103niaaa (national institute on alcohol abuse and alcoholism). 2005. screening for alcohol and alcohol related problems. alcohol alert, no. 65. http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/ publications/aa65/aa65.htm (accessed january 6, 2012).nih, ncrr (national institutes of health, national center for research resources). 2006. electronic health records overview. mclean, va: mitre corporation. http://www.ncrr.nih.gov/publications/informatics/ehr.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).nqf (national quality forum). 2011a. about nqf. http://www.qualityforum.org/aboutnqf/aboutnqf.aspx (accessed january 6, 2012).nqf. 2011b. nqf endorsed standards. http://www.qualityforum.org/measureslist.aspx?#k=hiv&p=2&s=n&so=a (accessed january 6, 2012).nrha (national rural health association). 2006. rural hiv care. http://199.237.254.34/opporty/pdf/hivtransportation.pdf (accessed january 5, 2012).nyc dohmh (new york city department of health and mental hygiene). 2011. 2011 advisory #27: health department releases new hiv treatment recommendations. http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/cd/2011/11md27.pdf (accessed may 15, 2012).nysdhai (new york state department of health aids institute). 2001. hiv and oral health: general principles. http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandoralhealth/generalprinciples/ (accessed january 6, 2012).nysdhai. 2011. new york state quality of care program. http://www.hivguidelines.org/qualityofcare/nyshivqualityofcareprogram/ (accessed january 6, 2012).oh, d. l., f. saraan, a. silvestre, t. brown, l. jacobson, s. badri, and r. detels. 2009. evaluation of adherence and factors affecting adherence to combination antiretroviral therapy among white, hispanic, and black men in the macs cohort. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 52(2):290293.ohl, m., j. tate, m. duggal, m. skanderson, m. scotch, p. kaboli, m. vaughansarrazin, and a. justice. 2010. rural residence is associated with delayed care entry and increased mortality among veterans with human immunodeciency virus infection. medical care 48(12):10641070.omb (ofce of management and budget). 1977. statistical policy directive no. 15, race and ethnic standards for federal statistics and administrative reporting. http://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/help/populations/bridgedrace/directive15.html (accessed august 11, 2011).omb. 1997a. recommendations from the interagency committee for the review of the racial and ethnic standards to the ofce of management and budget concerning changes to the standards for the classication of federal data on race and ethnicity. federal register (311001):3687336946.omb. 1997b. revisions to the standards for the classication of federal data on race and ethnicity. federal register 62:5878158790.onap (ofce of national aids policy). 2010. national hiv/aids strategy for the united states. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/les/uploads/nhas.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).othieno, j. 2007. twin cities care system assessment: process, ndings, and recommendations. journal of health care for the poor and underserved 18(3 suppl):189213.owelarsson, m. b., l. säll, e. salamon, and c. allgulander. 2009. hiv infection and psychiatric illness. african journal of psychiatry 12(2):115128.pacha (presidential advisory council on hiv/aids). 2011. letter to hhs secretary kathleen sebelius (august 8). http://aids.gov/federalresources/policies/pacha/meetings/august2011/august2011pachalettersecretary.pdf, (accessed january 6, 2012).palepu, a., d. m. cheng, t. kim, d. nunes, j. vidaver, j. alperen, r. saitz, and j. h. samet. 2006. substance abuse treatment and receipt of liver specialty care among persons coinfected with hiv/hcv who have alcohol problems. journal of substance abuse treatment 31(4):411417.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104 monitoring hiv care in the united statespark, w. b., p. g. choe, s. h. kim, j. h. jo, j. h. bang, h. b. kim, n. j. kim, m. oh, and k. w. choe. 2007. oneyear adherence to clinic visits after highly active antiretroviral therapy: a predictor of clinical progress in hiv patients. journal of internal medicine 261(3):268275.pence, b. w. 2009. the impact of mental health and traumatic life experiences on antiretroviral treatment outcomes for people living with hiv/aids. journal antimicrobial chemotherapy 63(4):636640.penzak, s. r., y. s. reddy, and s. r. grimsley. 2000. depression in patients with hiv infection. hiv update 57.pepfar (u.s. president™s emergency plan for aids relief). 2009. next generation indicators reference guide. http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/81097.pdf (accessed december 15, 2011).pepfar. 2011. about pepfar. http://www.pepfar.gov/about/index.htm (accessed december 15, 2011).perkins, d., b. e. meyerson, d. klinkenberg, and b. t. laffoon. 2008. assessing hiv care and unmet need: eight data bases and a bit of perseverance. aids care 20(3):318326.pzer. 2011. welcome to the patient health questionnaire (phq) screeners. http://www.phqscreeners.com/ (accessed december 15, 2011).pinkerton, s. d., d. r. holtgrave, and c. l. galletly. 2008. infections prevented by increasing hiv serostatus awareness in the united states, 2001 to 2004. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 47(3):354357.pladevall, m., l. k. williams, l. a. potts, g. divine, h. xi, and j. e. lafata. 2004. clinical outcomes and adherence to medications measured by claims data in patients with diabetes. diabetes care 27(12):28002805.prejean, j., r. song, q. an, and h. i. hall. 2008. subpopulation estimates from the hiv incidence surveillance systemšunited states, 2006. morbidity and mortality weekly report 57(36):985989. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5736a1.htm (accessed december 20, 2011).prejean, j., r. song, a. hernandez, r. ziebell, t. green, f. walker, l. s. lin, q. an, j. mermin, a. lansky, and h. i. hall. 2011. estimated hiv incidence in the united states, 20062009. plos one 6(8):e17502.probst, j. c., s. b. laditka, j. y. wang, and a. o. johnson. 2007. effects of residence and race on burden of travel for care: cross sectional analysis of the 2001 u.s. national household travel survey. bmc health services research 7 (march):40 (13 pages).reif, s., c. e. golin, and s. r. smith. 2005. barriers to accessing hiv/aids care in north carolina: rural and urban differences. aids care 17(5):558565.reisner, s. l., m. j. mimiaga, m. skeer, b. perkovich, c. v. johnson, and s. a. safren. 2009. a review of hiv antiretroviral adherence and intervention studies among hivinfected youth. topics in hiv medicine 17(1):1425.riley, e. d., d. r. bangsberg, d. guzman, s. perry, and a. r. moss. 2005a. antiretroviral therapy, hepatitis c virus, and aids mortality among san francisco™s homeless and marginally housed. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 38(2):191195.riley, e. d., a. r. moss, r. a. clark, s. l. monk, and d. r. bangsberg. 2005b. cash benets are associated with lower risk behavior among the homeless and marginally housed in san francisco. journal of urban health 82(1):142150.riley, e. d., k. moore, j. l. sorensen, j. p. tulsky, d. r. bangsberg, and t. b. neilands. 2011. basic subsistence needs and overall health among human immunodeciency virusinfected homeless and unstably housed women. american journal of epidemiology 174(5):515522.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 105rippeth, j. d., r. k. heaton, c. l. carey, t. d. marcotte, d. j. moore, r. gonzalez, t. wolfson, and i. grant. 2004. methamphetamine dependence increases risk of neuropsychological impairment in hiv infected persons. journal of the international neuropsychological society 10(1):114.robison, l. s., a. o. westfall, m. j. mugavero, m. c. kempf, s. r. cole, j. j. allison, j. h. willig, j. l. raper, c. m. wilcox, and m. s. saag. 2008. shortterm discontinuation of haart regimens more common in vulnerable patient populations. aids research and human retroviruses 24(11):13471355.roos, l. l., s. m. sharp, and m. m. cohen. 1991. comparing clinical information with claims data: some similarities and differences. journal of clinical epidemiology 44(9):881888.royal, s. w., d. p. kidder, s. patrabansh, r. j. wolitski, d. r. holtgrave, a. aidala, s. pals, and r. stalle. 2009. factors associated with adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy in homeless or unstably housed adults living with hiv. aids care 21(4): 448455.rumptz, m. h., c. tobias, s. rajabiun, j. bradford, h. cabral, r. young, and w. e. cunningham. 2007. factors associated with engaging socially marginalized hivpositive persons in primary care. aids patient care and stds 21(suppl 1):s30s39.sacktor, n. c., m. wong, n. nakasujja, r. l. skolasky, o. a. selnes, s. musisi, k. robertson, j. c. mcarthur, a. ronald, and e. katabira. 2005. the international hiv dementia scale: a new rapid screening test for hiv dementia. aids 19(13):13671374.samet, j. h., a. y. walley, and c. bridden. 2007. illicit drugs, alcohol, and addiction in human immunodeciency virus. panminerva medica 49(2):6777.samhsa (substance abuse and mental health services administration). 2011. screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (sbirt). http://www.samhsa.gov/prevention/sbirt/index.aspx (accessed november 21, 2011).sarnquist, c. c., s. soni, h. hwang, b. b. topol, s. mutima, and y. a. maldonado. 2011. rural hivinfected women™s access to medical care: ongoing needs in california. aids care 23(7):792796.sayles, j. n., m. d. wong, j. j. kinsler, d. martins, and w. e. cunningham. 2009. the association of stigma with selfreported access to medical care and antiretroviral therapy adherence in persons living with hiv/aids. journal of general internal medicine 24(10):11011108.scheyett, a., s. parker, c. golin, b. white, c. p. davis, and d. wohl. 2010. hivinfected prison inmates: depression and implications for release back to communities. aids and behavior 14(2):300307.schneider, e. c., a. m. zaslavsky, and a. m. epstein. 2002. racial disparities in the quality of care for enrollees in medicare managed care. journal of the american medical association 287(10):12881294.schur, c. l., m. l. berk, j. r. dunbar, m. f. shapiro, s. e. cohn, and s. a. bozzette. 2002. where to seek care: an examination of people in rural areas with hiv/aids. journal of rural health 18(2):337347.schwarcz, s. k., l. c. hsu, e. vittinghoff, a. vu, j. d. bamberger, and m. h. katz. 2009. impact of housing on the survival of persons with aids. bmc public health 9 (july):220 (18 pages).sears, c., t. davis, j. guydish, and a. gleghorn. 2009. investigating the effects of san francisco™s treatment on demand initiative on a publiclyfunded substance abuse treatment system: a time series analysis. journal of psychoactive drugs 41(3):297304.sengupta, s., b. banks, d. jonas, m. s. miles, and g. c. smith. 2011. hiv interventions to reduce hiv/aids stigma: a systematic review. aids and behavior 15(6):10751087.shafran, s. d. 2007. early initiation of antiretroviral therapy: the current best way to reduce liverrelated deaths in hiv/hepatitis c viruscoinfected patients. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 44(5):551556.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106 monitoring hiv care in the united statesshain, r. n., j. m. piper, e. r. newton, s. t. perdue, r. ramos, j. d. champion, and f. a. guerra. 1999. a randomized, controlled trial of a behavioral intervention to prevent sexually transmitted disease among minority women. new england journal of medicine 340(2):93100.shaw, m. 2004. housing and public health. annual review of public health 25 (april):397418.sherer, r., k. stieglitz, j. narra, j. jasek, l. green, b. moore, s. shott, and m. cohen. 2002. hiv multidisciplinary teams work: support services improve access to and retention in hiv primary care. aids care 14(suppl 1):s31s44.silverberg, m. j., w. leyden, c. p. quesenberry, and m. a. horberg. 2009. race/ethnicity and risk of aids and death among hivinfected patients with access to care. journal of general internal medicine 24(9):10651072.simoni, j. m., c. r. pearson, d. w. pantalone, g. marks, and n. crepaz. 2006. efcacy of interventions in improving highly active antiretroviral therapy adherence and hiv1 rna viral load: a metaanalytic review of randomized controlled trials. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 43(suppl 1):s23s35.simoni, j. m., k. r. amico, l. smith, and k. nelson. 2010. antiretroviral adherence interventions: translating research ndings to the real world clinic. current hiv/aids reports 7(1):4451.song, j. 1999. hiv/aids & homelessness: recommendations for clinical practice and public policy. nashville, tn: health care for the homeless clinicians™ network, national health care for the homeless council. http://www.nhchc.org/wpcontent/uploads/2011/10/aidshomelessness.pdf (accessed january 9, 2012).stall, r., t. c. mills, j. williamson, t. hart, g. greenwood, j. paul, l. pollack, d. binson, d. osmond, and j. a. catania. 2003. association of cooccurring psychosocial health problems and increased vulnerability to hiv/aids among urban men who have sex with men. american journal of public health 93(6):939942.stewart, k. e., m. m. phillips, j. f. walker, s. a. harvey, and a. porter. 2011. social services utilization and need among a community sample of persons living with hiv in the rural south. aids care 23(3):340347.sullivan, p. s., m. l. campsmith, g. v. nakamura, e. b. begley, j. schulden, and a. k. nakashima. 2007. patient and regimen characteristics associated with selfreported nonadherence to antiretroviral therapy. plos one 2(6):e552 (6 pages).tang, p. c., m. ralston, m. f. arrigotti, l. qureshi, and j. graham. 2007. comparison of methodologies for calculating quality measures based on administrative data versus clinical data from an electronic health record system: implications for performance measures. journal of the american medical informatics association 14(1):1015.torian, l. v., and e. w. wiewel. 2011. continuity of hivrelated medical care, new york city, 20052009: do patients who initiate care stay in care? aids patient care and stds 25(2):7988.trent, c. r. 2004. treatment on demand: a public policy initiative of the city of detroit. workshop, september 2728, detroit, mi. tucker, j. s., m. a. burnam, c. d. sherbourne, f.y. kung, and a. l. gifford. 2003. substance use and mental health correlates of nonadherence to antiretroviral medications in a sample of patients with human immunodeciency virus infection. american journal of medicine 114(7):573580.ulett, k. b., j. h. willig, h.y. lin, j. s. routman, s. abroms, j. allison, a. chatham, j. l. raper, m. s. saag, and m. j. mugavero. 2009. the therapeutic implications of timely linkage and early retention in hiv care. aids patient care and stds 23(1):4149.uthsc (university of texas health science center). 2011. the executive interview (exit 25). http://www.dementiaassessment.com.au/frontotemporal/exit25executiveinterview.pdf (accessed december 16, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 107valcour, v., r. paul, s. chiao, l. a. wendelken, and b. miller. 2011. screening for cognitive impairment in human immunodeciency virus. clinical infectious diseases 53(8):836842.valdiserri, r. o. 2002. hiv/aids stigma: an impediment to public health. american journal of public health 92(3):341342.valet, r. s., t. t. perry, and t. v. hartert. 2009. rural health disparities in asthma care and outcomes. journal of allergy and clinical immunology 123(6):12201225.vermund, s. h., s. l. hodder, j. e. justman, b. a. koblin, t. d. mastro, k. h. mayer, d. p. wheeler, and w. m. elsadr. 2010. addressing research priorities for prevention of hiv infection in the united states. clinical infectious diseases 50(suppl 3):s149s155.vivithanaporn, p., g. heo, j. gamble, h. b. krentz, a. hoke, m. j. gill, and c. power. 2010. neurologic disease burden in treated hiv/aids predicts survival: a populationbased study. neurology 75(13):11501158.vogenthaler, n. s., c. hadley, s. j. lewis, a. e. rodriguez, l. r. metsch, and c. del rio. 2010. food insufciency among hivinfected crackcocaine users in atlanta and miami. public health nutrition 13(9):14781484.waldropvalverde, d., r. l. ownby, f. l. wilkie, a. mack, m. kumar, and l. metsch. 2006. neurocognitive aspects of medication adherence in hivpositive injecting drug users. aids and behavior 10(3):287297.walley, a. y., d. m. cheng, h. libman, d. nunes, c. r. horsburgh, jr., r. saitz, and j. h. samet. 2008. recent drug use, homelessness and increased shortterm mortality in hivinfected persons with alcohol problems. aids 22(3):415420.weinhardt, l. s., m. p. carey, b. t. johnson, and n. l. bickman. 1999. effects of hiv counseling and testing on sexual risk behavior: a metaanalytic review of published research, 19851997. american journal of public health 89(9):13971405.weis, k. e., a. d. liese, j. hussey, j. j. gibson, and w. a. duffus. 2010. associations of rural residence with timing of hiv diagnosis and stage of disease at diagnosis, south carolina 20012005. journal of rural health 26(2):105112.weiser, s. d., d. r. bangsberg, s. kegeles, k. ragland, m. b. kushel, and e. a. frongillo. 2009a. food insecurity among homeless and marginally housed individuals living with hiv/aids in san francisco. aids and behavior 13(5):841848.weiser, s. d., e. a. frongillo, k. ragland, r. s. hogg, e. d. riley, and d. r. bangsberg. 2009b. food insecurity is associated with incomplete hiv rna suppression among homeless and marginally housed hivinfected individuals in san francisco. journal of general internal medicine 24(1):1420.west, j., y. khan, d. m. murray, and k. b. stevenson. 2010. assessing specic secondary icd9cm codes as potential predictors of surgical site infections. american journal of infection control 38(9):701705.wheeler, w. h., r. a. ziebell, h. zabina, d. pieniazek, j. prejean, u. r. bodnar, k. c. mahle, w. heneine, j. a. johnson, and h. i. hall. 2010. prevalence of transmitted drug resistance associated mutations and hiv1 subtypes in new hiv1 diagnoses, u.s.š2006. aids 24(8):12031212.whetten, k., j. leserman, r. whetten, j. ostermann, n. thielman, m. swartz, and d. stangl. 2006a. exploring lack of trust in care providers and the government as a barrier to health service use. american journal of public health 96(4):716721. whetten, r., k. whetten, b. w. pence, s. reif, c. conover, and s. bouis. 2006b. does distance affect utilization of substance abuse and mental health services in the presence of transportation services? aids care 18(suppl 1):2734.who (world health organization). 2008. hiv/aids and mental health (eb124/6). report by the secretariat. http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdfles/eb124/b1246en.pdf (accessed january 6, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108 monitoring hiv care in the united stateswohl, a. r., w. h. garland, j. wu, c. w. au, a. boger, r. dierstdavies, j. carter, f. carpio, and w. jordan. 2011. a youthfocused case management intervention to engage and retain young gay men of color in hiv care. aids care 23(8):988997.wolitski, r. j., r. s. janssen, i. m. onorato, d. w. purcell, and n. crepaz. 2005. an overview of prevention with people living with hiv. in positive prevention: reducing hiv transmission among people living with hiv/aids, edited by seth kalichman. new york: kluwer academic/plenum publishers. pp. 128.wolitski, r. j., d. p. kidder, s. l. pals, s. royal, a. aidala, r. stall, d. r. holtgrave, d. harre, and c. courtenayquirk. 2010. randomized trial of the effects of housing assistance on the health and risk behaviors of homeless and unstably housed people living with hiv. aids and behavior 14(3):493503.zaller, n., f. s. gillani, and j. d. rich. 2007. a model of integrated primary care for hivpositive patients with underlying substance use and mental illness. aids care 19(9):11281133.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 109appendix table 21 follows on next pagemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110 appendix table 21 core and additional indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicescore indicators for clinical hiv careindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aids˚date of hiv diagnosis˚˚cd4 test results at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv care˚˚no diagnosis of aids or aidsdening illness (e.g., ois)reported rates of cases newly diagnosed with hiv and a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and no clinical diagnosis of aids within time period can be used if specic cd4 test dates and results are not available.early diagnosis improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosis˚date of hiv diagnosis˚date of rst visit for hiv care date of rst/second cd4 or viral load test can be used if date of rst visit for hiv care is not available.timely linkage to clinical hiv care for plwha who are newly diagnosed improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)˚dates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 or viral load tests can be used if dates of visits for routine hiv care are not available.plwha who are in continuous hiv care experience better health outcomes, including decreased mortality, and are less apt to transmit the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 months˚dates of cd4 testsyes/no documentation of cd4 tests within 12month reporting period can be used if specic dates of cd4 tests are not available.regular cd4 testing improves health outcomes in plwha by permitting providers to monitor individuals™ immune function; determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (art)in untreated patients; assess immunologic response to art, and assess the need for initiation or discontinuation of prophylaxis for opportunistic infections. proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months˚dates of viral load testsyes/no documentation of viral load tests within 12month reporting period can be used if specic dates of viral load tests are not available.regular viral load (plasma hiv rna) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response in individuals on art. decreased viral load, and undetectable viral load in individuals on art, is associated with improved health outcomes and reduced transmission of the virus.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count >350 cells/mm3˚dates of routine hivcare visits˚dates of cd4 tests˚˚results of at least one cd4 test within time period specieddates of cd4 or viral load tests can be used if dates of visits for routine hiv care are not available.achieving and maintaining a cd4+ cell count ˙350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers. proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art*˚dates of cd4 tests˚results of cd4 tests˚˚dates of art prescription or dispensingresults from most recent cd4 test within reporting period can be used if specic dates of tests not available. yes/no documentation of whether on art can be used if prescription/ dispensing dates are not available.appropriate initiation of art improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 111appendix table 21 core and additional indicators for clinical hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicescore indicators for clinical hiv careindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aids˚date of hiv diagnosis˚˚cd4 test results at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv care˚˚no diagnosis of aids or aidsdening illness (e.g., ois)reported rates of cases newly diagnosed with hiv and a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and no clinical diagnosis of aids within time period can be used if specic cd4 test dates and results are not available.early diagnosis improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people newly diagnosed with hiv who are linked to clinical care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosis˚date of hiv diagnosis˚date of rst visit for hiv care date of rst/second cd4 or viral load test can be used if date of rst visit for hiv care is not available.timely linkage to clinical hiv care for plwha who are newly diagnosed improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine hiv medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)˚dates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 or viral load tests can be used if dates of visits for routine hiv care are not available.plwha who are in continuous hiv care experience better health outcomes, including decreased mortality, and are less apt to transmit the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more cd4 tests in the preceding 12 months˚dates of cd4 testsyes/no documentation of cd4 tests within 12month reporting period can be used if specic dates of cd4 tests are not available.regular cd4 testing improves health outcomes in plwha by permitting providers to monitor individuals™ immune function; determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (art)in untreated patients; assess immunologic response to art, and assess the need for initiation or discontinuation of prophylaxis for opportunistic infections. proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months˚dates of viral load testsyes/no documentation of viral load tests within 12month reporting period can be used if specic dates of viral load tests are not available.regular viral load (plasma hiv rna) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response in individuals on art. decreased viral load, and undetectable viral load in individuals on art, is associated with improved health outcomes and reduced transmission of the virus.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a cd4+ cell count >350 cells/mm3˚dates of routine hivcare visits˚dates of cd4 tests˚˚results of at least one cd4 test within time period specieddates of cd4 or viral load tests can be used if dates of visits for routine hiv care are not available.achieving and maintaining a cd4+ cell count ˙350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers. proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art*˚dates of cd4 tests˚results of cd4 tests˚˚dates of art prescription or dispensingresults from most recent cd4 test within reporting period can be used if specic dates of tests not available. yes/no documentation of whether on art can be used if prescription/ dispensing dates are not available.appropriate initiation of art improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.continued *in contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112 appendix table 21 continuedindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚dates of art prescription or dispensing˚˚dates of viral load tests ˚˚results of viral load tests results from most recent viral load test within reporting period can be used if specic dates of tests not available. yes/no documentation of whether on art can be used if prescription or dispensing dates are not available. rates of undetectable viral load among all persons diagnosed with hiv infection can be used as system level indicator.with the advent of more potent antiretroviral drugs, the goal of art is durable virologic suppression. an undetectable viral load improves health outcomes for plwha and reduces transmission of the virus.allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection*˚˚date of deathmortality rate within states or jurisdictionmortality is the ultimate outcome measure for assessing hiv/aids care among plwha. mortality should be inversely related to the quality of overall care delivered.core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 daysa ˚˚date of diagnosis or evidence of mental health disorder˚˚date of mental health referral˚˚date of rst visit for mental health servicesevidence of mental health assessment and any visits for mental health services during the same reporting period can be used if specic dates of mental health referral and mental health visits are not available.untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 daysb˚˚date of diagnosis or evidence of substance use disorder˚˚date of referral for substance abuse services˚˚date of rst visit for substance abuse servicesevidence of substance use assessment and any visits for substance abuse services during the same reporting period can be used if specic dates of substance abuse referral and substance abuse visits are not available.untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housedc at least once in the preceding 12 months*˚˚housing statusevidence of reported need for housing assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about housing status is not available. housing instability can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 113indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have been on art for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of detection˚˚dates of art prescription or dispensing˚˚dates of viral load tests ˚˚results of viral load tests results from most recent viral load test within reporting period can be used if specic dates of tests not available. yes/no documentation of whether on art can be used if prescription or dispensing dates are not available. rates of undetectable viral load among all persons diagnosed with hiv infection can be used as system level indicator.with the advent of more potent antiretroviral drugs, the goal of art is durable virologic suppression. an undetectable viral load improves health outcomes for plwha and reduces transmission of the virus.allcause mortality rate among people diagnosed with hiv infection*˚˚date of deathmortality rate within states or jurisdictionmortality is the ultimate outcome measure for assessing hiv/aids care among plwha. mortality should be inversely related to the quality of overall care delivered.core indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these services within 60 daysa ˚˚date of diagnosis or evidence of mental health disorder˚˚date of mental health referral˚˚date of rst visit for mental health servicesevidence of mental health assessment and any visits for mental health services during the same reporting period can be used if specic dates of mental health referral and mental health visits are not available.untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 daysb˚˚date of diagnosis or evidence of substance use disorder˚˚date of referral for substance abuse services˚˚date of rst visit for substance abuse servicesevidence of substance use assessment and any visits for substance abuse services during the same reporting period can be used if specic dates of substance abuse referral and substance abuse visits are not available.untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housedc at least once in the preceding 12 months*˚˚housing statusevidence of reported need for housing assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about housing status is not available. housing instability can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others. continued *in contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services. a receipt of services within 30 days would be the ideal for optimal care, and more urgent cases should be seen sooner. b see footnote a above.  c the u.s. department of housing and urban development™s homeless management information system (hmis) data standards provides guidance for classifying housing status in four categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular nighttime residence, staying in an emergency shelter), following the mckinneyvento homeless assistance act (42 u.s.c. 11302, sec. 103) denition of homelessness, as amended by the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing (hearth) act of 2009 (p.l. 11122, div. b, sec. 1003); imminently losing housing (e.g., being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no housing options identied); unstably housed and atrisk of losing housing (e.g., temporarily doubled up with others, moving frequently for economic reasons), and stably housed (http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdata standardsmarch2010.pdf, accessed march 12, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114 indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurityd at least once in the preceding 12 months* ˚˚food security statusevidence of reported need for food assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about food security status is not available. food insecurity can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others. poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to dietsensitive comorbidities.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*˚˚transportation needevidence of reported need for transportation assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about access to transportation is not available.unmet need for transportation to access clinical hiv care and related services can negatively affect treatment access, service utilization, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.additional indicators for clinical hiv careindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had a documented tuberculosis (tb) screening test with results interpreted at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚ date of hiv diagnosis/treatment or documentation of infection prior to test˚˚date and results of tb screeningyes/no documentation of tb test and results in medical record or yes/no documentation of tb test results within reporting period can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and tb screening are not available.all plwha with diagnosed active tuberculosis should receive art to improve health outcomes. screening for tb permits earlier diagnosis and initiation or art.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had documented chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screenings at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚date of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningsyes/no documentation of chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis screening within reporting period can be used if specic dates of screening tests are not available.infection with cooccurring sexually transmitted infections (stis) increases the risk of transmitting hiv to others. screening for stis permits earlier diagnosis and risk reduction.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had hepatitis b screening performed at least once since hiv diagnosis or for whom there is documented immunity˚˚date of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunityyes/no documentation of hepatitis b screening within reporting period or documented immunity can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and hepatitis b assessment are not available.individuals coinfected with hiv and hepatitis b virus are at greater risk for developing chronic hepatitis and for accelerated liver damage and serious liverrelated morbidity and mortality. early detection of hepatitis b coinfection permits earlier treatment and improved outcomes. individuals who are screened and negative for immunity should be vaccinated, eliminating the need for repeated screening.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had hepatitis c screening performed at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚date of hepatitis c screeningyes/no documentation of hepatitis c screening within reporting period can be used if specic dates of screening tests are not available.hiv and hepatitis c coinfection is associated with accelerated liver damage. early detection of cooccurring hepatitis c coinfection permits earlier treatment and improved outcomes.appendix table 21 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 115indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurityd at least once in the preceding 12 months* ˚˚food security statusevidence of reported need for food assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about food security status is not available. food insecurity can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others. poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to dietsensitive comorbidities.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*˚˚transportation needevidence of reported need for transportation assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about access to transportation is not available.unmet need for transportation to access clinical hiv care and related services can negatively affect treatment access, service utilization, and health outcomes for plwha, reducing treatment effectiveness and increasing risk of transmitting the virus to others.additional indicators for clinical hiv careindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had a documented tuberculosis (tb) screening test with results interpreted at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚ date of hiv diagnosis/treatment or documentation of infection prior to test˚˚date and results of tb screeningyes/no documentation of tb test and results in medical record or yes/no documentation of tb test results within reporting period can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and tb screening are not available.all plwha with diagnosed active tuberculosis should receive art to improve health outcomes. screening for tb permits earlier diagnosis and initiation or art.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had documented chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screenings at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚date of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningsyes/no documentation of chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis screening within reporting period can be used if specic dates of screening tests are not available.infection with cooccurring sexually transmitted infections (stis) increases the risk of transmitting hiv to others. screening for stis permits earlier diagnosis and risk reduction.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had hepatitis b screening performed at least once since hiv diagnosis or for whom there is documented immunity˚˚date of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunityyes/no documentation of hepatitis b screening within reporting period or documented immunity can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and hepatitis b assessment are not available.individuals coinfected with hiv and hepatitis b virus are at greater risk for developing chronic hepatitis and for accelerated liver damage and serious liverrelated morbidity and mortality. early detection of hepatitis b coinfection permits earlier treatment and improved outcomes. individuals who are screened and negative for immunity should be vaccinated, eliminating the need for repeated screening.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have had hepatitis c screening performed at least once in the preceding 12 months˚˚date of hepatitis c screeningyes/no documentation of hepatitis c screening within reporting period can be used if specic dates of screening tests are not available.hiv and hepatitis c coinfection is associated with accelerated liver damage. early detection of cooccurring hepatitis c coinfection permits earlier treatment and improved outcomes.continued *in contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services. d according to the u.s. department of agriculture, households with high food security have ﬁno reported indications of foodaccess problems or limitationsﬂ; households with marginal food security have ﬁone or two reported indicationsštypically of anxiety over food sufciency or shortage of food in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or food intakeﬂ; households with low food security have ﬁreports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and households with very low food security have ﬁreports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced food intake.ﬂ the lower two levelsšlow and very low food securityšrefer to food insecurity (http://www.ers.usda.gov/brieng/foodsecurity/labels.htm#cnstat, accessed february 3, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116 indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received an in˚uenza immunization during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of in˚uenza immunizationyes/no documentation of in˚uenza immunization within reporting period can be used if specic date of in˚uenza immunization is not available.hivinfected individuals are considered to be at greater risk for serious in˚uenzarelated complications. cdc recommends annual prophylactic vaccination (inactive) for in˚uenza.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a pneumococcal immunization at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚date of hiv diagnosis/treatment or documentation of infection prior to immunization˚˚date of pneumococcal immunizationyes/no documentation of pneumococcal immunization in medical record or yes/no documentation of pneumo coccal immunization within reporting period can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and pneumococcal immunization are not available.hivinfected individuals are considered to be at greater risk for contracting and developing serious complications from pneumococcal pneumonia. cdc recommends prophylactic vaccination as soon as possible following diagnosis, followed by a onetime revaccination 5 years later.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a hepatitis b vaccination, or who have documented immunity˚˚date of hepatitis vaccine/date of documented immunityyes/no documentation of hepatitis b vaccination or documented immunity can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and hepatitis b vaccination are not available.hiv and hepatitis b coinfection is associated with accelerated liver damage and the develop ment of chronic hepatitis and serious liverrelated morbidity and mortality. cdc recommends prophylactic vaccination against hepatitis b for susceptible individuals with hiv.proportion of artnaïve people with diagnosed hiv infection who receive drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to art initiation˚˚date of drug resistance testing˚˚date of art initiationdocumentation of drug resistance testing for persons receiving art can be used if dates of drug resistance testing and/or art initiation are not available.drug resistance testing prior to the initiation of art permits the identication of the appropriate treatment regimen and therefore improves health outcomes and reduces viral transmission.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicted), or active tb, who are not on art*˚˚diagnosis or test results for hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b, and tb˚˚art status (whether on art or art prescription/dispensing dates)number of people with any of these conditions who are not on art can be used if information about all three conditions is not available.hhs recommends that hivinfected individuals with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b virus coinfection (when treatment is indicated), or active tb receive art to improve health outcomes.proportion of pregnant women with diagnosed hiv infection who are not on art*˚˚pregnancy status ˚˚art status (whether on art or art prescription/dispensing dates)number of births during reporting period to women not on art can be used if complete information about pregnancy status is not available.use of combination art in hivpositive pregnant women signicantly reduces mothertochild transmission of the virus.additional indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were screened for mental health disorders at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of mental health screeningyes/no evidence of screening for mental health disorders or referral for treatment during reporting period can be used if dates of mental health screening are not available.undiagnosed, and therefore untreated, mental health disorders can negatively affect adherence to treatment and health outcomes for plwha and increase their risk of transmitting the virus to others.appendix table 21 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 117indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received an in˚uenza immunization during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of in˚uenza immunizationyes/no documentation of in˚uenza immunization within reporting period can be used if specic date of in˚uenza immunization is not available.hivinfected individuals are considered to be at greater risk for serious in˚uenzarelated complications. cdc recommends annual prophylactic vaccination (inactive) for in˚uenza.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a pneumococcal immunization at least once since hiv diagnosis˚˚date of hiv diagnosis/treatment or documentation of infection prior to immunization˚˚date of pneumococcal immunizationyes/no documentation of pneumococcal immunization in medical record or yes/no documentation of pneumo coccal immunization within reporting period can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and pneumococcal immunization are not available.hivinfected individuals are considered to be at greater risk for contracting and developing serious complications from pneumococcal pneumonia. cdc recommends prophylactic vaccination as soon as possible following diagnosis, followed by a onetime revaccination 5 years later.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who have received a hepatitis b vaccination, or who have documented immunity˚˚date of hepatitis vaccine/date of documented immunityyes/no documentation of hepatitis b vaccination or documented immunity can be used if specic dates of hiv diagnosis and hepatitis b vaccination are not available.hiv and hepatitis b coinfection is associated with accelerated liver damage and the develop ment of chronic hepatitis and serious liverrelated morbidity and mortality. cdc recommends prophylactic vaccination against hepatitis b for susceptible individuals with hiv.proportion of artnaïve people with diagnosed hiv infection who receive drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to art initiation˚˚date of drug resistance testing˚˚date of art initiationdocumentation of drug resistance testing for persons receiving art can be used if dates of drug resistance testing and/or art initiation are not available.drug resistance testing prior to the initiation of art permits the identication of the appropriate treatment regimen and therefore improves health outcomes and reduces viral transmission.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicted), or active tb, who are not on art*˚˚diagnosis or test results for hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b, and tb˚˚art status (whether on art or art prescription/dispensing dates)number of people with any of these conditions who are not on art can be used if information about all three conditions is not available.hhs recommends that hivinfected individuals with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b virus coinfection (when treatment is indicated), or active tb receive art to improve health outcomes.proportion of pregnant women with diagnosed hiv infection who are not on art*˚˚pregnancy status ˚˚art status (whether on art or art prescription/dispensing dates)number of births during reporting period to women not on art can be used if complete information about pregnancy status is not available.use of combination art in hivpositive pregnant women signicantly reduces mothertochild transmission of the virus.additional indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive servicesindicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were screened for mental health disorders at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of mental health screeningyes/no evidence of screening for mental health disorders or referral for treatment during reporting period can be used if dates of mental health screening are not available.undiagnosed, and therefore untreated, mental health disorders can negatively affect adherence to treatment and health outcomes for plwha and increase their risk of transmitting the virus to others.continued*in contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118 indicatordata elements neededproxy/alternative data elementsrationaleproportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were screened for substance use disorders at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of screening for substance useyes/no evidence of screening for substance use disorders or referral for treatment during reporting period can be used if dates of substance use screening are not available.undiagnosed, and therefore untreated, substance use disorders can negatively affect adherence to treatment and health outcomes for plwha and increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for housing at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of housing needs assessmentyes/no evidence of housing assessment or referral for housing assistance during reporting period can be used if dates of housing assessment are not available.assessment of housing stability is important because housing instability can negatively affect adherence to treatment and health outcomes for plwha and increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for food or nutrition at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚date of food security assessmentyes/no evidence of food security assessment or referral for food or meal assistance during reporting period can be used if specic dates of assessment are not available.assessment of food security is important because food insecurity can negatively affect adherence to treatment; effectiveness of treatment, including art; and health outcomes for plwha and increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection who were assessed for need for transportation at least once during the preceding 12 months˚˚ date of transportation needs assessmentyes/no evidence of assessment for transportation need or referral for transportation services during reporting period can be used if specic dates of assessment are not available.assessment of transportation need is important because an unmet need for transportation to access clinical hiv care and related services can negatively affect treatment access and health outcomes for plwha and increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.appendix table 21 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 119appendix table 22 follows on next pagemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120 appendix table 22 indicators of clinical hiv care and mental  health, substance abuse, and supportive services, mapped to entry and  engagement in carediagnosislinkageengagement & retentionprimary caretreatmentvirologic suppressionmediatorsdisparitiesindicators and type (process/outcome)outcomeoutcomeproportion with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (two or more visits in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion in continuous care for 12 or more months with cd4+ cell count 350 cells/mm3in the preceding 12 months:proportion who received two or more cd4 testsproportion who received two or more viral load testsscreened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisscreened for hepatitis cimmunized for in˚uenzasince diagnosis:screened for tuberculosisscreened for hepatitis bimmunized for hepatitis b (if needed)immunized for pneumococcal pneumoniareceived drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to art initiationproportion with a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicated), or active tuberculosis who are not on artinfected pregnant women who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral loadallcause mortality rateproportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who received these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with an unmet need for housing food transportationin the preceding 12 months:for mental health disordersfor substance use disordersfor need for housing food transportationrelated to diagnosis, linkage, engagement and retention, primary care, treatment, and virologic suppression, stratied by subpopulationstratied by subpopulationnote: the committee™s recommended core indicators are written in bold text.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 121appendix table 22 indicators of clinical hiv care and mental  health, substance abuse, and supportive services, mapped to entry and  engagement in carediagnosislinkageengagement & retentionprimary caretreatmentvirologic suppressionmediatorsdisparitiesindicators and type (process/outcome)outcomeoutcomeproportion with a cd4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (two or more visits in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion in continuous care for 12 or more months with cd4+ cell count 350 cells/mm3in the preceding 12 months:proportion who received two or more cd4 testsproportion who received two or more viral load testsscreened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisscreened for hepatitis cimmunized for in˚uenzasince diagnosis:screened for tuberculosisscreened for hepatitis bimmunized for hepatitis b (if needed)immunized for pneumococcal pneumoniareceived drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to art initiationproportion with a measured cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b (when treatment is indicated), or active tuberculosis who are not on artinfected pregnant women who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral loadallcause mortality rateproportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who received these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with an unmet need for housing food transportationin the preceding 12 months:for mental health disordersfor substance use disordersfor need for housing food transportationrelated to diagnosis, linkage, engagement and retention, primary care, treatment, and virologic suppression, stratied by subpopulationstratied by subpopulationcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122 appendix table 22 continueddiagnosislinkageengagement & retentionprimary caretreatmentvirologic suppressionmediatorsdisparitiesdata elementsdiagnosisresults at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv careaids or aidsdening illness (e.g., ois)diagnosisvisit for hiv care (or proxy of rst or second cd4 or viral load test date)routine hivcare visitstestsleast one cd4 test within time period speciedtestsload testsdiagnosis/treatment or documentation of infectionchlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningsc screening of tuberculosis screening screening or date of documented immunityimmunizationpneumococcal immunizationvaccine/date of documented immunityresistance testinginitiationteststestsprescription or dispensingtest results for hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b, and tuberculosisprescription or dispensingload testsload testsor evidence of mental health disorderfor mental health servicesfor mental health servicesor evidence of substance use disorderfor substance abuse servicesfor substance abuse servicesstatusneed health screeningscreening for substance usehousing, food security, and transportation needs assessmentfor indicators and mediatorselements pertaining to subpopulations: race ethnicity sex gender identity sexual orientation date of birth zip code/other geographic markermonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 123appendix table 22 continueddiagnosislinkageengagement & retentionprimary caretreatmentvirologic suppressionmediatorsdisparitiesdata elementsdiagnosisresults at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv careaids or aidsdening illness (e.g., ois)diagnosisvisit for hiv care (or proxy of rst or second cd4 or viral load test date)routine hivcare visitstestsleast one cd4 test within time period speciedtestsload testsdiagnosis/treatment or documentation of infectionchlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningsc screening of tuberculosis screening screening or date of documented immunityimmunizationpneumococcal immunizationvaccine/date of documented immunityresistance testinginitiationteststestsprescription or dispensingtest results for hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b, and tuberculosisprescription or dispensingload testsload testsor evidence of mental health disorderfor mental health servicesfor mental health servicesor evidence of substance use disorderfor substance abuse servicesfor substance abuse servicesstatusneed health screeningscreening for substance usehousing, food security, and transportation needs assessmentfor indicators and mediatorselements pertaining to subpopulations: race ethnicity sex gender identity sexual orientation date of birth zip code/other geographic markermonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124 monitoring hiv care in the united statesconditionetiological cofactorsguidance for optimal managementcervical/anal dysplasiahuman papillomavirus (hpv); hiv*of opportunistic infections in hivinfected adults and adolescents (http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentles/adultoi.pdf)chronic obstructive pulmonary diseasecigarette smokingand hiv (http://www.hiv.va.gov/provider/manualprimarycare/copd.asp)diabeteshiv*; highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart)*; diet; genetics; exercise(http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/31/supplement1.toc)hepatomahepatitis b virus; hepatitis c virusguidelines for the clinical management and treatment of chronic hepatitis b and c coinfection in hiv infected adults (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.14681293.2007.00535.x/pdf)management of chronic hepatitis b (http://www.easl.eu/assets/application/les/b73c0da3c52fa1dle.pdf)and hiv coinfection: recommendations from an hivhbv international panel  (www.hemaids.ru/system/les/attachments/1659/aidsaidspdf183.pdf)hyperlipidemiahiv; haart; diet; genetics; exercisedetection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (atp iii final report) (http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol/atp3rpt.htm)management of dyslipidemia in human immunodeciency virus (hiv)infected adults receiving antiretroviral therapy: recommendations of the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america and the adult aids clinical trials group (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/5/613.full)appendix table 23 cooccurring conditions and etiological cofactors with link to guidance for optimal managementmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicators 125conditionetiological cofactorsguidance for optimal managementosteoporosishiv*; haart*,**; lack of sun exposure; genetics; diet; substance usemanagement of persons infected with human immunodeciency virus: 2009 update by the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/49/5/651.full)renal diseasehypertension; haart**; hivchronic kidney disease in hivinfected patients (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/40/11/1559.full)hypogonadismadvanced hiv diseasemanagement of persons infected with human immunodeciency virus: 2009 update by the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/49/5/651.full)hepatitischronic hepatitis b or c; antiretroviral hepatotoxicitymanagement of persons infected with human immunodeciency virus: 2009 update by the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/49/5/651.full)guidelines for the management and treatment of chronic hepatitis b and c coinfection in hivinfected adults (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.14681293.2007.00535.x/pdf)sexually transmitted infectionssyphilis; gonorrhea; chlamydia; herpes simplex; enteric infections (via fecal contact)guidelines, 2010 (http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/stdtreatment2010rr5912.pdf)tuberculosis and other opportunistic infectionshivassociated immunodeciencyof opportunistic infections in hivinfected adults and adolescents (http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentles/adultoi.pdf)appendix table 23 continuedcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126 monitoring hiv care in the united statesconditionetiological cofactorsguidance for optimal managementmental health disordersanxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress; stigma; discriminationhivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandmentalhealth/)substanceusing hivinfected patients (http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandsubstanceuse/mentalhealthdisordersamongsubstanceusinghivinfectedpatients/) substance use disordersanxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress; stigma; discriminationhivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandsubstanceuse/)substanceusing hivinfected patients (http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandsubstanceuse/mentalhealthdisordersamongsubstanceusinghivinfectedpatients/)oral healthcandida; oral hairy leukoplakia; herpes simplex (http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinicalguidelines/hivandoralhealth/)* connection between condition and cofactor not proven.** tenofovir most commonly associated with this nding.appendix table 23 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1273sources of data on hiv care to assess indicators of hiv care and access to supportive servicesin this chapter the committee describes data from public and private data systems to assess the indicators for hiv care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services identied in chapter 2. the chapter identies what the committee determined to be the best sources of data for assessing the indicators, discusses ways to maximize their usefulness, and recommends approaches for supplementing current data systems to gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) and the patient protection and affordable care act (aca) in improving hiv care (statement of task heading text and question 1). the chapter also describes other data collection and standardization efforts that could be utilized to monitor improvements in hiv care and how to regularly obtain data that capture the care experiences of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) without substantial new investments (statement of task questions 2 and 3). the chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations.identification of data systemsto identify the best public and private sources of data to estimate the indicators related to continuous hiv care and access to services for plwha, the committee rst compiled an initial list of 32 public and private data systems or data collection agencies, including those that are hiv specic and those that are not hiv specic but include information on plwha. the list included data collection efforts and systems highlighted in the project proposal as well as others identied by committee members as important or potential sources of information on plwha, including care monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128 monitoring hiv care in the united statesand services provided to them. box 31 summarizes the data systems and collection activities identied by the committee for further consideration.requests for information were sent to individuals familiar with 29 of the data systems and agencies. several other potential sources of datašaccountable care organizations, the enhanced comprehensive hiv prevention planning (echpp) project, and the 12 cities projectšwere still being implemented at the time of the inquiry.1 information was obtained from 27 of the data systems or agencies contacted. the committee was unable to obtain information from aetna and the hmo (health maintenance organization) research network. the substance abuse and mental health services administration provided information on several data collection activities. in total, the committee reviewed information on 31 different data collection activities. the committee requested background information (e.g., the population for which data are collected; the method and frequency of data collection; whether the data are public, private, or proprietary) and details about the data elements captured by each of the data systems in the areas of hiv testing and linkage to care, clinical care, access to care, treatment and adherence, nancial security, demographics, risk behavior assessment, and patient experience with care.the data systems vary with respect to their design; the size, nature, and representativeness of population; the source and type of data; and the specic data elements included. the committee took account of these factors when considering which data systems, individually and in aggregate, would be most helpful for estimating the indicators presented in chapter 2 and for assessing the impact of the nhas and the aca in improving hiv care in the united states.the committee identied 12 data systems it considered to be most useful for tracking the impact of the nhas and the aca on hiv care in the united states: ˚national hiv surveillance system˚medical monitoring project˚ryan white services report˚ryan white aids drug assistance program reports˚medicaid statistical information system˚chronic condition data warehouse˚north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design˚cfar network of integrated clinical systems ˚hiv research network˚clinical case registry: hiv1 complete descriptions of echpp and the 12 cities project are provided later in this chapter.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 129box 31 data collection activities considered by the committeehiv careœspecic data systemspublicreport)tive therapyprivatedata systems with information that includes people living with hivpublicdata systemprivatenormative health information database®], wellpoint [healthcore integrated research database®])monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130 monitoring hiv care in the united states˚kaiser permanente˚national vital statistics systemtwo additional data systems provide useful information for tracking the impact of the initiatives on hiv care for two small but important subpopulations of hivinfected individuals (american indians and alaska natives; federal prisoners) and a third provides information relevant to housing assistance and other supportive services for plwha:˚resource and patient management system˚bureau of prisons electronic medical record˚housing opportunities for persons with aidsappendix table 31 provides an overview of the data systems, including their strengths and limitations, potential enhancements to consider, and implications of the aca for each. although no single data system can fully track the progress of the nhas and the aca, the committee concluded that a combination of these 15 data systems can provide a collective platform for helping to evaluate these initiatives and for estimating the indicators identied to measure the quality of hiv care and access to supportive services. appendix tables 32a through 32e show which of the data elements associated with the indicators are available in each data system. appendix table 32f shows which data systems capture additional data elements that were identied by the committee to be of interest, but not required to estimate the indicators. appendix tables 33a through 33d summarize the indicators that can be estimated using information available from each of the data systems. some of the data collection instruments are publicly available on the internet (see appendix table 34); these provide more complete information on the data captured by the relevant data system.sources of hiv care datanational hiv surveillance systemthe centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) maintains the national hiv surveillance system (nhss), which provides data about the hiv/aids epidemic for program planning and resource allocation. started in 1981, the surveillance system is conducted in all 50 states and the district of columbia, as well as american samoa, guam, puerto rico, the u.s. virgin islands, and the northern mariana islands. in addition, the three freely associated states (the federated states of micronesia, the republic of the marshall islands, and the republic of palau) report hiv surveillance monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 131data to cdc. cdc funds and assists state and local health departments to collect the information, and the state and local hiv surveillance systems represent valuable additional sources of data pertinent to hiv care.2 the nhss is a populationbased census of all persons diagnosed and reported with hiv infection in the united states, including both those individuals receiving hiv care and those who are not in care.3 since april 2008, all 50 states and the district of columbia, as well as american samoa, guam, the northern mariana islands, palau, puerto rico, and the u.s. virgin islands, have been using the same condential namebased reporting standards for newly diagnosed cases of hiv. although the nhss only includes data from those condential namebased reporting systems that have been collecting hiv data for at least 4 years in the national aggregate numbers it publishes (cdc, 2010),4 all states and areas report hiv surveillance data to cdc, and the data for each reporting area are included in the annual hiv surveillance report. as such, the population in the surveillance system is one of the most nationally representative and provides the largest available sample of diagnosed plwha in the united states.another advantage of the nhss is the use of standardized denitions of variables and reporting methods. in terms of data elements of interest to the committee,5 the system includes date of hiv/aids diagnosis; information on cd4+ cell count and plasma hiv rna (viral load) closest to diagnosis; and optional elds for hiv and substance abuse treatment referral, pregnancy status, and antiretroviral therapy (art) status at the time of reporting. data gathered also can be used to monitor disparities with regard to race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age, geographic area, and country of birth.in addition, most jurisdictions report all cd4 count and viral load lab 2 state, territorial, and local hiv surveillance systems may include data from codebased reports initiated prior to namebased reporting and anonymous results that have not been name ascertained and hence are not included in the nhss. the proportion of these uncounted cases can be calculated precisely by the reporting areas that have made the transition to namebased reporting.3 the national surveillance system is meeting its completeness standard of ˛85 percent for all diagnosed cases being reported to the system (cdc response to iom request for information, april 4, 2011).4 the 2009 national aggregate data published in 2012 includes data from the 46 states and 5 dependent areas that had implemented condential namebased reporting by january 2007 (cdc, 2012, commentary). two additional states will be represented in the national aggregate data reported next year. the hiv surveillance report for 2012, to be issued in 2014, will be the rst to include aggregate data from all 50 states (cdc, 2010).5 although the data systems considered by the committee capture many useful data elements, only those data elements identied by the committee to be of specic interest for tracking the impact of the nhas and aca are discussed in the text. appendix table 34 lists the publicly available data collection instruments for the data systems discussed, which provide a comprehensive picture of the data elements captured by each.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132 monitoring hiv care in the united statesresults,6 which permits the tracking of individuals™ health status over time. in those cases, additional information can be extrapolated or calculated from available data. for example, the time between diagnosis and initial (or second) cd4 and viral load test can serve as a surrogate for the length of time between diagnosis and entry into care, and the number of routine hiv care visits per year may be estimated from the number of hivrelated lab reports per year. one limitation of the nhss, as noted in the nhas (onap, 2010, p. 18), is the fact that although most jurisdictions report all lab results, such as cd4 and viral load results, not all do. another limitation is the problem of incomplete or inaccurate reporting by clinicians treating plwha and by state and local health departments. studies have raised questions about the accuracy and completeness of nhss data. a study comparing selfreported dates of hiv diagnosis with those reported to the nhss indicates that 56 percent of the date pairs agreed on the year of diagnosis, with another 17 percent differing by 1 year and 19 percent by 3 or more years (hall et al., 2005). thirty percent of selfreported dates were earlier than those reported in surveillance data (hall et al., 2005). another study comparing date of rst diagnosis based on selfreport, medical record, and surveillance system data showed 51 percent agreement between selfreported year of diagnosis and the surveillance system and 70 percent agreement between the years reported in medical records and in surveillance (mccoy et al., 2010). another 21 percent of selfreported dates differed by 1 year, while 23 percent differed by 3 or more years (mccoy et al., 2010). on average the selfreported dates were earlier than those recorded in the surveillance data (mccoy et al., 2010).according to one study of reporting completeness, 81 percent of hiv diagnoses are reported within 12 months of diagnosis (hall et al., 2006). this gure corresponds with the observation of mccoy and colleagues that only 81 percent of the cases in their study could be matched to surveillance data (mccoy et al., 2010). incomplete reporting may be explained by lack of timeliness in reporting, failure to comply with case reporting, or an assumption that previously diagnosed cases already had been reported (mccoy et al., 2010). structures are in place to improve the accuracy and 6 as of june 15, 2010, 33 of 59 reporting areas (50 states, district of columbia, 5 u.s. dependent areas, and 3 freely associated states) were reporting all cd4 and viral load test results (see appendix table 35), including 30 states, district of columbia, guam, and puerto rico (personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and prevention, october 6, 2011). one additional state (kentucky) reported all cd4 results, but only detectable viral load results, and 7 additional states reported all viral load results, but not all cd4 results. more states are moving toward reporting all cd4 and viral load test results. massachusetts, for example, mandated all cd4 and all hiv viral load results be electronically reported by clinical and commercial laboratories as of january 2012 (massachusetts department of public health, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 133timeliness of reporting. for example, increased use of electronic laboratory reporting is expected to increase the completeness and timeliness of hiv surveillance reporting (overhage et al., 2008).despite current gaps in accuracy and reporting, the nhss is one of the most representative hiv data systems that exists and offers a wealth of information. in terms of the data elements required to assess the core indicators for clinical hiv care, the nhss, as previously noted, currently captures the individual™s date of diagnosis and the dates and results of the individual™s rst and most recent viral load test and the cd4 test at, or closest to, the date that the individual was determined to be hivinfected or to have aids (see appendix table 32a), as well as the rst cd4+ cell count <200 cells/mm3. the ongoing cd4 and viral load test dates available for most reporting areas may be used as a surrogate for dates of rst and ongoing visits for routine hiv care in those jurisdictions. these data permit estimation of the indicators for linkage to and continuity of care, regular cd4 and viral load testing, and individuals in care who achieve or maintain a cd4+ cell count of greater than 350 cells/mm3 (see appendix table 33a).a revised version of the adult hiv condential case report was approved by the ofce of management and budget (omb) in june 2011. the form includes a section that asks whether the individual ﬁhas ever taken any antiretrovirals (arvs),ﬂ arv medications taken, and dates arvs were taken (date begun, date of last use). this information, which is collected ﬁif required by health department,ﬂ is required for state and local health department that participate in cdc™s hiv incidence surveillance (his) and variant, atypical and resistant hiv surveillance (varhs) activities and is optional for all other surveillance areas (cdc response to iom request for information, october 20, 2011). when available, the arv information may permit estimation of the core indicators pertaining to art initiation and subsequent durable virologic suppression. however, there currently is no mechanism by which the nhss can routinely capture arv usage longitudinally. longitudinal individuallevel art data in conjunction with longitudinal cd4 and viral load test dates and results would more reliably permit calculation of the relevant core indicators. enhancement of nhss data in this way would allow its use to evaluate all of the core hiv care indicators for the majority of the population diagnosed with hiv in the united states.7 information is also captured on pregnancy status at the time the form is completed, which may be used to estimate the additional clinical 7 since the nhss captures date of death, it can provide the data necessary to calculate the core indicator pertaining to all cause mortality among plwha. however, as discussed in more detail later in this report, the national vital statistics system also collects and calculates annual data on hiv mortality.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134 monitoring hiv care in the united statescare indicator pertaining to proportion of pregnant women with hiv who are receiving art.nhss data also permit calculation of the core hiv care indicators for subpopulations of plwha based on age, race and ethnicity,8 sex assigned at birth, current gender identity, geographic distribution, and country of birth. although cdc does not currently capture information specically about individuals™ sexual orientation, which relates to the nhas target and associated indicator pertaining to the proportion of diagnosed gay or bisexual men with undetectable viral load, combining data on sex assigned at birth with data collected on sex of sexual partner(s) (sex with male) can serve as a close proxy.as is common with disease surveillance in the united states, the hiv surveillance system also does not collect information about income level. unlike the previous version of the adult hiv condential case report form, which included an optional section asking about the individual™s primary source of reimbursement for medical treatment (medicaid, private insurance or hmo, no coverage, other public funding, clinical trial or government program, unknown), the current form does not collect that information. collection of such data, especially if the ryan white hiv/aids program were added to the list of reimbursement source checkboxes provided on the form, would permit the use of nhss data to estimate the indicators for the subpopulations specically identied in the nhas and would help to facilitate the evaluation of data across data systems as discussed in chapter 6.uniform reporting to cdc of ongoing cd4 and viral load test dates and results from all jurisdictions and collection of longitudinal information on arv usage would permit the use of data from the nhss to assess all of the core indicators for hiv care identied by the committee. use of national surveillance system data would permit evaluation of the indicators for the vast majority of the population diagnosed with hiv in the united states, as well as for subpopulations based on race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age, and country of origin. in addition, capturing information on sexual orientation and maintaining current geographic areas of residence for hivinfected individuals in the system would further enhance the ability of the nhss to be used to evaluate the impact of the nhas and health care reform on hiv care in the united states.8 like the other federal data systems, nhss captures data on race and ethnicity as specied by omb (1977, 1997a,b).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 135medical monitoring projectinitiated in 2005 in response to an institute of medicine (iom, 2004) report, the medical monitoring project (mmp) is a cdcsponsored populationbased surveillance system designed to collect comprehensive clinical and behavioral service need, utilization, and outcomes data on a nationally representative sample of adults (˛18 years of age) living with hiv/aids who are receiving medical care from outpatient facilities in the united states and puerto rico (blair et al., 2011). mmp is the rst project since the hiv cost and services utilization study (bozzette et al., 1998) almost 15 years ago that is designed to obtain comprehensive information about hiv care from a nationally representative population of plwha who are receiving care. mmp employs a probability proportional to size sampling design to obtain crosssectional probability samples of its target population. a sample of about 400 individuals from each of 26 project areas (approximately 10,400 people) was selected each year for the 2007 and 2008 data collection cycles.9 data are obtained from individual patient interviews and medical record review.mmp captures most of the data elements needed to assess all of the indicators identied by the committee (see appendix tables 32a to 32e and 33a to 33c), including data on supportive services, which makes it an attractive source of data. in terms of demographic data, the interview component of mmp captures selfreported data on race, ethnicity, sex at birth, gender identity (male, female, transgender), and sexual orientation (homosexual, heterosexual, bisexual). in addition to the comprehensiveness of the data currently captured, the nature of the interview component of mmp allows ˚exibility to modify the questionnaire to capture different data elements that are subsequently determined to be useful. starting with the 2011 cycle, for example, mmp is capturing data on stigma and discrimination, making it the only data system to do so among those examined by the committee.an additional strength of mmp is its design to generate results that are nationally representative of the population of hivinfected adults in care in the united states, which makes it a potentially valuable tool for tracking changes in access to and quality of hiv care in the country. although mmp only includes hivinfected individuals who are in care, the sample is not limited to those receiving care through a specic payer (medicaid, medicare, veterans health administration [vha], private or hmo) as is the case with a number of other data systems.despite its strengths, mmp also has several limitations. one signicant 9 details of the sampling method are described in the mmp 2009 protocol (cdc, 2009) and summarized in blair et al. (2011) and on the mmp website (cdc, 2011b).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136 monitoring hiv care in the united statesconcern about mmp is its low participation rate. for the 2007 data collection cycle, 10,192 individuals were determined to be eligible for participation. the median participation rate was 40 percent, ranging from 3 to 76 percent depending on the project area. interview data ultimately were reported for 3,643 of the 3,944 participants interviewed; medical record abstraction data were not reported (blair et al., 2011). as a result of the low participation rate, the data for the 2007 collection cycle may not be nationally or locally representative of hivinfected adults receiving care in the united states. steps have been taken to improve participation rates beginning with the 2009 collection cycle, and cdc anticipates that future data will permit nationally representative results (blair et al., 2011).10 it is not clear, however, that the efforts will completely resolve the issues of nonresponse bias. for example, studies have found that plwha who are harder to reach and/or engage for study participation are more likely to be homeless or unstably housed; to be struggling with mental health or drug use problems; to be socially isolated; and to have high rates of missed appointments. specic efforts to engage such populations are needed to ensure their representation in the study.a second concern about mmp is the potential for social desirability response bias in the responses to the interview questions. since many of the the interviews are conducted ﬁin person,ﬂ respondents may be reluctant to answer accurately if doing so means providing what they perceive to be less ﬁsocially appropriateﬂ responses to sensitive questions (blair et al., 2011). providing participants with a means to enter their responses to sensitive questions directly into the computer or on the response form is one way to help counteract social desirability response bias. this approach would avoid the necessity of sharing their responses with the interviewer and could improve the accuracy of the information collected (carr et al., 1983; greist et al., 1973; kobak et al., 1996; lawrence et al., 2010; lucas et al., 1977; metzger et al., 2000; petrie and abell, 1994; waruru et al., 2005; willig, 2011), although a study of clients at an addiction treatment center found no signicant differences in the reliability of information on drug, alcohol, or tobacco use collected through computerized interviews, facetoface interviews, or selfreport formats (skinner and allen, 1983).a third concern is the potential inaccuracy of clinical data (lab values, vaccinations, art prescription) collected through participant selfreport (blair et al., 2011). although a problem for reports of ndings based on clinical information obtained solely from interviews (e.g., blair et al. 2011), medical record abstraction is another component of mmp (cdc, 2009, pp. 2225), which permits comparison with and corroboration of 10 some interview and medical record abstraction data from mmp™s 20092010 cycle have been reported (cdc, 2011d).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 137the selfreported clinical data. it is important that data from the medical record abstraction component of the protocol be available to permit such crosschecking and conrmation of selfreported information. the 2009 mmp protocol species that in project areas that have the surveillance authority to abstract medical records of selected patients without their consent, medical record abstraction should be completed for all sampled patients, including those who decline to participate in the interview or who cannot be located for interview (cdc, 2009, p. 25). in project areas with a more narrow denition of surveillance, where record abstraction cannot be completed without patient consent, minimal data can be collected on all sampled patients. the minimum data set contains the same elds as the nhss case report form, and therefore these data can be collected in all project areas under hiv/aids surveillance authority.despite its current limitations, the research infrastructure, design, and implementation efforts that are in place make mmp a promising tool for monitoring care among hivinfected adults receiving care in the united states. the committee supports the current efforts of cdc to improve individual participation and completion rates. other strategies to increase participation might include providing additional incentives for study participants11 and participating clinics or reducing the time required to complete the full interview by selectively eliminating certain questions.12 in addition, implementation of the ﬁminimum data setﬂ records abstraction could help to provide some data for individuals who decline to participate.beginning with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstraction will focus only on the 12 months preceding the interview; earlier clinical data will no longer be captured (personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and prevention, october 20, 2011). although limiting medical record abstraction to the preceding 12 months likely will expedite collection of the data, certain data elements required to estimate some hiv care indicators may no longer be captured. for example, data on hepatitis b screening, vaccination, and immunity would not be captured if the relevant testing and immunization took place more than 12 months prior. another option for reducing the number of questions in the standard interview without undermining the breadth of information provided might be to eliminate (some of) the selfreported clinical data if the same infor11 the 2009 mmp protocol species that individual participants will receive approximately $40 in cash or cash equivalent for participating in the interview (cdc, 2009, p. 21).12 currently the mmp protocol offers two interview instruments: the standard questionnaire, which is the default and takes approximately 45 minutes to complete, and the short questionnaire, which is reserved for individuals who speak neither english nor spanish or are too sick to respond to the standard questionnaire and takes approximately 20 minutes to complete. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138 monitoring hiv care in the united statesmation already is being harvested through medical record abstraction. in addition, as electronic health records (ehrs) become more prevalent, mmp may be able to increase the scope of medical abstraction while retrieving and processing the data in a timely way. such enhancements would help to make mmp better able to fulll its promise as an expanded surveillance system for monitoring hiv care in the united states.the potential for mmp to provide comprehensive information for tracking improvements in access to and quality of hiv care and supportive services in the united states is great; however, the low completion rate to date and the potential for nonresponse bias raise concerns about the representativeness of the data, especially for the homeless or unstably housed population and those with mental health and/or substance use disorders. implementation of strategies to improve participation rates, especially among hardtoreach populations, and to expedite the processing and availability of the data obtained through medical record abstraction would signicantly increase the value of the project.ryan white hiv/aids program dataaccording to the health resources and services administration (hrsa), approximately 529,000 people currently receive at least one medical, health, or related support service through the ryan white hiv/aids program each year (hhs, 2011a). the aids drug assistance program (adap), under part b of the ryan white program, reported 213,764 clients enrolled during fy 2009, including 33,672 new enrollees, and 190,936 clients served (nastad, 2011, table 5). the ryan white program is the thirdlargest federally funded program serving plwha (after medicare and medicaid) and the largest that serves only plwha (kff, 2009b). twentynine percent ($5.4 billion) of federal spending for hiv care was allocated to the ryan white program in fy 2011 (kates, 2011, p. 1). the majority of ryan white program clients are low income, with approximately 70 percent at or below the federal poverty level (fpl) (hrsa, 2010, p. 45, table 6). hrsa launched a new reporting scheme in 2009, replacing the ryan white hiv/aids program annual data report with the ryan white hiv/aids program service report (rsr). the rsr captures individual clientlevel data annually for individuals who receive one or more ryan whiteœfunded services (client report), as well as grantee and service provider information (grantee report and service provider report). the rsr client report generates a unique client identier for every ryan white hiv/aids program client based on the client™s name, birth date, and other characteristics; the identier is then encrypted before being sent to hrsa, further protecting the client™s privacy. use of unique client identiers not monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 139only permits tracking of individual clients across providers, generating more accurate client counts, but also permits the capture of individuallevel demographic, clinical, and service utilization data, which can be used to assess quality of care received.13the client report captures many of the data elements needed to assess the core clinical hiv care indicators identied by the committee (appendix tables 32a, 33a). the client report captures the year of birth (but not the full date); date of death; dates of ambulatory or outpatient hiv care visits; and the dates and results of all cd4 counts and viral load tests within the reporting period. in addition, the client report captures the year, but not the full date, of hiv diagnosis and whether the individual has been prescribed art at any time within the reporting period, but not the date of art initiation or subsequent prescriptions. finally, the client report records the date of the client™s rst ambulatory or outpatient care visit with the provider. however, the visit need not be for hiv care, nor is it necessarily the client™s rst hiv care visit following diagnosis, which is required to assess the indicator pertaining to linkage to care.the rsr client report also captures data relevant to the indicators related to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (see appendix tables 32b, 33b, 33d): screening for both mental health and substance use within the reporting period; number of mental health service visits; number of substance abuse service visits (inpatient and outpatient) in each quarter of the reporting period; housing status (stable permanent, temporary, unstable); and receipt of housing, food, and (medical) transportation services in each quarter of the reporting period (hrsa, 2011). the report does not provide information on referral for mental health or substance abuse services (e.g., whether the services were received within 60 days of referral); direct (e.g., dates) assessment of housing, food, or transportation need; or the proportion of clients who are food insecure or have an unmet need for transportation services, although such information might be inferred from the number of clients who are receiving food or transportation services. the client report also collects data specic to a number of the additional clinical hiv care indicators (appendix tables 32c, 33c). these data include whether a client has been screened for tuberculosis (tb) during the 12month reporting period or since being diagnosed with hiv; whether a client was screened for syphilis during the reporting period (excluding those under 18 years of age who are not sexually active); whether a client was screened for hepatitis b and c during the reporting period or since diagnosis 13 although the ryan white clientlevel data will be deduplicated, the process will identify some false negatives and false positives, as is the case with any identier based on personal characteristics.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140 monitoring hiv care in the united stateswith hiv; and whether a client has completed the hepatitis b vaccination series. in addition, data are collected on the pregnancy status of hivinfected female clients, the stage of pregnancy at which they entered prenatal care, and whether they were prescribed art to prevent maternaltochild transmission of hiv. data relevant to the additional clinical hiv care indicators that are not captured by the client report include dates of chlamydia and gonorrhea screenings; dates of in˚uenza and pneumococcal immunizations; and data pertaining to art drug resistance testing and art initiation in individuals with hiv nephropathy, hepatitis b or c, or tb.although the data elements collected by the client report are not identical to those enumerated for the indicators identied by the committee, they provide information that may serve as a proxy for estimating many of the indicators. in addition, the rsr client report captures demographic data that specify subpopulations within ryan white hiv/aids program clients including race and ethnicity; gender (male, female, transgender, unknown; and for transgender, maletofemale, femaletomale, unknown); geographic code (rst three digits of client zip code); income as a percentage of the fpl; and sources of health insurance.adaps independently report data to hrsa, and adap reporting also is undergoing revision. the october 1, 2012 through march 31, 2013, data collection period is the rst to capture individual clientlevel data for the adap data report (adr), replacing the adap quarterly report. like the rsr, the adr will employ unique client identiers using the same algorithm and encryption process as those used for the rsr. the encrypted client identiers are meant to carry across the reports. in the future, although the reports will remain separate, clientlevel data from the rsr and the adr will be merged into a single system, and the two reports will be linked for those clients receiving adap and other ryan whiteœfunded services (personal communication, faye malitz, health resources and services administration, october 25, 2011).appendix tables 32a through 32e summarize the data elements pertaining to the committee™s indicators that are captured by the adap quarterly report and the adr, including those that are new for the adr. appendix tables 33a through 33d map the committee™s indicators to the various data elements that are or will be captured by the adap reports.14 the adap reports do not supplement the data already captured in the rsr in terms of those needed to evaluate the committee™s indicators. however, for the population of adap clients who do not receive other ryan white 14 no data elements from the adap quarterly report that are pertinent to the committee™s indicators will be dropped in moving to the adr, although new data elements of interest will be added. the committee refers to ﬁthe adap reportsﬂ jointly when it is unnecessary to distinguish between them.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 141services, the adr in particular can provide data to estimate a few of the core clinical hiv care indicators, such as the proportion of adap clients who have received cd4 and/or viral load testing in the past year (appendix table 33a). the adr also may be able to provide the data to estimate the indicators pertaining to the proportion of clients with a cd4+ cell count that is less than 500 cells/mm3 who are on art; the proportion of clients on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load; and the proportion of female adap clients who are pregnant and on art. however the data for these indicators are limited to art drugs that are fully adap funded. if a client is not receiving at least one such drug, that person will not be identied as being on art.the adap reports capture no data pertaining to mental health or substance use screening or services or to the need for or use of supportive services for housing, food, and transportation. demographic data captured in the adap reports are more limited than those captured by the rsr, limited to race and ethnicity, gender (as in rsr), and for the adap quarterly report, percentage of clients with an annual household income less than 200 percent of the fpl. the adr includes year of birth and insurance status or type, as well as income as a percentage of the fpl.as a standalone data system, the adap reports are of limited usefulness in providing the data needed to estimate the indicators identied by the committee for tracking the provision of hiv care and mental health, substance use, and supportive services in the united states. however, adap data may prove useful for assessing waiting time for access to art drugs and the proportion of people who need, but do not have access to, art. the committee supports hrsa™s intention to merge the clientlevel data from the rsr and the adr into a single system.ryan white hiv/aids program data are an important source of information for monitoring access to quality hiv care and supportive services because of the population represented and the importance of the program in providing care and services to many disadvantaged populations. by increasing health insurance options and extending medicaid coverage to nondisabled individuals who meet the expanded income criteria, implementation of the aca is expected to reduce the dependency of a portion of current ryan white hiv/aids program clients on the program to meet their health care service needs, although the ryan white hiv/aids program likely will continue to serve an important role in providing hiv care to individuals who remain uninsured. reduction in the use of ryan white funds for medical care would permit the redirection of funds to other vital ryan whiteœfunded services. the ryan white hiv/aids program has an established role in providing a comprehensive array of services beyond medical care, including medical case management and treatment adherence counseling, mental health and substance abuse treatment services, oral care, monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142 monitoring hiv care in the united statesfood assistance, medical transportation, and psychosocial support (iom, 2011, p. 20). increased emphasis on such services through continued funding of the ryan white hiv/aids program and decreased demand for medical care among clients would continue to advance the goals of the nhas in important ways, for example, by supporting plwha ﬁwho have challenges meeting their basic needs, such as housingﬂ (onap, 2010, p. 21). as one of the few data systems examined by the committee that capture data on housing, food, and medical transportation need, an increase in ryan white funding available for such supportive services would make it an even more valuable source of data on those services.although the population of plwha receiving services through the ryan white hiv/aids program is a large and important one, it is not nationally representative of plwha, and use of ryan white data to estimate the indicators will only permit tracking of the indicators for that group. another difculty with ryan white hiv/aids program data is that data pertaining to medical and supportive services received are reported only when the services were funded with ryan white dollars. such services include mental health and substance abuse treatment visits and housing, food, and transportation services. an organization might receive funding from a number of different sources, and if a client were to receive some services funded, at least in part, through the ryan white hiv/aids program and other services funded exclusively by another source, only the former would be reported to hrsa. ryan whiteœfunded services vary widely among and within states, depending on how state and local jurisdictions tailor services to meet the needs of local communities (rawlings and hopson, 2009). there are persistent dollarpercase federal allocations to states (martin and keenan, 2011), which are associated with the size and scope of adap drug formularies (martin and barry, 2011). if other sources of state and local funding are used to provide these additional services, they will not appear on the client™s record. to obtain a comprehensive picture of access to needed services within the ryan white hiv/aids client population, it would be helpful to have information on all pertinent services received by clients regardless of funding source, as is the case for clinical data. the clinical information reported by providers who receive ryan white hiv/aids program funding includes all of the data requested for each ryan white hiv/aids program client, regardless of how the service was paid for and who delivered it. thus, all of a given client™s outpatient or ambulatory care visit dates, cd4 and viral load counts, and the like within the reporting period are included.along with mmp, the rsr is one of two data systems to provide information on the need for and utilization of supportive services for housing, food, and transportation, as well as hiv medical care and mental health monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 143and substance use services.15 the data™s usefulness is limited by the reporting only of those supportive services that are funded through the ryan white hiv/aids program. just as all pertinent clinical data are reported by ryan whiteœfunded providers for clients regardless of payment source, reporting of complete data for supportive service utilization would provide more robust information for tracking the impact of the nhas and health care reform on the provision of these services. absent reporting of all supportive service utilization, an indication of whether clients had received any nonryan whitefunded services would allow analyses of ryan white hiv/aids program data to be stratied accordingly.medicaid statistical information systemmedicaid is the largest safetynet health insurance program in the united states, providing health and longterm care coverage to more than 59 million lowincome and disabled beneciaries (kff, 2011a). although plwha represent less than 1 percent of the total medicaid population, in fy 2007 medicaid provided coverage for 47 percent of plwha estimated to be receiving regular medical care: 212,892 medicaid beneciaries were hiv infected (kates, 2011, p. 1). medicaid is nanced jointly by the federal and state governments and represents the largest expenditure on health care coverage for plwha when federal and state funds are combined. together, federal and state medicaid expenditures totaled $9.3 billion in fy 2011, accounting for 51 percent of federal spending for hiv care (kates, 2011, p. 1). medicare accounts for another $5.4 billion (29 percent) of federal funding for hiv care (kates, 2011, p. 1). approximately 29 percent of medicaid beneciaries with hiv were dually eligible for medicare in fy 2007 (kates, 2011, p. 1).the medicaid statistical information system (msis) is the claims processing system for medicaid, which captures utilization data and management information pertaining to medical care and services provided to medicaid recipients. msis includes the full population of people with hiv/aids enrolled in medicaid in the united states,16 and, given medicaid™s prominent role in hiv care (covering 47 percent of plwha estimated to be in care), it not only captures a signicant share of plwha but also is a critical source of care and coverage that should be assessed. currently, 15 housing opportunities for persons with aids (hopwa) is a federal program under the u.s. department of housing and urban development (hud) that provides short and longterm housing assistance to plwha and their families (hud, 2011b). hopwa data, discussed later in the chapter, provide important information on housing needs and services for plwha, but are focused primarily on housing.16 it does not include information on individuals who are eligible for, but not enrolled in, medicaid.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144 monitoring hiv care in the united statesto qualify for medicaid individuals must be low income and be ﬁcategorically eligible.ﬂ most medicaid beneciaries with hiv (74 percent) qualify through the disability pathway, meaning their disease is sufciently advanced to preclude them from working (kates, 2011, p. 4). the anticipated expansion of medicaid under the aca will remove the categorical eligibility requirement and extend eligibility to most people under the age of 65 who have incomes less than 133 percent of the fpl (kates, 2011, p. 4). the resulting increase in medicaid™s role in covering care for plwha makes msis a particularly important source of data for tracking the impact of the aca on hiv care.states are required to report medicaid beneciary and claims data quarterly to the centers for medicare and medicaid services (cms) through the medical management information system (mmis).17 these data, which include demographic and monthly enrollment data for each person covered by medicaid in the quarter (eligible les) and adjudicated claims data (paid claims les), are captured in msis. claims les are categorized by inpatient, longterm care, prescription drug, and noninstitutional services and include data on types and dates of services, providers, costs and types of reimbursement, and epidemiological variables (cms, 2011c).msis data are available in two forms: msis les and medicaid analytic extract (max) les. msis les are organized quarterly for the federal scal year (octoberœseptember) and by transaction or claims adjudication date. they cover all enrollment transactions, including retroactive enrollment and corrections, as well as all interim claims records, including originals, voids, credits, debits, and the like. max les contain data extracted from the msis les and formatted to facilitate research and public policy needs. they are organized chronologically by calendar year, based on date of service, and msis claims records (initial, interim, voids, and adjustments) are combined or consolidated to generate nal records for specic services covered by medicaid as accurately as possible (ccw, 2011c; cms, 2011a,d). max les include a person summary le, as well as inpatient hospital, longterm care, prescription drug, and other services les.18max les are available to approved academic researchers and certain government agencies through the cms chronic condition data warehouse (ccw). max les currently are available for 1999 through 2008, although 2008 data are not yet available for all states (resdac, 2011a).19 msis les 17 cms plans to move to monthly collection of data within 2 years (cms response to iom request for information, april 8, 2011).18 more detailed descriptions of msis and max les, and the differences between them, are available from cms (2011d). see also resdac (2011b), ccw (2011b), and cms (2010).19 data are currently missing for hawaii, missouri, north dakota, pennsylvania, utah, wisconsin, and the district of columbia, although these data were expected to be available on or about october 31, 2011 (cms, 2011a).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 145are available through fy 2009 (48 states) and for 22 states for fy 2010 (cms, 2011b). although most states complete their reporting within a year, not all do, resulting in about a 2year lag time for msis data les. the lag time is somewhat longer (2.53 years) for max data les because the raw msis data must be extracted and consolidated (ccw, 2011c). a builtin lag of at least 13 to 14 months is needed to ensure that claims for most services delivered in a given calendar year are captured, and another 9 to 10 months are needed to validate and process the data (resdac, 2011b).20 advantages of msis as a source of data for hiv care include the large number of hivinfected individuals represented (although enrollees with hiv are identiable only if they have a diagnosis for hiv entered in the system); strong representation of ﬁvulnerable populations,ﬂ including racial and ethnic minorities; regular collection of data over time (currently quarterly, moving to monthly within 2 years [cms response to iom request for information, april 8, 2011]), linkage of data to unique personal identiers, and an existing data processing and data retrieval structure. in addition, diagnostic and treatment information is reported by providers, which may reduce inaccuracies inherent in patient selfreport, although nonclinical factors can affect provider reporting also. for example, changes in disease recognition, treatment, and prescription patterns, as well as billing or reimbursement considerations, may have an impact on provider reporting (crystal et al., 2007). inaccurate reporting (errors, coding variation, designation) is another nonclinical factor that can affect the accuracy of the data available from msis or max. msis and max data include eligibility and claims data and limited demographic data. as is the case with all claims databases, information is available to chart ﬁquality of careﬂ based solely on medical service and medication utilization. dates of service, diagnosis and procedure codes, and provider codes are available, but core outcome measures such as cd4 and viral load test results are not. some negative outcome indicators would be available, such as treatment for an opportunistic infection or mortality, based on date of death. assessment for mental health treatment needs or medical comorbidities would be indicated only if a diagnosis code appears in the case le to justify treatment or medication. appendix tables 32a through 32e summarize which data elements of interest to the committee are captured in msis.one challenge of using msis or max data is identication of the population of plwha who are medicaid beneciaries. variations in diagnostic and other service coding may adversely affect the usefulness of any particular group of codes for accurately identifying the medicaid population with a given condition. therefore, use of a combination of diagnosis 20 although 22 to 24 months has been reported as the minimum lag time for max data (resdac, 2011b), it appears that 30 to 36 months may be more realistic.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146 monitoring hiv care in the united statescodes (for hiv/aids), common procedure codes (cd4 counts; hiv rna tests), and prescription drug codes (arvs) is likely the best way to identify the maximum number of plwha among medicaid recipients with the greatest positive predictive value (see crystal et al., 2007; koroukian et al., 2003). difculties other than those related to coding also limit the ability to identify the full population of plwha within medicaid. the ˚uctuating eligibility of some beneciaries causes those individuals to move in and out of coverage during the course of a year, meaning any medical care they receive in the period during which they are not covered is not captured by medicaid claims data. dual eligibility with medicare also causes claims covered by medicare not to be captured in medicaid data. each of these situations makes it probable that msis or max data on encounters will not provide a complete accounting of medical services received by individuals in the group (koroukian et al., 2003). not only may some medicaid recipients with hiv not be identied at all, but a number of others within these groups will have incomplete encounter data in msis, resulting in an underestimation of the indicators for the population of medicaid recipients (crystal et al., 2007).similar to the cases in which ryan white hiv/aids program data include only ryan whiteœfunded services, even if the msis data were complete and accurate, state variation in covered services beyond a set of ﬁmandatoryﬂ services required to receive matching federal funds and service payment structure (feeforservice versus prepaid plans) would mean those data still would not provide a complete accounting of service utilization by individual recipients. for example, msis may include data pertaining to a given type of service for some beneciaries (those residing in a state in which the service is covered) but not capture data on the provision of the same type of service for medicaid beneciaries residing in a state where the service is not covered. in addition, states may place limits on the number of occurrences (prescriptions, inpatient days, provider visits) that medicaid will cover. in both types of case, medicaid claims data will not provide a complete picture of service utilization by individual beneciaries.in other cases, msis data may not be complete or accurate. feeforservice plans generate fairly complete utilization data because reimbursement depends on ling a claim for each covered service. however, in fy 2007, 71 percent of medicaid beneciaries with hiv received some covered services through managed care plans (kates, 2011). although states are required to report utilization for beneciaries in prepaid plans (hmos, preferred health plans), the accuracy and completeness of these data are suspect (ccw, 2011c; crystal et al., 2007). both situations (variations in medicaid coverage, incomplete or inaccurate medicaid data) may result in incomplete service utilization data being available from msis on specic individuals. identication of the most common service providers for monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 147individuals with variable medicaid eligibility or of services not covered by medicaid (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program) would permit use of data from these additional sources to gain a more complete measure of the full set of services received by these individuals. likewise, combined medicare and medicaid data for individuals dually eligible for both programs also would provide a more complete picture of service usage. as discussed in chapter 6, although combining data from multiple data systems to generate a more complete measure of service utilization for the purpose of estimating the recommended indicators is a theoretical ideal, doing so in practice poses numerous statistical challenges.demographic data of interest are limited to date of birth, date of death, gender (male, female), race and ethnicity, and zip code. msis also collects limited information on private payer status. income (as a percentage of the fpl) is an optional eld, although information about income level could be inferred based on eligibility criteria. also, data are collected on whether the beneciary received temporary assistance for needy families benets during the month. msis links data to unique individual identiers (either msis generated or social security number, depending on the state), so that information may be tracked across time for individuals, permitting evaluation of their longitudinal care experiences to the extent permitted by claims data. the demographic data collected would permit assessment of indicators for racial and ethnic subgroups of interest, as well as subgroups based on location of residence and payer status. since data on sexual orientation are not collected, msis data do not permit estimation of the indicators for the nhastargeted subgroup of gay and bisexual men, although separate assessments could be made for men and women with data based on sex. with respect to the core indicators of hiv care, msis could be expected to provide the data needed to assess the indicators pertaining to continuity of care and regular cd4 and viral load testing, based on claims submitted for ofce visits with hiv listed as one of the diagnosis codes and claims submitted for cd4 and viral load tests, all of which capture dates of service (see appendix table 33a). however, any services received by an individual that were not reported to cms would not be included in msis, resulting in gaps in the information available. msis captures date of death and so could provide data to calculate the mortality rate within its population of plwha.msis captures neither the date of hiv diagnosis nor the date of rst visit for hiv care; thus it cannot be used to assess the linkagetocare indicator. also, since msis does not capture clinical data, such as the results of cd4 counts and viral load tests, it cannot independently provide the information needed to assess the remaining core indicators of clinical hiv care, even though it collects data on the prescription and (re)ll dates for art drugs, when claims are submitted.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148 monitoring hiv care in the united statesmsis captures data pertaining to screening and visits for mental health and substance use services covered by medicaid, but it does not specically capture the dates of (hence, the time between) diagnosis or referral and rst visit for services. with regard to supportive services, msis collects data on the provision of social work or case management services, but specic information pertaining to housing, food, and transportation needs is not captured (see appendix tables 32b, 33b).for the additional indicators (see appendix tables 32c, 33c), msis could provide data to assess the clinical hiv care indicators relating to tb, sexually transmitted infections (stis), and hepatitis b and c screenings, along with in˚uenza, pneumococcal pneumonia, and hepatitis b immunizations, although clinical information about whether the tb test results were interpreted or hepatitis b immunity was documented would not be available. data would also be available to assess the indicators pertaining to drug resistance testing and the proportion of hivinfected pregnant women on art, although pregnancy status would have to be extrapolated from related diagnostic or service codes. data to assess indicators relating to timely diagnosis of hiv infection and those involving clinical markers for art initiation would not be readily available.despite the importance of data from the medicaid population for tracking the impact of the nhas and the aca on hiv care, msis and max data have some limitations. as previously noted, the lag time from service utilization to reporting completion (especially for max data) may be problematic for timesensitive policy evaluation. in addition, medicaid data alone may not provide a complete accounting of service utilization by beneciaries who receive services from multiple funding sources, and strategies must be employed to help correct for that additional encounter data. stephen crystal and colleagues (2007) list some ﬁbest practicesﬂ for working with medicaid data. development of methods for combining data from or analyzing data across additional relevant data systems (e.g., medicare, ryan white hiv/aids program) might provide more complete information on service utilization for individuals receiving services through two or more of the programs. one such effort is the database of linked medicaid and medicare data developed by cms in 2009, which contains service utilization and expenditures data for 9 million dually eligible beneciaries (chcs, 2010). ccw assigns a unique beneciary identication number for the max and medicare records of dually eligible beneciaries to permit tracking and analysis of data across programs (ccw, 2011c, p. 4).chronic condition data warehousealthough not representing as large a patient population as medicaid, medicare accounted for 29 percent of federal spending on hiv in fy monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 1492011 (kates, 2011), the largest source of federal spending on hiv care.21 medicare is a federal program providing health care coverage to disabled individuals and those age 65 and older. approximately 100,000 medicare beneciaries are hivinfected, representing about 20 percent of hivinfected individuals estimated to be receiving care in the united states (kff, 2009a). the majority of plwha currently receiving medicare qualied through the disability pathway. with the evolution of hiv into a chronic condition, many plwha are living longer and increasingly are expected to qualify for medicare on the basis of age, resulting in an increase in the number medicare beneciaries with hiv. given medicare™s part d prescription drug coverage and the increasing number of medicareeligible plwha, medicare plays an important role in hiv care coverage.the ccw contains feeforservice22 claims data for 100 percent of medicare beneciaries from 2005 to 200923 and part d drug event data from 2006 to 2009 (ccw, 2011a, about). as such, it includes feeforservice utilization data for all plwha who are enrolled in the medicare program. to expedite delivery and maximize cost efciency, data sets are available for predetermined cohorts representing 21 chronic conditions. although hiv/aids is not presently one of the predened cohorts, it currently is under consideration for addition to the list of ˚agged conditions (ccw, 2011a, chronic conditions).medicare uses a unique beneciary identication number and collects the basic demographic data of interest: date of birth, date of death, ombdened race and ethnicity, gender (male, female), and zip code. the medicare current beneciary survey (mcbs) of a representative national sample of medicare beneciaries is used to generate two les (access to care; cost and use) each year. the access to care le ﬁcontains summaries of use and expenditures for the year from medicare les along with survey data on insurance coverage, health status and functioning, access to care, information needs, satisfaction with care, and incomeﬂ (ccw, 2011b, p. 10). although mcbs data are not automatically linked to medicare beneciary identication numbers, information is available upon request to permit mcbs data to be merged with other ccw data at the beneciary level. medicare also requires assessments for beneciaries receiving care in nursing facilities, inpatient rehabilitation facilities, and home care. these assessments provide data on certain aspects of beneciaries™ health status, as well as other relevant information (e.g., the safety and sanitary condition of the individual™s 21 federal spending on medicare is greater than that on medicaid (if the state share is not included) and the ryan white hiv/aids program (kff, 2011b). 22 most services for medicare recipients in managed care are not captured in the ccw.23 the ccw also contains data on a random 5 percent sample of medicare beneciaries for 1999 forward.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshome for those receiving home care) and likely will increase in importance as the population of plwha ages and individuals with hiv enter home and institutional nursing care in greater numbers.as a source of claims data, medicare is similar to medicaid in terms of the data available to assess the core indicators of hiv care. it should be able to inform indicators related to continuity of care, regular cd4 and viral load testing, and mortality rate, but it does not contain the information necessary to evaluate the linkagetocare indicator or the clinical data needed to assess the other core hiv care indicators. art drug prescription and (re)ll data are available for medicare part d beneciaries. the availability of medicare data to assess the additional indicators for hiv care is similar to that of msis data as well.although medicare does not have data on screening for mental health disorders or substance use, it does capture service utilization data on the diagnosis of and covered treatment for these conditions, but as with medicaid, the data do not specically permit calculation of the time between treatment referral and receipt of services. medicare does not collect data on housing, food, or transportation needs, although questions pertaining to housing adequacy are included in the assessment for home health beneciaries (oasis).as previously noted, efforts to link medicare and medicaid data for dually eligible beneciaries will provide a more complete picture of service utilization for that group of individuals. in addition, inclusion of hiv/aids in the list of predetermined chronic condition cohorts for which ccw data sets are available should expedite delivery of these data for research and policy use.north american aids cohort collaboration on research and designthe north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design (naaccord) captures data from 22 single and multisite clinical and classical epidemiologic hiv cohorts, which represent most of the hiv/aids cohort studies in north america, including the cfar network of integrated clinical systems (cnics) and the hiv research network (hivrn) discussed in the following sections. although naaccord includes data from cnics and hivrn, not all of the data elements captured by those systems are represented in naaccord.naaccord collects data on more than 100,000 hivinfected adults from more than 60 academic research and hospital and communitybased clinical sites throughout the united states (44 states and the district of columbia) (kitahata, 2011; naaccord, 2011; naaccord response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011). naaccord is demonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 151signed to be widely representative of hiv care in the united states,24 and the population of plwha represented is similar to that reported by the cdc in terms of age and sex, but it includes somewhat fewer minorities25 (kitahata, 2011; naaccord response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011). naaccord data pertaining to the core clinical hiv care indicators include date of diagnosis (although these data are not complete); date of rst visit at the clinical site and whether the individual was previously seen at another site (but not always the date of rstever visit for hiv care); dates of routine hiv care visits; cd4 and viral load test dates and results; dates that individual arvs were started or stopped; year of birth; and mortality information (date and cause of death) (appendix tables 32a, 33a). for the additional indicators of clinical hiv care, naaccord also includes dates of art drug resistance testing; diagnoses of aidsdening conditions; diagnoses of and/or laboratory results relevant to renal disease (nephropathy), hepatitis c, and hepatitis b; dates of hepatitis c and hepatitis b screening; and dates of tb testing (quantiferontb tests). as of 2012, naaccord collects information on pregnancy status. naaccord does not currently collect dates of screening for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis or dates of vaccination or immunization for hepatitis b, in˚uenza, or pneumococcal pneumonia (see appendix tables 32c, 33c).information on diagnosis or referral for mental health disorders and substance abuse is included in naaccord, but not data on screening for those disorders or on rst visit for mental health or substance abuse treatment, although it will capture visits for psychiatry, psychology, and counseling, beginning in 2012. naaccord does not include data pertaining to housing stability, food security, or access to transportation but could add such data to the extent they are collected by social workers in the clinical practice setting (appendix tables 32b, 33b).demographic information available in naaccord includes age, sex, race and ethnicity, and the rst three digits of zip code, as well as metropolitan statistical area (msa), and, as of 2012, country of birth. data on 24 since urban areas are heavily represented among the cohorts, naaccord may not be representative of the care experience of plwha in rural areas.25 a comparison of 2007 data for naaccord and the population of plwha indicates that naaccord had a lower proportion of nonhispanic blacks (40 percent versus 46 percent) and latinos (14 percent versus 20 percent), as well as a higher proportion of nonhispanic whites (41 percent versus 32 percent) (kitahata, 2011). older (2005) data reported for the nhss (33 states and u.s. dependent areas with condential namebased reporting) and naaccord for hiv transmission risk factors suggest that, at the time, naaccord had a lower proportion of men who have sex with men (33 percent versus 44 percent) and a higher proportion of injection drug users (27 percent versus 20 percent) and individuals infected through heterosexual contact or other means (40 percent versus 30 percent). (see cdc, 2007, table 8; gange et al., 2007, table 3.)monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152 monitoring hiv care in the united statessexual orientation, gender identity, income, and insurance status are not collected. (see appendix table 32d.)data collected by naaccord can be used to estimate all of the core indicators of clinical hiv care. the data system is less useful for estimating the additional clinical care indicators and much less so for indicators pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services. a strength of naaccord is that new data elements can be added relatively easily if they are collected by the participating cohorts.cfar network of integrated clinical systemsthe cfar network of integrated clinical systems comprises a network of eight centers for aids research (cfar) sites26 that have implemented pointofcare electronic data collection systems. cnics data are collected prospectively through these systems on plwha in care at the site and, therefore, characterize the rapidly changing course of hiv disease management. the cnics cohort includes more than 23,000 individuals and represents a diverse population of patients with regard to sex, race, ethnicity, age, risk factor for hiv transmission, and geographic distribution, although the cfar sites are located in urban areas and the data may not be representative of plwha in rural areas (cnics, 2011, cnics sites; kitahata, 2011).cnics currently maintains data on 10 unique domains: (1) disease diagnoses; (2) laboratory data (viral load, cd4 count, viral hepatitis, hematologic, kidney, and chemistries or metabolic markers); (3) medication data; (4) demographics (sex, race and ethnicity, age, and risk factor for hiv transmission); (5) health care utilization (initial patient enrollment, primary care visits, and hospitalizations); (6) vital status (death date, source, and cause of death); (7) patientreported outcomes27; (8) antiretroviral drug resistance; (9) biological specimens; and (10) census block data (cnics, 2011, data elements).according to the project website, an important distinction between 26 these are case western reserve university; university of alabama at birmingham; university of california, san francisco; university of washington; university of california, san diego; fenway community health center of harvard university; university of north carolina; and johns hopkins university. although the johns hopkins university site is no longer cfarfunded, it has continued to collaborate with other cnics sites.27 most sites collect patientreported outcomes data from consenting patients using touchscreen tablets or pcs that are connected to a wireless network. data are captured on depression and anxiety; adherence; smoking, alcohol, drug use; hiv transmission risk behaviors; symptom burden; physical activity level; body morphology; and quality of life. as of august 2010, there were approximately 8,000 completed assessments in the central database (cnics, 2011, data elements). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 153cnics and other cohorts is the ability to provide peerreviewed open access to data for research from a system that prospectively collects comprehensive patient data including validated outcomes, longitudinal resistance data, and pros (cnics, 2011).cnics includes much of the data needed to calculate the core clinical hiv care indicators (appendix tables 32a, 33a), including dates of rst and ongoing visits for hiv care, cd4 and viral load test dates and results, and dates of starting and stopping specic arvs. information on date of diagnosis is collected by cnics, but these data are not available for some individuals. for the additional clinical hiv care indicators (appendix tables 32c, 33c), cnics collects data on diagnosis of aidsdening conditions; hepatitis b and c; chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screening; art drug resistance testing; and diagnosis of renal disease. data also are collected on tb testing using quantiferontb tests. as of 2012, data on pregnancy status is collected, and collection of immunization information for hepatitis b, in˚uenza, and pneumococcal pneumonia is proposed. if all these data are collected, cnics will capture the data needed to estimate all of the core and additional indicators for clinical hiv care.cnics also collects certain data on mental health and substance abuse disorders, including dates of screening and diagnosis or referral. although cnics does not specically capture the date of rst visits for mental health treatment services, it does capture visits for psychiatry, psychology, and counseling. since it also captures date of screening, a proximate visit for services would suggest date of rst visit, but it would not be ˚agged as such. cnics captures whether an individual received substance abuse treatment in the past year, but not specic dates of service. cnics does not currently include data on housing, food, and transportation needs assessment or status, but data on housing stability (stable or permanent, temporary, unstable, and homelessness) are collected in the clinical practice setting and could be added to cnics (cnics response to iom request for information, april 11, 2011).demographic data captured in cnics include age, sex, race, and ethnicity. data on sexual orientation and gender identity are not currently collected. cnics collects msa of residence and is adding the three initial numbers of individuals™ zip codes, which provide state and at least county of residence, as permitted by the health insurance portability and accountability act. country of birth is collected beginning in 2012. insurance status is collected, and income data are collected and could be added to cnics. pros provide an opportunity to collect qualitative data on satisfaction with provider care and on stigma or discrimination, as well as other information of interest, including food security and transportation needs.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshiv research networkthe hiv research network compiles data electronically from health records and through manual medical record review in order to obtain, analyze, and disseminate current information on the delivery of services to plwha. hivrn captures these data longitudinally to assess trends in areas such as accessibility, quality, utilization, safety, and costs of hivrelated health care services. hivrn is primarily supported by the agency for healthcare research and quality with additional support from other agencies of the u.s. department of health and human services (hhs).hivrn represents a consortium of 16 academic and communitybased sites that provide primary and subspecialty hiv care in 13 cities throughout the united states, with 8 in the eastern united states, 1 in the midwest, 3 in the south, and 4 in the west (hivrn, 2011). data are collected annually on the clinical and demographic characteristics of approximately 21,000 adults, adolescents, and children receiving hiv care at the participating sites (hivrn response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011). (five of the sixteen sites are devoted to pediatric care.) the data from each site are sent to the data coordination center at the johns hopkins school of medicine, where they are consolidated into a single uniform database.hivrn data can be used to estimate all of the core clinical hiv care indicators identied by the committee. in addition, data for estimating the core indicators for mental health and substance abuse are available for a subset of the participating sites. hivrn does not collect data on the dates of screening for mental health or substance abuse disorders, nor does it collect any data pertinent to the committee™s core or additional indicators for housing, food security, or unmet need for transportation. as with naaccord and cnics, hivrn data are collected from urban areas and may not be representative of plwha in rural areas.clinical case registry: hivthe veterans health administration within the department of veterans affairs is the largest provider of hiv care in the united states, serving more than 24,000 veterans with hiv in 2010 (va, 2011). the clinical case registry (ccr): hiv is an administrative and clinical database containing populationbased data on hivinfected individuals who receive care through the vha.28 local reporting allows clinicians with access to the database to monitor clinical outcomes and resource utilization. the national database permits quality of care, as well as outcomes and utiliza28 a second ccr collects data on veterans with hepatitis c who receive care in the vha system.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 155tion, monitoring. data on all veterans with a conrmed diagnosis of hiv/aids in vha care during the calendar year are included in the database. the sample is limited to those veterans who receive care within the vha system and is older and predominantly male, compared with the overall population of plwha in the united states (vha response to iom request for information, april 11, 2011).the vha has a sophisticated ehr system that captures utilization and outcomes data. data needed to calculate all of the core clinical hiv care indicators and most of the additional clinical care indicators are available from the ehr if the services are performed within the vha system (appendix tables 32a, 32c, 33a, 33c). date of diagnosis, cd4 count at diagnosis, and date of rst visit for hiv care are all available for individuals diagnosed and treated within the vha, but for those who transfer into the system following diagnosis, data on linkage to care and stage of disease at diagnosis are not available. information on prescriptions and rells written by vha providers is available as are dispensing data for prescriptions (re)lled through the vha pharmacy system.although prenatal care is covered by the vha, prenatal care services are provided outside the system by community providers. although the vha ehr does not capture data from external providers, the information pertaining to art prescription for pregnant women would be available for prescriptions lled through the vha pharmacy system.data pertaining to screening for mental health disorders and substance use are not captured in the vha data system (vha response to iom request for information, april 11, 2011), but it does include data on diagnosis of or referral for mental health and substance abuse disorders, as well as date of rst visit for treatment services if they occur in the vha. data pertinent to the supportive services indicators are not collected, although some data pertaining to social work or case management are captured. (appendix tables 32b, 33b). demographic data collected include age, sex, race, ethnicity, and address. data on gender identity, sexual orientation, income, insurance status, and country of birth are not collected. (see appendix tables 32d, 32e.)as an ehr, the vha data system contains comprehensive clinical data on test and treatment services provided within the system, including prescription and pharmacy dispensing data, although information on services provided outside the system is not reliably captured.29 as an integrated health care system, the vha is well poised to respond to challenges raised by the nhas, as demonstrated by its recent efforts to implement routine 29 a uniform notation in the ehr indicating whether a patient reports having received health care services outside of the vha system could facilitate research on health care services provided by the vha. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshiv testing. although the population of plwha served by the vha is disproportionately male and older compared to the national population of plwha, recent collaborative efforts between the vha and kaiser permanente (kp) (discussed in the following section) may be the rst step in addressing concerns about representativeness.kaiser permanentekaiser permanente is one of the largest notforprot health plans in the united states, providing coverage to more than 8.7 million members in nine states and the district of columbia (kp, 2011). health outcome and utilization data are collected on all members through ehrs and databases. the secondlargest private provider of hiv care in the united states in 2006, with more than 16,000 hivinfected individuals in care, kp data represent a diverse population of individuals with private insurance in california, hawaii, and selected metropolitan areas, including baltimore, maryland; washington, dc; and atlanta, georgia. analyses have shown that kp is representative of the hivinfected population in california (kp response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011), a state with more than 6.5 million kp members (kp, 2011), and as the largest provider of hiv care in hawaii, kp is representative of the population there as well (kp response to iom request for information, march 30, 2011).kp has a sophisticated ehr system that facilitates the capture and retrieval of detailed clinical data. a major benet to a robust ehr system is the availability of data on both service utilization and clinical outcomes. kp captures all of the data elements necessary to assess the core indicators of clinical hiv care, although the date of hiv diagnosis is only captured for individuals diagnosed within the kp system (appendix tables 32a, 33a). thus, the linkagetocare indicator can be calculated reliably only for those in the system at the time of diagnosis. kp also captures the data needed to assess the additional indicators for clinical hiv care (appendix tables 32c, 33c). data on the prescription of art drugs are available, as are most pharmacy (re)ll data. no data are available on prescriptions (re)lled at pharmacies outside of the kp system.kp also records data on screening for mental health disorders and substance abuse, although the screenings are performed as indicated and not according to a predetermined schedule. data on referral for services for mental health disorders and substance abuse are included in individuals™ ehrs, as are data on receipt of treatment services that are provided within the kp system. data relevant to supportive services indicators are not routinely collected within the kp system.as an integrated health care system with a comprehensive ehr system, kp, like the vha, captures comprehensive clinical test and treatment monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 157data for services provided within the system. although the population of plwha served by kp is not nationally representative, it is representative of the privately insured hivinfected population in areas of the united states with access to kaiser (hawaii; california; oregon; midatlantic region, including the district of columbia; atlanta, georgia).in december 2009, kp and the vha launched a pilot project in san diego, california, for electronically sharing ehr les of individuals who receive care from both systems with patient permission (kp, 2009). now part of the nationwide health information network exchange project (nwhin exchange, 2011), this type of data sharing not only should improve patient care but also could permit the capture of similar types of data from a larger and more diverse population than those represented by the individual participating systems.national vital statistics systemmost of the data systems reviewed by the committee collect date of death. in particular, the nhss would serve as the most nationally representative source of data for estimating the committee™s recommended mortality indicator: allcause mortality rate among plwha. as indicated in chapter 2, the committee selected allcause mortality for the indicator because of the inherent difculties in determining and recording in every instance whether deaths among plwha were related to the disease or another cause. mortality rate due to hiv nevertheless may be a useful measure for some purposes. in such cases, the national vital statistics system (nvss) is the best source of data for estimating mortality related to hiv infection. although some of the data systems examined by the committee, such as naaccord, record information on cause of death, the nvss regularly calculates hiv mortality. nvss operates under the auspices of cdc™s national center for health statistics, which collects vital statistics data through contracts with the registration systems in jurisdictions that are legally responsible for recording vital events, such as births and deaths (nvss, 2011a). mortality data from the nvss provide uniform, nationwide demographic, geographic, and causeofdeath information for individuals who die in the united states (nvss, 2011b). standard forms (e.g., death certicate) and model procedures are developed and recommended for nationwide use to promote the collection of uniform national data. the death certicate requires a single immediate (nal) cause of death and allows for as many as three underlying causes of death to be listed sequentially (cdc, 2011c). although reporting errors of various types may occur for cause of death, cdc provides extensive information on writing causeofdeath statements for death certicates (nvss, 2011c). preliminary hiv mortality data currently are available for 2009 (kochanek et al., 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158 monitoring hiv care in the united statesadditional data systems for monitoring hiv carethe committee identied three additional systems that provide data to help evaluate the impact of the nhas and the aca on hiv care and access to supportive services for plwha in the united states. the indian health service (ihs) and the federal bureau of prisons (bop) have data systems that capture health care data for two small but important subpopulations of hivinfected individuals: american indians and alaska natives (ai/ans) and federal prisoners. the housing opportunities for persons with aids (hopwa) program collects data pertinent to the program™s funding of assistance for housing and other supportive services for its beneciaries.resource and patient management systemnationally, ai/ans represent less than 1 percent of plwha (between 3,039 and 3,083 individuals in 2009) (cdc, 2012, commentary, table 15a). yet, ai/ans are disproportionately burdened by the epidemic in several ways. the rate of hiv diagnoses among ai/ans was 9.7 (per 100,000) in 2010, compared with 6.5 for asians and 7.3 for whites (cdc, 2012, table 1a).30 compared with other racial and ethnic groups, ai/ans also have one of the shortest timelines from aids diagnosis to death (cdc, 2012, commentary, table 14a; hall et al., 2005). impoverishment and conditions such as alcoholism and diabetes that occur at higher rates among ai/ans (chartier and caetano, 2010; ihs, 2008) may complicate care and adherence to treatment.31 the ihs is the federal agency responsible for providing comprehensive health care services to approximately 2.0 million ai/ans representing 566 federally recognized tribes (ihs, 2012). most ihs facilities are primary care clinics. two ihsfunded hospitals together treat the majority of hiv patients in the lower 48 states (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, october 13, 2011). combined with an additional two sites, these facilities account for 61 percent of the ihs hiv/aids case load (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, october 13, 2011). although some ihs clinics provide limited hiv care services, most refer their hiv clients to outside providers for hiv care (gao, 2007; ihs response to iom request for information, march 28, 2011). as of june 2011, there were 289 hiv/aids patients on record at federal ihs health care service sites, of which 224 were ﬁactive,ﬂ having received cd4 and viral load testing within the preceding 12 months. patients receiving care in tribally operated and urban indian health care programs are not included in 30 black or african americans and native hawaiian and other pacic islanders had higher rates of diagnosis (cdc, 2012, table1a).31 in addition, an estimated 25 percent of ai/ans with hiv infection are undiagnosed (cdc, 2011a).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 159these numbers due to administrative constraints (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, february 29, 2012).the ihs uses an electronic record system called the resource and patient management system (rpms) to manage clinical, administrative, and nancial information on patients and resources and improve the quality of care provided at federal, tribal, and urban ihs facilities throughout the united states (cullen, 2006). data are entered into rpms by providers during patient visits.32 an optional automated module within rpms called the hiv management system (hms) may be used by hiv care providers and case managers in the ihs system to capture data related to hiv/aids and to assist nonspecialist providers with decision making through the use of clinical reminders, provider guidelines, and qualityofcare audit reports. hms captures hivspecic information such as date of hiv diagnosis, cdc classications, and art status. lab, radiology, and pharmacy data are available through linkage with rpms. hms also may be used to report hiv/aids cases to public health authorities through a state surveillance form and report (cullen, 2006). hms was rst implemented in 2006, and personnel at 12 ihs facilities had been trained in how to use the system by october 2007 (gao, 2007). in 2009, it was integrated into rpms (ihs, 2011a, home, tech support), but hms usage is not mandatory (ihs, 2011d). although 283 ihs facilities have downloaded hms as part of the rpms update, only the two large hospitals that treat the majority of hivinfected patients are known to use the system and contribute to its ongoing development (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, october 13, 2011).another component of the rpms, called the clinical reporting system (crs), is used for national, local, and area monitoring of clinical performance measures. the crs draws from local rpms databases to create printed or electronic reports of clinical performance measures, including hiv screening and hiv quality of care, as well as a number of other conditions (e.g., sti, depression, and alcohol screening) that may be relevant for monitoring hiv care (see ihs, 2011c). according to 2011 guidance on the crs, hiv screening information is reported nationally (ihs, 2011b,c). reported information includes data on hiv screening among pregnant women and among patients age 13 to 64 with no recorded hiv diagnosis prior to the report period, broken down by gender and age groups, as well as the percentage of patients with documented hiv screening refusals (ihs, 2011b,c). in addition, information is reported on the percentages of patients with positive, negative, or indeterminate test results and on the 32 although the ihs is a federal agency, tribal data require special permission to access, since the data belong to the tribe and not to the federal government (ihs response to iom request for information, march 28, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160 monitoring hiv care in the united statesnumber of hiv tests given to patients during the report period where the patient was not diagnosed with hiv anytime prior to the screening (ihs, 2011b). hiv screening is also incorporated into a syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and hiv screening measure where diagnosis of one of these stis prompts screening for the other three (ihs, 2011b).crs also captures hiv qualityofcare data for the user population of patients age 13 and older with at least two direct care visits (i.e., visits within the ihs system) during the report period with hiv diagnosis and one hiv visit in the last 6 months (ihs, 2011c). these measures are not reported nationally, however. the qualityofcare measures assessed are (1) the percentage of patients who received the cd4 test only (without hiv viral load) during the report period; (2) the percentage of patients who received hiv viral load only (without cd4) during the report period; (3) the percentage of patients who received both cd4 and hiv viral load tests during the report period; and (4) total numerators 1, 2, and 3 (ihs, 2011c). the rst collection period for these variables was july 2010œjune 2011 (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, october 13, 2011). ihs recently added ﬁnewly diagnosed hivﬂ to crs, but the measure has not yet been validated (personal communication, lisa neel, indian health service, october 13, 2011). as with other clinically based ehr systems (e.g., kp, vha), the ihs collects all of the data needed to calculate the core clinical hiv care indicators for services provided within the ihs (appendix tables 32a, 33a), and the hms attempts to include historical data about tests and services provided outside of ihs facilities. similarly, the ihs captures the data pertinent to the additional clinical hiv care indicators (appendix tables 32c, 33c). even if certain data (e.g., date of in˚uenza vaccination) are not currently captured in the hms, they may apply to quality measures for other subpopulations (e.g., individuals ages 50 and older, individuals with diabetes) (ihs, 2011c). in addition, data would be captured at the patient level and could be applied to hivspecic indicators in the future.data for calculating the mental health and substance abuse indicators also are captured by the ihs (appendix tables 32b, 33b, 33d). information pertaining to the need for and provision of supportive services may be recorded in the provider narrative section of the ehr. demographic data collected include age, sex, race, ethnicity, and locality of residence. data on gender identity and sexual orientation are not routinely collected but might be recorded in the provider narrative section of the ehr.ihs captures the data necessary for estimating most of the indicators identied by the committee, which could be used to track improvements in hiv care and access within the population of hivinfected individuals receiving care in ihs facilities. the limited number of ihs facilities providing comprehensive hiv care can affect the size of the hivinfected population monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 161represented in the data system. facilities that transition from federal to tribal management no longer automatically report data to ihs. in addition, some tribal facilities have moved from ihs to privatevendor ehrs, making data sets incompatible.bureau of prisons electronic medical recordwhen both state and federal prisons are considered, 21,987 inmates (1.5 percent of total inmates) were hiv infected or had conrmed aids as of the end of 2008. of those inmates, 1,538 were federal prisoners (maruschak, 2010). the bop, which is responsible for ensuring access to health care services for the almost 217,000 individuals incarcerated in federal correctional institutions throughout the united states (bop, 2011), uses the bureau of prisons electronic medical record (bemr), a pointofcare direct entry webbased system record, to collect health information on inmates housed at 116 federal correctional institutions (bop response to iom request for information, april 14, 2011). the bemr includes a fully integrated pharmacy capability (computerized order entry through prescription administration records, bemrx) as well as a dental module (doj, 2011; price, 2011). the bemr tracks cd4 count and viral load for prisoners with hiv/aids. other information contained in the bemr that may be useful for tracking hiv/aids care received by prisoners includes demographic, prescription drug, substance use, and mental health data. the bop is in the process of enhancing the bemr by programming key hiv data elements for the extraction and analysis of hiv data that currently are available only in individuals™ records (bop response to iom request for information, april 14, 2011).due to the much larger number of hivinfected inmates in state prisons, it would be necessary to track hiv care data from the state inmate population as well in order to gain a more complete picture of hiv care within the u.s. corrections system. gathering and integrating data from the individual state systems poses a signicant challenge, however. a 2007 survey of state electronic health initiatives found that although 22 of 42 states responding had implemented some sort of health information technology use in their state prison systems, only 3 states reported the use of ehrs and/or electronic medical records (smith et al., 2008). kentucky had implemented an ehr system across all of its stateoperated correctional facilities. virginia had planned implementation of an ehr system for its correctional facilities, and washington state was exploring the feasibility of a single, integrated ehr for all of its correctional institutions, including state prisons, city and county jails, and juvenile corrections facilities (smith et al., 2008).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162 monitoring hiv care in the united statesintegrating ehrs across all types of correctional institutions would provide a rich source of data for tracking the provision of hiv care in the incarcerated population. for individuals already diagnosed with hiv, linkage to and maintaining continuity of care and treatment adherence upon release is a signicant challenge. development of methods for capturing data on the provision of transitional services and associated outcomes for hivinfected prisoners upon release would be important in this regard (rich et al., 2011). housing opportunities for persons with aidsthe hopwa program, managed by the u.s. department of housing and urban development™s (hud™s) ofce of hiv/aids housing, provides funds for housing assistance and other supportive services. the additional supportive services most relevant to the indicators identied by the committee include meals and nutritional services, transportation services, mental health services, and alcohol and drug abuse services, as well as approved health, medical, and intensive care services (hopwa, 2011a,b). hopwa programs provide assistance to lowincome households with one or more plwha along with other members of the household. by the end of fy 2010, hopwa had provided resources for housing assistance to 60,669 unduplicated households (hopwa response to iom request for information, april 4, 2011). the population served by hopwa is generally representative of lowincome plwha (hopwa response to iom request for information, april 4, 2011).hopwa grantees report aggregated data on program performance outcome measures related to maintenance of housing stability, improved access to care and support, and reduced risk of homelessness for lowincome persons and their families living with hiv/aids. hopwa competitive program grantees submit an annual progress report (apr) and formula program grantees submit a consolidated annual performance evaluation report (caper) measuring performance outcomes.apr and caper (hopwa, 2011a,b) report information on the number of households with an unmet need for housing assistance,33 as well as the type of subsidy assistance needed. they also report on the number of households served by hopwa and other funding sources that provide housing assistance and support to plwha and their families and the number of households that received other supportive services through hopwa funds (e.g., meals or nutritional services, transportation, mental health 33 these data are for ﬁthe number of hopwaeligible households that require hopwa housing subsidy assistance, but are not served by any hopwafunded housing subsidy assistance in [the] service areaﬂ (hopwa, 2011b, p. 8).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 163services, alcohol and drug abuse services). aggregate data are reported on the number of plwha who qualied their household to receive hopwa housing assistance, their prior living situation, the number of other plwha who reside with the hopwaeligible individuals, and the number of persons not diagnosed with hiv who reside with the eligible individuals. the reports also record the number of hopwaeligible individuals and other beneciaries by race and ethnicity, as well as by sex (male, female) and gender (transgender male to female, female to male) within given age ranges. additional information reported includes number of households that demonstrated ﬁa housing plan for maintaining or establishing stable ongoing [sic] housingﬂ; contact with a case manager or benets counselor as specied in the client™s individual service plan; contact with a primary health care provider as specied in the client™s individual service plan; access to and maintenance of medical insurance or assistance; and sources of income. the reports also include the number of households receiving assistance by percentage of area median income.in addition to the aggregate data reported by hopwa grantees, hud developed the homeless management information system (hmis) to store longitudinal standardized individuallevel data on persons receiving housing assistance and homeless prevention services through continuum of care programs. programlevel data on homeless service usage is reported as well. aggregate hmis data provides information about the size, characteristics, and needs of the homeless population at the local, state, and national levels. although hmis is not an hivspecic data system, one of the clientlevel universal data elements it captures is ﬁdisabling condition,ﬂ which includes aids and aidsrelated conditions.hud requires the collection in hmis of a minimum set of data elements from all individuals receiving homeless assistance and prevention services. these data are required to generate unduplicated estimates of the number and basic demographic characteristics of individuals accessing services and patterns of service use. these ﬁuniversal data elementsﬂ include, among others, name, date of birth, race, ethnicity, gender (male, female; transgender male to female, female to male), presence of a disabling condition, residence prior to program entry, zip code of last permanent address, and housing status (hud, 2010, pp. 4063). additional ﬁprogramspecicﬂ data elements are variously required from specied homeless assistance programs, including those funded through hopwa. the programspecic data elements include the amounts and sources of income, if any, in the preceding 30 days; receipt of noncash benets (e.g., medicare, medicaid, supplemental nutrition assistance program); and information on physical and developmental disability, chronic health conditions, hiv/aids, mental health, substance abuse, domestic violence, and destination upon program exit (hud, 2010, pp. 64ff.). optional programspecic data elements, not monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164 monitoring hiv care in the united statesrequired for apr reporting, include employment status, education, general health status, and pregnancy status (hud, 2010, pp. 93ff.).the data from hopwa™s apr and caper and those captured in hmis provide important information about access to housing and other supportive services for plwha, including an assessment of unmet housing needs for hopwaeligible households (i.e., those with income below 80 percent of the area median income and documented hiv/aids status) (hud, 2011a). the unmet needs assessment is limited, however, to those individuals identied as being hopwaeligible and may not represent the full scope of need for housing assistance among plwha. in terms of access to other supportive services (e.g., nutrition or food, transportation), the data are limited to households receiving hopwafunded services and do not re˚ect need or access to services among other plwha.the collection of longitudinal individuallevel data in hmis permits assessment of patterns of housing service usage and outcomes over time. in addition, a number of the clientlevel data elements captured may allow for linkage or crossmatching to additional information in other pertinent data systems (e.g., msis, ccw, ryan white hiv/aids program).similar data collection effortsseveral additional data collection efforts are under way that will provide useful information for assessing the impact of the nhas and aca on hiv care, including cdc™s enhanced comprehensive hiv prevention planning project, hhs™s 12 cities project, and the nationwide health information network exchange.enhanced comprehensive hiv prevention planning projectlaunched in september 2010 in response to the nhas, the echpp project is a 3year demonstration project funded by the cdc™s division of hiv/aids prevention. the program targets the 12 msas that have the highest aids prevalence, cumulatively accounting for 44 percent of cases in the united states (dhap, 2011).34 following the nhas, the overarching goals of the project are to maximize the impact of hiv prevention strategies in these geographic areas, reduce the incidence of hiv infections, improve the quality of hiv care, and reduce hiv health disparities.the 12 echpp grantees are evenly divided between state or territorial health departments and directly funded local health departments. during 34 the 12 msas are atlanta, georgia; baltimore, maryland; chicago, illinois; dallas, texas; district of columbia; houston, texas; los angeles, california; miami, florida; new york city; philadelphia, pennsylvania; san juan, puerto rico; san francisco, california.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 165the rst year of the project, each grantee was required to conduct a local situational analysis, taking account of available resources, epidemiologic proles, priority areas, and cost and costeffectiveness data for specic interventions and strategies. based on these analyses, the grantees created a set of goals and strategies that would best aid in the accomplishment of nhas goals. these enhanced prevention plans, which have been approved by cdc, include interventions and public health strategies designed to prevent new hiv infections and to promote hiv care and treatment. by the end of 2011, the jurisdictions had begun implementing their plans and had submitted funding applications for the second and third years of the project.although prevention of new infections is the primary emphasis of echpp, seven of its nine required prevention strategies for plwha address treatment concerns such as linkage to care, retention or reengagement in care, provision of art consistent with current guidelines, adherence to antiretroviral medications, sti screening, prevention of perinatal transmission, and linkage to other medical and social services (dhap, 2011). echpp has a comprehensive evaluation plan that incorporates process, outcome, and impact indicators to assess progress in these prevention and treatment areas that will be collected in the 12 msas, as well as supplemental data from a subset of the cities (fisher and hoyte, 2011).12 cities projectcreated by hhs to work in conjunction with cdc™s echpp initiative, the 12 cities project is a demonstration project designed to promote prevention and treatment of hiv in the 12 cities (msas) disproportionately affected by the epidemic through crossagency collaboration and coordination with state and local health departments and other organizations (hhs, 2011b). ultimately the lessons learned through the 12 cities project will help to improve hiv care in other jurisdictions. the project expands upon the foundation laid by echpp, engaging additional federal partners and increasing focus on hiv care and treatment. whereas echpp™s emphasis is on local plans to improve prevention and care in the 12 jurisdictions, the 12 cities project emphasizes better coordination of services and funding of federal efforts to improve hiv prevention and care within the jurisdictions and the development of a common set of measures (indicators), in conjunction with streamlining reporting requirements, to evaluate the efforts with respect to the goals of the nhas.motivated by the need to develop common metrics for tracking program outcomes for the 12 cities project, hhs undertook a broader effort to develop a streamlined set of crossagency, core indicators that can be used to monitor the prevention, treatment, and care services of all federally monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166 monitoring hiv care in the united statesfunded programs providing hiv/aids services. hhs identied the need for indicators in seven domains: hiv+ diagnosis, early hiv diagnosis, initial linkage to care, sustained engagement in care, initiation of art, viral load suppression, and housing (valdiserri and forsyth, 2011; personal communication, andrew forsyth, department of health and human services, january 24, 2012). the committee has recommended indicators in each of these areas. although the jurisdictions included in the 12 cities project represent a large percentage of the u.s. population of plwha, use of a common set of core indicators across all federally funded hiv/aids programs nationwide will generate a more complete picture of hiv care in the united states.nationwide health information network exchangedeveloped under the auspices of the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology, the nationwide health information network (nwhin) exchange is a publicprivate partnership designed to promote the exchange of health information from patient health records (onc, 2011). federal agencies participating in nwhin exchange include cdc, department of veterans affairs, and department of defense. nonfederal entities include kp, various hospitals, health information organizations, and state health information exchanges. health care cost instituteanother type of data sharing partnership is the health care cost institute (hcci), launched in september 2011. the hcci is an independent, nonprot entity whose goal is to create a comprehensive database of health care cost and service utilization data to promote and support research on the drivers of escalating health care costs and utilization. hcci will make available deidentied claims records from four of the largest private health insurers in the united states (aetna, humana, kaiser permanente, unitedhealthcare), as well as medicare advantage data from each of those plans (hcci, 2011). currently the hcci database contains more than 5 billion medical claim records from over 5,000 hospitals and 1 million service providers from 2000 through the present (merrill, 2011). eventually hhci plans to add data from additional private insurers, as well as public payers such as medicaid (merrill, 2011). this type of cooperative arrangement among private insurers and between the private insurance industry and the public serves as another example of the type of data sharing enterprise that would help to expand the pool of data available to estimate the indicators beyond those available from any individual data system.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 167conclusions and recommendations˚currently data are being collected by a number of public and private data systems, some specic to hiv and others not, each of which has limitations. these data systems are collecting relevant information that can serve as a collective platform for evaluating access to continuous and highquality care in all populations of plwha. the committee identied 12 data systems in particular that collect data of use for estimating the core indicators to monitor progress toward meeting the goals of the nhas and aca:˚˚national hiv surveillance system˚˚medical monitoring project˚˚ryan white services report˚˚ryan white aids drug assistance program reports˚˚medicaid statistical information system˚˚chronic condition data warehouse˚˚˚north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design˚˚cfar network of integrated clinical systems˚˚hiv research network˚˚clinical case registry: hiv˚˚kaiser permanente˚˚national vital statistics system two additional data systems provide information of use in tracking the impact of the initiatives on care for two small but important subpopulations of hivinfected individuals (ai/ans; federal prisoners), and a third provides information relevant to housing assistance and other supportive services for plwha:˚˚resource and patient management system˚˚bureau of prisons electronic medical record˚˚housing opportunities for persons with aids˚the committee™s review of federal data systems relevant to hiv care showed they capture a wealth of data that can be used to monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168 monitoring hiv care in the united statesestimate the indicators identied by the committee for monitoring the impact of the nhas and the aca in improving hiv/aids care in the united states. each data system has limitations, however. few contain all of the data elements needed to estimate the indicators, especially those pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services. in addition, most of the data systems are not fully representative of the population of plwha in the united states. in many cases (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program, msis, ccw, vha), the population represented in the data system is dened by program eligibility and cannot be expanded. similarly, the purposes for which the data systems were designed preclude expansion of the data elements they collect to include all of those needed to estimate all of the indicators identied by the committee. furthermore, such expansion would entail signicant increases in cost and reporting burden. the committee concluded, however, that more modest changes in individual data systems could improve the usefulness of their data for tracking changes in hiv care and access to supportive services for people living with hiv. for example, a given data system might add one or more data elements or modify an existing data element to allow the system to provide data for estimating a subgroup of the indicators identied by the committee, such as those pertaining to supportive services (housing, food security, transportation), or to simplify identication of data representing hivinfected individuals (e.g., ˚agging hiv/aids as a chronic condition in the ccw). in cases where the population represented in a data system is not constrained by the program it serves (e.g., mmp), steps might be taken either to make the population more representative of the national population of people living with hiv or to include groups (e.g., homeless) who are less apt to be represented in other data systems. recommendation 31. the department of health and human services, the department of veterans affairs, the department of housing and urban development, and other relevant federal agencies should review and, to the extent practicable, modify the federal data systems identied by the committee to better enable them to be used for monitoring progress toward achieving the goals of the national hiv/aids strategy.˚uniform longitudinal reporting of cd4 and viral load test dates and results from all jurisdictions and data on the initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy would facilitate the use of data from the nhss to assess all of the core monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 169indicators for clinical hiv care identied by the committee. in addition, collection of data on sexual orientation, sources of coverage for medical treatment, and maintaining current geographic area of residence for individuals in the nhss would facilitate use of national surveillance system data for evaluation of indicators for specic subpopulations identied in the nhas. recommendation 32. the centers for disease control and prevention should take steps to enhance the national hiv surveillance system including˚˚˚˚issuing guidelines or criteria for national hiv surveillance system reporting to include all cd4 and viral load test results˚˚˚˚capturing longitudinal data pertaining to the initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy for individuals diagnosed with hiv (e.g., through pharmacybased reporting)˚˚˚˚obtaining information on sexual orientation and sources of coverage for medical treatment (including, but not limited to, medicaid, medicare, ryan white hiv/aids program, other public funding, private insurance or health maintenance organization, no coverage) and obtaining and employing current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census block) for individuals in the national hiv surveillance system˚the committee™s review of data systems relevant to hiv care showed that clinically based ehr systems (e.g., vha, kp, ihs, bop) capture all, or most, of the data elements needed to estimate the clinical hiv care indicators identied by the committee. they also generally capture at least some of the information needed to estimate the indicators pertaining to mental health and substance abuse, but they do not routinely capture data needed to estimate the indicators pertaining to supportive services. another limitation of providerbased systems is that individually they represent only one segment of the population of plwha in the united states (e.g., veterans, kp enrollees, ai/ans, federal prisoners). other data systems represent larger proportions of plwha nationally (e.g., nhss, msis) and may contain information on mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program, msis), but they contain limited or no clinical data. the nwhin exchange is an example of a partnership between public monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170 monitoring hiv care in the united statesand private entities to exchange health information for a variety of purposes. it could serve as a model for or a foundation upon which to build a broader data sharing partnership among public and private data systems both to permit better estimation of the indicators identied by the committee and to return information to private health care systems and providers for the purpose of improving health care for individuals with hiv. building upon existing data sharing partnerships would help to reduce the costs associated with implementation of such partnerships for the exchange of information relevant to the provision of hiv care. recommendation 33. the department of health and human services, the department of veterans affairs, the indian health service, the federal bureau of prisons, and other relevant federal agencies should use existing data from private data systems, including data from electronic health records, to monitor the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy and the patient protection and affordable care act on improving hiv care. federal agencies also should share data pertaining to hiv care with private health care systems and providers to improve the quality of care for individuals with hiv. methods might include the development of a data sharing partnership between public and private data systems that include data pertaining to hiv care.referencesblair, j. m., a. d. mcnaghten, e. l. frazier, j. skarbinski, p. huang, and j. d. heffelnger. 2011. clinical and behavioral characteristics of adults receiving medical care for hiv infectionšmedical monitoring project, united states, 2007. mmwr surveillance summaries 60(11):120.bop (federal bureau of prisons). 2011. weekly population report. http://www.bop.gov/ locations/weeklyreport.jsp (accessed december 22, 2011).bozzette, s. a., s. h. berry, n. duan, m. r. frankel, a. a. leibowitz, d. lefkowitz, c. a. emmons, j. w. sentertt, m. l. berk, s. c. morton, and m. f. shapiro. 1998. the care of hivinfected adults in the united states. hiv cost and services utilization study consortium. new england journal of medicine 339(26):18971904.carr, a. c., a. ghosh, and r. j. ancill. 1983. can a computer take a psychiatric history? psychological medicine 13(1):151158.ccw (chronic condition data warehouse). 2011a. chronic condition data warehouse. http://www.ccwdata.org/index.htm (accessed march 6, 2012).ccw. 2011b. chronic condition data warehouse user guide. version 1.8. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwuserguide.pdf (accessed december 21, 2011).ccw. 2011c. medicaid analytic extract files (max) user guide. version 1.1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwmaxuserguide.pdf (accessed february 2, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 171cdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 2007. cases of hiv infection and aids in the united states and dependent areas, 2005. hiv/aids surveillance report 17, revised edition, june. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2005report/#3 (accessed january 18, 2012).cdc. 2009. medical monitoring project 2009 protocol. atlanta, ga: centers for disease control and prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp 2009protocol.pdf (accessed october 21, 2011).cdc. 2010. summary of changes to the national hiv surveillance report. national center for hiv/aids, hepatitis, std, and tb prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/resources/factsheets/pdf/summarychanges.pdf (accessed october 20, 2011).cdc. 2011a. hiv surveillancešunited states, 19812008. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(21):689693.cdc. 2011b. medical monitoring project (mmp). http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/index.htm (accessed october 21, 2011).cdc. 2011c. u.s. standard certicate of death. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/death1103nalacc.pdf (accessed november 27, 2011).cdc. 2011d. vital signs: hiv prevention through care and treatmentšunited states. morbidity and mortality weekly report 60(47):16181623.cdc. 2012. diagnoses of hiv infection and aids in the united states and dependent areas, 2010. hiv surveillance report. volume 22. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2010report/index.htm (accessed march 21, 2012).chartier, k., and r. caetano. 2010. ethnicity and health disparities in alcohol research. alcohol research & health 33(12):152160.chcs (center for health care strategies, inc.). 2010. integrating medicare and medicaid data to support improved care for dual eligibles. http://www.chcs.org/usrdoc/ integratingmedicareandmedicaiddataforduals.pdf (accessed january 24, 2012).cms (centers for medicare and medicaid services). 2010. medicaid and chip statistical information system (msis): file specications and data dictionary. release 3.1. https://www.cms.gov/msis/downloads/msisdd2010.pdf (accessed december 21, 2011).cms. 2011a. medicaid analytic extract (max) general information. https://www.cms.gov/medicaiddatasourcesgeninfo/07maxgeneralinformation.asp (accessed october 26, 2011).cms. 2011b. medicaid statistical information system (msis) state summary datamart. http://msis.cms.hhs.gov/ (accessed december 21, 2011).cms. 2011c. overview: medicaid statistical information system (msis). https://www.cms.gov/msis/ (accessed january 24, 2012).cms. 2011d. what are the types of records that are contained in each of the medicaid analytic extract (max) files? how do the records in these files differ from the records in the medicaid statistical information system (msis) files? https://questions.cms.hhs.gov/app/answers/detail/aid/9230/kw/medicaid%20analytic%20extract (accessed december 22, 2011).cnics (cfar network of integrated clinical systems). 2011. cnics. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/ (accessed december 21, 2011).crystal, s., a. akincigil, s. bilder, and j. t. walkup. 2007. studying prescription drug use and outcomes with medicaid claims data: strengths, limitations, and strategies. medical care 45(10 suppl 2):s5865.cullen, t. 2006. hiv management system: software application. indian health service, ofce of information technology. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/document/954931/2006cullen051111comppdf (accessed december 22, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdhap (division of hiv/aids prevention). 2011. enhanced comprehensive hiv prevention planning (echpp) project. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/nhas/echpp/pdf/echppfactsheet.pdf (accessed december 27, 2011).doj (department of justice). 2011. federal prison system. fy 2012 performance budget. http://www.justice.gov/jmd/2012justication/pdf/fy12bopsejustication.pdf (accessed december 22, 2011).fisher, h. h., and t. hoyte. 2011. using hiv surveillance data to inform the echpp evaluation. powerpoint presentation at the 2011 national hiv prevention conference, august 1417, atlanta, ga. http://www.slideshare.net/cdcnpin/usinghivsurveillancedatatoinformtheechppevaluation (accessed december 22, 2011).gange, s. j., m. m. kitahata, m. s. saag, d. r. bangsberg, r. j. bosch, j. t. brooks, l. calzavara, s. g. deeks, j. j. eron, k. a. gebo, m. j. gill, d. w. haas, r. s. hogg, m. a. horberg, l. p. jacobson, a. c. justice, g. d. kirk, m. b. klein, j. n. martin, r. g. mckaig, b. rodriguez, s. b. rourke, t. r. sterling, a. m. freeman, and r. d. moorey. 2007. cohort prole: the north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design (naaccord). international journal of epidemiology 36:294301.gao (u.s. government accountability ofce). 2007. indian health service: hiv/aids prevention and treatment services for american indians and alaskan natives: report to congressional requesters. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0890.pdf (accessed december 22, 2011).greist, j. h., t. p. laughren, d. h. gustafson, f. f. stauss, g. l. rowse, and j. a. chiles. 1973. a computer interview for suiciderisk prediction. american journal of psychiatry 130(12):13271332.hall, h. i., k. mcdavid, q. ling, and a. sloggett. 2005. survival after diagnosis of aids, united states. annals of epidemiology 15(8):652.hall, h. i., r. song, j. e. gerstle 3rd, and l. m. lee, hiv/aids reporting system evaluation group. 2006. assessing the completeness of reporting of human immunodeciency virus diagnoses in 20022003: capturerecapture methods. american journal of epidemiology 164(4):391397.hcci (health care cost institute). 2011. about hcci. http://healthcostinstitute.org/about (accessed november 27, 2011).hhs (u.s. department of health and human services). 2011a. statement by mary k. wakeeld, administrator, health resources and services administration, before the committee on energy, the subcommittee on health, united states house of representatives: health resources and services administration on ryan white aids reauthorization bill. http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2009/09/t20090909a.html (accessed august 9, 2011).hhs. 2011b. 12 cities project. http://blog.aids.gov/downloads/nhashhs12.pdf (accessed january 24, 2012).hivrn (hiv research network). 2011. hivrn: contacts. https://cds.johnshopkins.edu/hivrn/index.cfm?do=sens.content&page=contacts.html (accessed december 21, 2011).hopwa (housing opportunities for persons with aids). 2011a. annual progress report (apr): measuring performance outcomes. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/ aprhopwa.docx (accessed december 1, 2011).hopwa. 2011b. consolidated annual performance evaluation report (caper): measuring performance outcomes. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwacaper10312014.doc (accessed december 8, 2011).hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2010. going the distance: the ryan white hiv/aids program. http://hab.hrsa.gov/data/les/2010progressrpt.pdf (accessed december 14, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 173hrsa. 2011. 2010 annual ryan white hiv/aids program services report (rsr) instruction. u.s. department of health and human services. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyour grant/les/rsrinstructionmanual2010.pdf (accessed august 9, 2011).hud (u.s. department of housing and urban development). 2010. homeless management information system (hmis) data standards, revised notice. ofce of community planning and development, march. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdata standardsmarch2010.pdf (accessed december 9, 2011).hud. 2011a. administering hopwa housing assistance: determining beneciary eligibility. ofce of hiv/aids housing. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=doc12082.pdf (accessed december 9, 2011).hud. 2011b. hiv/aids housing. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/hud?src=/program ofces/commplanning/aidshousing (accessed october 26, 2011).ihs (indian health service). 2008. diabetes in american indians and alaska natives. fact sheet. department of health and human services. http://www.ihs.gov/medicalprograms/diabetes/index.cfm?module=resourcesfactsheetsaians08 (accessed august 25, 2011).ihs. 2011a. icare. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/ca/icare/ (accessed december 22, 2011).ihs. 2011b. ihs clinical reporting system (bgp): national gpra developmental report performance measure list and denitions. version 12.0, december. albuquerque, nm: ofce of information technology, division of information resource management. https://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv12/gpra%20dev%20measures%20v12.pdf (accessed january 25, 2012).ihs. 2011c. ihs clinical reporting system (bgp): select measures (local) report performance measure list and denitions. version 12.0, december. albuquerque, nm: ofce of information technology, division of information resource management. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv12/selectedmeasuresv12.pdf (accessed january 25, 2012).ihs. 2011d. the ihs hiv/aids program: frequently asked questions. http://www.ihs.gov/medicalprograms/hivaids/index.cfm?module=faq (accessed december 22, 2011).ihs. 2012. ihs fact sheets: ihs year 2012 prole. http://www.ihs.gov/publicaffairs/ihs brochure/prole.asp (accessed february 29, 2012).iom (institute of medicine). 2004. measuring what matters: allocation, planning and quality assessment for the ryan white care act. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011. hiv screening and access to care: health care system capacity for increased hiv testing and provision of care. washington, dc: the national academies press.kates, j. 2011. medicaid and hiv: a national analysis. washington, dc: henry j. kaiser family foundation. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed january 11, 2012).kff (kaiser family foundation). 2009a. medicare and hiv. hiv/aids policy fact sheet. february. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/717104.pdf (accessed december 19, 2011).kff. 2009b. the ryan white program. hiv/aids policy fact sheet. february. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/758205.pdf (accessed december 19, 2011).kff. 2011a. medicaid and chipškaiser state health facts. http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparecat.jsp?cat=4 (accessed december 14, 2011).kff. 2011b. u.s. federal funding for hiv/aids: the president™s fy 2012 budget request. hiv/aids policy fact sheet. october. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/702907.pdf (accessed december 21, 2011).kitahata, m. 2011. iom review of data systems monitoring hiv care in the u.s.: cnics and naaccord. powerpoint presentation before the committee, washington, dc, april 28.kobak, k. a., j. h. greist, j. w. jefferson, and d. j. katzelnick. 1996. computeradministered clinical rating scales: a review. psychopharmacology 127(4):291301.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174 monitoring hiv care in the united stateskochanek, k. d., j. xu, s. l. murphy, a. m. miniño, and h. kung. 2011. deaths: preliminary data for 2009. national vital statistics reports 59(4):151.koroukian, s. m., g. s. cooper, and a. a. rimm. 2003. ability of medicaid claims data to identify incident cases of breast cancer in the ohio medicaid population. health services research 38(3):947960.kp (kaiser permanente). 2009. va and kaiser permanente invite veterans to participate in health record pilot program. press release, november 25. http://xnet.kp.org/newscenter/pressreleases/nat/2009/112509vapilot.html (accessed december 21, 2011).kp. 2011. our plans. https://www.kpchoicesolution.com/healthplans.aspx (accessed december 21, 2011).lawrence, s. t., j. h. willig, h. m. crane, j. ye, i. aban, w. lober, c. r. nevin, d. s. batey, m. j. mugavero, c. mccullumsmith, c. wright, m. kitahata, j. l. raper, m. s. saag, and j. e. schumacher. 2010. routine, selfadministered, touchscreen, computerbased suicidal ideation assessment linked to automated response team notication in an hiv primary care setting. clinical infectious diseases 50(8):11651173.lucas, r. w., p. j. mullin, c. b. luna, and d. c. mcinroy. 1977. psychiatrists and a computer as interrogators of patients with alcoholrelated illnesses: a comparison. british journal of psychiatry 131(2):160167.martin, e. g., and c. l. barry. 2011. the adoption of mental health drugs on state aids drug assistance program formularies. american journal of public health 101(6):11031109.martin, e. g., and p. s. keenan. 2011. sticky dollars: inertia in the evolution of federal allocations for hiv care through the ryan white program. publius: the journal of federalism 41(1):101125.maruschak, l. m. 2010. hiv in prisons, 20072008. u.s. department of justice. http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/hivp08.pdf (accessed december 6, 2011).massachusetts department of public health. 2012. letter to clinical laboratories. (february 28).mccoy, s. i., b. jones, p. a. leone, s. napravnik, e. b. quinlivan, j. j. eron, and w. c. miller. 2010. variability of the date of hiv diagnosis: a comparison of selfreport, medical record, and hiv/aids surveillance data. annals of epidemiology 20(10):734742.merrill, m. 2011. healthcare cost institute to provide data from four private sector insurers. health it news. http://healthcareitnews.com/news/healthcarecostinstituteprovidedatafourprivatesectorinsurers (accessed november 27, 2011).metzger, d. s., b. koblin, c. turner, h. navaline, f. valenti, s. holte, m. gross, a. sheon, h. miller, p. cooley, and g. r. seage iii, for the hivnet vaccine preparedness study protocol team. 2000. randomized controlled trial of audio computerassisted selfinterviewing: utility and acceptability in longitudinal studies. american journal of epidemiology 152(2): 99106.naaccord (north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design). 2011. north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design: cohorts. http://statepiaps.jhsph.edu/naaccord/cohorts/index.html (accessed december 21, 2011).nastad (national alliance of state and territorial aids directors). 2011. national adap monitoring project annual report. http://www.nastad.org/docs/0200352011%20nastad%20national%20adap%20monitoring%20project%20annual%20report.pdf (accessed december 6, 2011).nvss (national vital statistics system). 2011a. national vital statistics system. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss.htm (accessed december 21, 2011).nvss. 2011b. national vital statistics system: mortality data. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/deaths.htm (accessed december 21, 2011).nvss. 2011c. writing causeofdeath statements. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/writingcodstatements.htm (accessed november 27, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 175nwhin (nationwide health information network) exchange. 2011. nationwide health information network exchange. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt?open= 512&objid=1407&parentname=communitypage&parentid=8&mode=2&inhiuserid=11113&cached=true (accessed december 21, 2011).omb (ofce of management and budget). 1977. statistical policy directive no. 15, race and ethnic standards for federal statistics and administrative reporting. http://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/help/populations/bridgedrace/directive15.html (accessed august 11, 2011).omb. 1997a. recommendations from the interagency committee for the review of the racial and ethnic standards to the ofce of management and budget concerning changes to the standards for the classication of federal data on race and ethnicity. federal register (311001):3687336946.omb. 1997b. revisions to the standards for the classication of federal data on race and ethnicity. federal register 62:5878158790.onap (ofce of national aids policy). 2010. national hiv/aids strategy for the united states. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/les/uploads/nhas.pdf (accessed july 14, 2011).onc (ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology). 2011. nationwide health information network exchange. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/community/healthithhsgovnhinexchange/1407 (accessed november 27, 2011).overhage, j. m., s. grannis, and c. j. mcdonald. 2008. a comparison of the completeness and timeliness of automated electronic laboratory reporting and spontaneous reporting of notiable conditions. american journal of public health 98(2):344350.petrie, k., and w. abell. 1994. responses of parasuicides to a computerized interview. computers in human behavior 10(4):415418.price, l. g. 2011. the federal bureau of prisons electronic medical record (bemr): from sojourn to odyssey. powerpoint presentation at the 2011 usphs scientic and training symposium/ new orleans, louisiana. http://www.phscofevents.org/agenda/agglance detail.cfm?sgid=58 (accessed december 22, 2011).rawlings, m. k., and d. p. hopson. 2009. the impact of hiv policies and politics on communities of color. in hiv/aids in u.s. communities of color, edited by v. stone, b. ojikutu, m. k. rawlings, and k. y. smith. dordrecht: springer. pp. 261282.resdac (research data assistance center). 2011a. availability of research identiable data, limited data sets, and non identiable files. http://www.resdac.org/tools/tbs/tn015cms%20data%20availability508%20.pdf (accessed december 22, 2011).resdac. 2011b. medicaid faqs draft. http://www.resdac.org/medicaid/faqsdraft08172006.doc (accessed october 31, 2011).rich, j. d., d. a. wohl, c. g. beckwith, a. c. spaulding, n. e. lepp, j. baillargeon, s. gardner, a. avery, f. l. altice, and s. springer, centers for aids researchšcollaboration on hiv in corrections (cfarchic) working group. 2011. hivrelated research in correctional populations: now is the time. current hiv/aids reports 8(4):288296.skinner, h. a., and b. a. allen. 1983. does the computer make a difference? computerized versus facetoface versus selfreport assessment of alcohol, drug, and tobacco use. journal of consulting and clinical psychology 51(2):267275.smith, v. k., k. gifford, s. kramer, j. dalton, p. mactaggart, and m. lim warner. 2008. state ehealth activities in 2007: findings from a state survey. http://www.commonwealth fund.org/usrdoc/1104smithstateehltactivities2007ndingsst.pdf (accessed august 31, 2011).va (department of veterans affairs). 2011. center for quality management in public health: hiv infected veterans in vha care by stateš2010. http://www.publichealth.va.gov/quality/reports/hivincarebystate2010.asp (accessed december 21, 2011).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176 monitoring hiv care in the united statesvaldiserri, r., and a. forsyth. 2011. dhhs/ohap consultation on hiv/aids core indicators, data streamlining, and federal reporting requirements. washington, dc, september 19.waruru, a. k., r. nduti, and t. tylleskär. 2005. audio computerassisted selfinterviewing (acasi) may avert socially desirable responses about infant feeding in the context of hiv. bmc medical informatics and decision making 5(august):24 (7 pages).willig, j. 2011. data at the hivresearch and informatics service center (risc). powerpoint presentation before the committee, san francisco, ca, july 8.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 177appendix table 31 follows on next pagemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 31 summary of data systems for monitoring  hiv care identied by the committee designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsnational hiv surveillance system (centers for disease control and prevention)public health surveillance, statemediated mandatory reporting by all jurisdictionslongitudinal from time of diagnosisall persons diagnosed with hiv/aidsclinician reports of diagnosislab reports of cd4 counts and viral loadstate health department reporting808,090 (803,771)a š2009 data for 46 states and 5 u.s. dependent areas with condential namebased reportingwide coverage of diagnosed plwhaincludes plwha out of carepopulationbased censusincludes individuals not in carenot limited to one type of payerdenitions of variables and reporting methods standardizedtrend data routinely availablemany highest priority indicators can be calculatedcan be used to monitor disparities re: gender, race/ethnicity, regionpossible to link with other data systems maintained at local level (e.g., ryan white services report; homeless management information system)clinical data elements limited to cd4 and viral load tests, with optional elds for art and pregnancy statusnot all jurisdictions report lab results longitudinallyinability to track individuals across reporting areasinaccurate/ incomplete reportingnot yet complete for jurisdictions without mature namebased reportingaddition of payer informationaddition of employment status, income, sexual orientationaddition of art status (whether receiving)work with states to extend reporting of all cd4 and viral load lab results to all jurisdictionsnumber may increase and become more comprehensive as more individuals with hiv/aids are identied with increased access to health care coverage aestimated number following statistical adjustment for reporting delays and missing riskfactor information, but not for incomplete reporting (http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2010report/pdf/2010hivsurveillancereportvol22.pdf#page=52, accessed march 21, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 179appendix table 31 summary of data systems for monitoring  hiv care identied by the committee designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsnational hiv surveillance system (centers for disease control and prevention)public health surveillance, statemediated mandatory reporting by all jurisdictionslongitudinal from time of diagnosisall persons diagnosed with hiv/aidsclinician reports of diagnosislab reports of cd4 counts and viral loadstate health department reporting808,090 (803,771)a š2009 data for 46 states and 5 u.s. dependent areas with condential namebased reportingwide coverage of diagnosed plwhaincludes plwha out of carepopulationbased censusincludes individuals not in carenot limited to one type of payerdenitions of variables and reporting methods standardizedtrend data routinely availablemany highest priority indicators can be calculatedcan be used to monitor disparities re: gender, race/ethnicity, regionpossible to link with other data systems maintained at local level (e.g., ryan white services report; homeless management information system)clinical data elements limited to cd4 and viral load tests, with optional elds for art and pregnancy statusnot all jurisdictions report lab results longitudinallyinability to track individuals across reporting areasinaccurate/ incomplete reportingnot yet complete for jurisdictions without mature namebased reportingaddition of payer informationaddition of employment status, income, sexual orientationaddition of art status (whether receiving)work with states to extend reporting of all cd4 and viral load lab results to all jurisdictionsnumber may increase and become more comprehensive as more individuals with hiv/aids are identied with increased access to health care coveragecontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsmedical monitoring project (centers for disease control and prevention)multistage probability proportional to size sampling designrepeated crosssectional probability sampleadults (˛18 years) diagnosed with hiv/aids and receiving outpatient careselfreported behavioral and selected clinical datamedical record abstraction3,643 hivinfected adults (2007 cycle)4,217 hivinfected adults (2009 cycle)brepeated crosssectional probability samples of adult plwha receiving outpatient medical care in united states and puerto ricomost indicators can be calculatedincludes data on supportive services2009 data cycle weighted to estimate nationally representative percentages of adult plwha in carenot limited to patients receiving care through a specic payerlow individual participation rate in 2007 cycle2007 data unweightedpossibility of social desirability response bias for inperson interviewssome clinical information (e.g., date of hiv diagnosis and date of rst entry into care) is selfreportedstratication by certain characteristics produced numbers too small for reliable interpretationonly includes individuals who are in caretake steps to improve participation rates and make sample more nationally representative particularly among hard to reach populations such as homelesscreate a mechanism to allow supplemental questions to be added as needed to capture salient data (e.g., with specic aca implementation issues and how they might affect patients)sample may be expected to re˚ect greater number of plwha not previously in care, as number of persons in care increasesappendix table 31 continued bthe 2009 collection cycle data were weighted to estimate nationally representative percentages of hivinfected adults receiving medical care in the united states.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 181designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsmedical monitoring project (centers for disease control and prevention)multistage probability proportional to size sampling designrepeated crosssectional probability sampleadults (˛18 years) diagnosed with hiv/aids and receiving outpatient careselfreported behavioral and selected clinical datamedical record abstraction3,643 hivinfected adults (2007 cycle)4,217 hivinfected adults (2009 cycle)brepeated crosssectional probability samples of adult plwha receiving outpatient medical care in united states and puerto ricomost indicators can be calculatedincludes data on supportive services2009 data cycle weighted to estimate nationally representative percentages of adult plwha in carenot limited to patients receiving care through a specic payerlow individual participation rate in 2007 cycle2007 data unweightedpossibility of social desirability response bias for inperson interviewssome clinical information (e.g., date of hiv diagnosis and date of rst entry into care) is selfreportedstratication by certain characteristics produced numbers too small for reliable interpretationonly includes individuals who are in caretake steps to improve participation rates and make sample more nationally representative particularly among hard to reach populations such as homelesscreate a mechanism to allow supplemental questions to be added as needed to capture salient data (e.g., with specic aca implementation issues and how they might affect patients)sample may be expected to re˚ect greater number of plwha not previously in care, as number of persons in care increasescontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsryan white services report (health resources and services administration)hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for ryan white hiv/aids program grantees and contracted service providershivinfected individuals receiving at least one ryan white serviceryan white grantees and contracted service providersgrantee report: summary of rw providers in the jurisdiction and services they offerservice provider report: basic information about the organization; lists service provider contracts for reporting periodclient report: clientlevel demographic information; hiv clinical information; hiv medical, health care, and support services received>500,000 hivinfected individuals representative of clients receiving ryan white funded servicesnot representative of national population of plwha in the united statesmost indicators (or a proxy) can be calculatedincludes data on supportive services, such as need for and use of housing, food, transportation services for people served by ryan white hiv/aids programgrantee data can be used to monitor changes at service system levelgrantees/providers are not required to report client service data for services not paid for by the ryan white hiv/aids program (may result in clientlevel data gaps) [full clinical data are reported regardless of funding source]difcult to compare data across jurisdictions due to interstate variation in programsreport all client service data regardless of funding sourceanticipated shift in clientele and servicesreduced dependency on program to meet health service needsredirection of funds to other vital services (e.g., housing, case management)appendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 183designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsryan white services report (health resources and services administration)hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for ryan white hiv/aids program grantees and contracted service providershivinfected individuals receiving at least one ryan white serviceryan white grantees and contracted service providersgrantee report: summary of rw providers in the jurisdiction and services they offerservice provider report: basic information about the organization; lists service provider contracts for reporting periodclient report: clientlevel demographic information; hiv clinical information; hiv medical, health care, and support services received>500,000 hivinfected individuals representative of clients receiving ryan white funded servicesnot representative of national population of plwha in the united statesmost indicators (or a proxy) can be calculatedincludes data on supportive services, such as need for and use of housing, food, transportation services for people served by ryan white hiv/aids programgrantee data can be used to monitor changes at service system levelgrantees/providers are not required to report client service data for services not paid for by the ryan white hiv/aids program (may result in clientlevel data gaps) [full clinical data are reported regardless of funding source]difcult to compare data across jurisdictions due to interstate variation in programsreport all client service data regardless of funding sourceanticipated shift in clientele and servicesreduced dependency on program to meet health service needsredirection of funds to other vital services (e.g., housing, case management)continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsryan white aids drug assistance program (adap) reports  (health resources and services administration)adap quarterly report hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for adap grantees and contracted entitiesaggregate data on adap clients enrolled/ servedadap grantees and contracted entities such as pharmacy benets management organizations adap quarterly data report (aggregate data)213,764 adap clients enrolled (fy2009)190,963 adap clients served (fy2009)adap clients are hivpositive, low income, and uninsured or underinsureddata are aggregatecontains only limited data, mostly demographicscheduled to be replaced by adap data report beginning with april 1œseptember 30, 2012, collection periodadap data report (note: first data collection period is april 1œseptember 30, 2012)proposed hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for adap grantees and contracted entitiesclientlevel data on adap clients enrolled/ served (proposed)adap grantees and contracted entities such as pharmacy benets management organizations adap data report (proposed) (clientlevel data)demographic variables may be selfreportedclinical data must be from lab report, clinical documentation, or hiv surveillance program213,764 adap clients enrolled (fy2009)190,963 adap clients served (fy2009)adap clients are hivinfected, low income, and uninsured or underinsuredclientlevel dataprovides information only on medications that are fully funded by adapcapture dispensing information for all adap formulary drugs regardless of funding sourceappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 185designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsryan white aids drug assistance program (adap) reports  (health resources and services administration)adap quarterly report hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for adap grantees and contracted entitiesaggregate data on adap clients enrolled/ servedadap grantees and contracted entities such as pharmacy benets management organizations adap quarterly data report (aggregate data)213,764 adap clients enrolled (fy2009)190,963 adap clients served (fy2009)adap clients are hivpositive, low income, and uninsured or underinsureddata are aggregatecontains only limited data, mostly demographicscheduled to be replaced by adap data report beginning with april 1œseptember 30, 2012, collection periodadap data report (note: first data collection period is april 1œseptember 30, 2012)proposed hrsa/hab mandatory reporting for adap grantees and contracted entitiesclientlevel data on adap clients enrolled/ served (proposed)adap grantees and contracted entities such as pharmacy benets management organizations adap data report (proposed) (clientlevel data)demographic variables may be selfreportedclinical data must be from lab report, clinical documentation, or hiv surveillance program213,764 adap clients enrolled (fy2009)190,963 adap clients served (fy2009)adap clients are hivinfected, low income, and uninsured or underinsuredclientlevel dataprovides information only on medications that are fully funded by adapcapture dispensing information for all adap formulary drugs regardless of funding sourcecontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsmedicaid statistical information system (centers for medicare & medicaid services)health care claims and eligibilityhivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in medicaidclaims and eligibility data reported by stateseligible leinpatient claimslongterm care claimsother claimsprescription drug claims claim types:feefor servicecapitated paymentsencounter claimsservicetracking claims (some states)212,892 hivinfected individuals (fy2007)representative of plwha enrolled in medicaid (estimated 47 percent of plwha in care)enrollees most likely to be black males over the age of 1974 percent qualify for medicaid as disabled (therefore not currently representative of nondisabled population of plwha)represents largest single source of care coverage for plwha: medicaid enrollees account for 47 percent of plwha estimated to be in regular careutilization data only: no clinical outcome data no data on housing, food, transportation serviceschallenging to identify hivpositive medicaid recipientsincomplete data on services for beneciaries in managed carediagnostic and service information dependent on codes entered on claims potentially resulting in incomplete datavariations in medicaid eligibility resulting in enrollment lapsesanticipated increase in enrollment with increased eligibility provisions in aca: magnitude likely to vary greatly across statesappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 187designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsmedicaid statistical information system (centers for medicare & medicaid services)health care claims and eligibilityhivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in medicaidclaims and eligibility data reported by stateseligible leinpatient claimslongterm care claimsother claimsprescription drug claims claim types:feefor servicecapitated paymentsencounter claimsservicetracking claims (some states)212,892 hivinfected individuals (fy2007)representative of plwha enrolled in medicaid (estimated 47 percent of plwha in care)enrollees most likely to be black males over the age of 1974 percent qualify for medicaid as disabled (therefore not currently representative of nondisabled population of plwha)represents largest single source of care coverage for plwha: medicaid enrollees account for 47 percent of plwha estimated to be in regular careutilization data only: no clinical outcome data no data on housing, food, transportation serviceschallenging to identify hivpositive medicaid recipientsincomplete data on services for beneciaries in managed carediagnostic and service information dependent on codes entered on claims potentially resulting in incomplete datavariations in medicaid eligibility resulting in enrollment lapsesanticipated increase in enrollment with increased eligibility provisions in aca: magnitude likely to vary greatly across statescontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationschronic condition data warehouse (centers for medicare & medicaid services)health care claimshivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in medicareclaims data submitted by health care providersapproximately 100,000 hivinfected individualsapproximately 20 percent of plwha estimated to be receiving care in the united statesplwha who are disabled or age 65 or older29 percent of hivinfected medicaid enrollees are dually eligible for medicarerepresents approximately 20 percent of plwha in carenumber expected to increase with aging population of plwhaprimarily feeforservice utilization datalimited data on services for beneciaries in managed carelimited/no clinical outcome data or data on supportive servicesmay provide better information on drug coverage than other systems (with part d enrollees) designate hiv/aids as one of the predened chronic condition cohortspotentially more claims for medicare part deventual elimination of part d ﬁdonut holeﬂappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 189designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationschronic condition data warehouse (centers for medicare & medicaid services)health care claimshivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in medicareclaims data submitted by health care providersapproximately 100,000 hivinfected individualsapproximately 20 percent of plwha estimated to be receiving care in the united statesplwha who are disabled or age 65 or older29 percent of hivinfected medicaid enrollees are dually eligible for medicarerepresents approximately 20 percent of plwha in carenumber expected to increase with aging population of plwhaprimarily feeforservice utilization datalimited data on services for beneciaries in managed carelimited/no clinical outcome data or data on supportive servicesmay provide better information on drug coverage than other systems (with part d enrollees) designate hiv/aids as one of the predened chronic condition cohortspotentially more claims for medicare part deventual elimination of part d ﬁdonut holeﬂcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designclinical cohorts collect data in the course of routine medical practice at each of the contributing clinical sitesclassical epidemiologic hiv interval cohorts collect data at visits scheduled every 6 monthshivinfected adults at 60+ clinical and academic research sites in the united states and canadaelectronic data provided by contributing clinical and interval cohortsclinical cohorts collect data from electronic health records, interview questionnaires, chart review, and other data collection systemsinterval cohorts collect data from structured interview, questionnaires, and other data collection systemsapproximately 100,000 hivinfected individualsdemographics (including age, sex, and transmission risk group) are similar to those reported by the cdc for the united states, but with somewhat fewer minorities; includes individuals from all but three u.s. states, but not all areas of each state representedrepresents about 20 percent of plwha in carenew data elements can be added if they are collected by individual cohortsdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research/policy useno common protocol for timing and standardization of data elements across siteslimited data on supportive servicesplwha receiving care primarily in academic medical centers may show little change in already high standard of care in response to aca or nhas implementation no change anticipatedappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 191designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designclinical cohorts collect data in the course of routine medical practice at each of the contributing clinical sitesclassical epidemiologic hiv interval cohorts collect data at visits scheduled every 6 monthshivinfected adults at 60+ clinical and academic research sites in the united states and canadaelectronic data provided by contributing clinical and interval cohortsclinical cohorts collect data from electronic health records, interview questionnaires, chart review, and other data collection systemsinterval cohorts collect data from structured interview, questionnaires, and other data collection systemsapproximately 100,000 hivinfected individualsdemographics (including age, sex, and transmission risk group) are similar to those reported by the cdc for the united states, but with somewhat fewer minorities; includes individuals from all but three u.s. states, but not all areas of each state representedrepresents about 20 percent of plwha in carenew data elements can be added if they are collected by individual cohortsdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research/policy useno common protocol for timing and standardization of data elements across siteslimited data on supportive servicesplwha receiving care primarily in academic medical centers may show little change in already high standard of care in response to aca or nhas implementation no change anticipatedcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationscfar network of integrated clinical systemsclinical cohortslongitudinal record while in care in a selected center for aids research (cfar)individuals receiving hiv care at 8 selected cfar sites across the united statescelectronic health recordselectronic patientreported outcomes using standardized questionnairechart review and other data collection systems23,197 hivinfected adultsrepresentative of plwha in the geographic regions of the selected cfar sitesmuch of the data needed to calculate indicators, except for supportive servicesnew data elements, such as housing stability, can be added if they are collected in the clinical practice settingpatient reported outcome questionnaire could be used to ask about basic needs, stigma, discriminationdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research/policy usepopulation not nationally representative of plwha in the united statesno change anticipatedhiv research networkclinical cohortslongitudinal record while in care at a participating siteadults, children, and adolescents in care at hospital and communitybased outpatient clinics throughout the united statesdata supplied electronically and through medical record reviewapproximately 21,000 hivinfected patients in caredemographics (including age, sex, race/ethnicity, and transmission risk group) are similar to those reported by the cdcmuch of the data needed to calculate indicators, except for supportive servicesnew data elements, such as housing stability, can be added if they are collected in the clinical practice settingdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research useappendix table 31 continued cuniversity of alabama at birmingham (uab); university of california at san francisco (ucsf); university of washington (uw); case western reserve university (cwru),  cleveland, oh; lifespan/tufts/brown university cfar (fenway), boston, ma/providence ri; the university of california, san diego (ucsd); the university of north carolina at chapel hill (unc), and johns hopkins university (jhu), baltimore, md.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 193designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationscfar network of integrated clinical systemsclinical cohortslongitudinal record while in care in a selected center for aids research (cfar)individuals receiving hiv care at 8 selected cfar sites across the united statescelectronic health recordselectronic patientreported outcomes using standardized questionnairechart review and other data collection systems23,197 hivinfected adultsrepresentative of plwha in the geographic regions of the selected cfar sitesmuch of the data needed to calculate indicators, except for supportive servicesnew data elements, such as housing stability, can be added if they are collected in the clinical practice settingpatient reported outcome questionnaire could be used to ask about basic needs, stigma, discriminationdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research/policy usepopulation not nationally representative of plwha in the united statesno change anticipatedhiv research networkclinical cohortslongitudinal record while in care at a participating siteadults, children, and adolescents in care at hospital and communitybased outpatient clinics throughout the united statesdata supplied electronically and through medical record reviewapproximately 21,000 hivinfected patients in caredemographics (including age, sex, race/ethnicity, and transmission risk group) are similar to those reported by the cdcmuch of the data needed to calculate indicators, except for supportive servicesnew data elements, such as housing stability, can be added if they are collected in the clinical practice settingdata are private/ proprietary, but may be available upon submission of proposal for research usecontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsclinical case registry: hiv (department of veterans affairs)longitudinal record while in care in systemhivdiagnosed veterans receiving care in veterans health administration (vha) facilitieselectronic health records23,463 hivinfected individuals (2008)population is predominantly male and older compared to all plwha in the united statesoutcome and utilization datalargest provider of hiv care in the united statespopulation not nationally representative of plwha in the united statesonly captures data within vha systemno data on supportive services or mental health/ substance abuse screeningno change anticipatedappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 195designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsclinical case registry: hiv (department of veterans affairs)longitudinal record while in care in systemhivdiagnosed veterans receiving care in veterans health administration (vha) facilitieselectronic health records23,463 hivinfected individuals (2008)population is predominantly male and older compared to all plwha in the united statesoutcome and utilization datalargest provider of hiv care in the united statespopulation not nationally representative of plwha in the united statesonly captures data within vha systemno data on supportive services or mental health/ substance abuse screeningno change anticipatedcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationskaiser permanentelongitudinal record while in care in systemhivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in kaiserelectronic health records>19,000 hivinfected individuals (2009); regional variation +/200 to >6,600 hiv registry of 17,000+ (2010)largest private provider of hiv care (2010)representative of the insured hivpositive population in the u.s. areas with kaiser access (hawaii, california, oregon, midatlantic region, atlanta, ga)majority caucasian msmgreater percentage of latinos on west coast and greater percentage of blacks on east coast12% female, but greater percentage on east coastoutcome and utilization datarepresents one of the largest groups of privately insured plwha in the united statesdata are private/ proprietaryonly captures data within kaiser systemno data on supportive servicesyounger and marginally employed individuals may not remain in system due to insurance statuspossible increase in enrollees as more people with low/ moderate incomes (133œ400% of federal poverty level) gain access to private insurancepossible increase in private insurance enrollees with elimination of preexisting condition clausesappendix table 31 continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 197designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationskaiser permanentelongitudinal record while in care in systemhivdiagnosed individuals enrolled in kaiserelectronic health records>19,000 hivinfected individuals (2009); regional variation +/200 to >6,600 hiv registry of 17,000+ (2010)largest private provider of hiv care (2010)representative of the insured hivpositive population in the u.s. areas with kaiser access (hawaii, california, oregon, midatlantic region, atlanta, ga)majority caucasian msmgreater percentage of latinos on west coast and greater percentage of blacks on east coast12% female, but greater percentage on east coastoutcome and utilization datarepresents one of the largest groups of privately insured plwha in the united statesdata are private/ proprietaryonly captures data within kaiser systemno data on supportive servicesyounger and marginally employed individuals may not remain in system due to insurance statuspossible increase in enrollees as more people with low/ moderate incomes (133œ400% of federal poverty level) gain access to private insurancepossible increase in private insurance enrollees with elimination of preexisting condition clausescontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 31 continueddesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsresource and patient management system (indian health service [ihs])longitudinal record while in care in systemamerican indians/ alaska natives receiving hiv care within ihselectronic health recordsa minority of the estimated 2,385 hivpositive american indian/alaska native individuals (2008) receive hiv care in ihs facilitiesamerican indian/alaska native individuals account for <1 percent of plwhanot representative of national (or native) population of plwhautilization and outcome dataoptional hivspecic module in electronic health record systemimportant subpopulationvery small subpopulation of plwha (even within native population)data from tribal facilities require special permission to accessdata on supportive services are not routinely capturedno change anticipatedbureau of prisons electronic medical recordlongitudinal record while in care in systemfederal prisoners diagnosed with hiv/aidselectronic health records1,538 hivinfected individuals (december 31, 2008)not representative of national population of plwhadeveloping capability to extract hiv data that currently are only available at individual levelimportant subpopulationvery small subpopulation of plwha (even among incarcerated population in the united states)no change anticipatedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 199designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationsresource and patient management system (indian health service [ihs])longitudinal record while in care in systemamerican indians/ alaska natives receiving hiv care within ihselectronic health recordsa minority of the estimated 2,385 hivpositive american indian/alaska native individuals (2008) receive hiv care in ihs facilitiesamerican indian/alaska native individuals account for <1 percent of plwhanot representative of national (or native) population of plwhautilization and outcome dataoptional hivspecic module in electronic health record systemimportant subpopulationvery small subpopulation of plwha (even within native population)data from tribal facilities require special permission to accessdata on supportive services are not routinely capturedno change anticipatedbureau of prisons electronic medical recordlongitudinal record while in care in systemfederal prisoners diagnosed with hiv/aidselectronic health records1,538 hivinfected individuals (december 31, 2008)not representative of national population of plwhadeveloping capability to extract hiv data that currently are only available at individual levelimportant subpopulationvery small subpopulation of plwha (even among incarcerated population in the united states)no change anticipatedcontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 31 continueddesignpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationshousing opportunities for persons with aids (department of housing and urban development)hud mandated reporting for housing opportunities for person with aids (hopwa) competitive program and formula program granteesaggregate data on hopwa beneciaries and households served and unmet need for housing based on hopwaeligible households not served by hopwafunded assistance in service areahopwa grantees: information on program accomplishments in maintaining housing stability, improving access to care, and reducing risk of homelessnesscompetitive program grantees le annual progress reportformula program grantees le consolidated annual performance evaluation report 60,669 unduplicated households (by end of fy2010)generally representative of lowincome plwhaincludes data on unmet need for housing among hopwaeligible households not receiving hopwa housing assistanceincludes data on supportive services, such as housing, food or nutrition, and transportation, as well as mental health and substance abuse services funded through hopwagrantee data can be used to monitor changes at service system leveldata are aggregatedsupportive services information limited to hopwafunded servicesmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 201designpopulation coveredsource of datanumberhow representativestrengthslimitationspotential enhancementsaca implicationshousing opportunities for persons with aids (department of housing and urban development)hud mandated reporting for housing opportunities for person with aids (hopwa) competitive program and formula program granteesaggregate data on hopwa beneciaries and households served and unmet need for housing based on hopwaeligible households not served by hopwafunded assistance in service areahopwa grantees: information on program accomplishments in maintaining housing stability, improving access to care, and reducing risk of homelessnesscompetitive program grantees le annual progress reportformula program grantees le consolidated annual performance evaluation report 60,669 unduplicated households (by end of fy2010)generally representative of lowincome plwhaincludes data on unmet need for housing among hopwaeligible households not receiving hopwa housing assistanceincludes data on supportive services, such as housing, food or nutrition, and transportation, as well as mental health and substance abuse services funded through hopwagrantee data can be used to monitor changes at service system leveldata are aggregatedsupportive services information limited to hopwafunded servicesmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdate of hiv diagnosis [or rst evidence of hiv infection]date of rst visit for hiv care[or date of rst/second cd4/viral  load test]cd4 count at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv caredates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 countscd4 countsdates of viral load testsviral load resultsart prescription/ dispensing datesdate of  deathnational hiv surveillance systemyesyes (cd4/vl)yesyes(cd4/vl test dates: most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)yes(most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)whether ever taken arv, arv taken, and dates taken (not required in all areas)yesmedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(during surveillance period)ryan white services reportnoyes (at present rw provider agency)noyesyesyesyesyeswhether prescribed within 12month reporting periodyesryan white adap reportsnonononoyes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)nomedicaid statistical information systemnononoyesyes noyesnoyesyesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenononoyesyesnoyesnoyesyesnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyes, but data are not completeyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(dates of starting and stopping individual drugs)yescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyes, but data are not completeyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(dates of starting and stopping individual drugs)yesappendix table 32a data elements for core clinical hiv care indicatorsmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 203date of hiv diagnosis [or rst evidence of hiv infection]date of rst visit for hiv care[or date of rst/second cd4/viral  load test]cd4 count at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv caredates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 countscd4 countsdates of viral load testsviral load resultsart prescription/ dispensing datesdate of  deathnational hiv surveillance systemyesyes (cd4/vl)yesyes(cd4/vl test dates: most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)yes(most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)yes (most reporting areas)whether ever taken arv, arv taken, and dates taken (not required in all areas)yesmedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(during surveillance period)ryan white services reportnoyes (at present rw provider agency)noyesyesyesyesyeswhether prescribed within 12month reporting periodyesryan white adap reportsnonononoyes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(most recent in past 12 months)yes(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)nomedicaid statistical information systemnononoyesyes noyesnoyesyesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenononoyesyesnoyesnoyesyesnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyes, but data are not completeyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(dates of starting and stopping individual drugs)yescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyes, but data are not completeyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(dates of starting and stopping individual drugs)yescontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdate of hiv diagnosis [or rst evidence of hiv infection]date of rst visit for hiv care[or date of rst/second cd4/viral  load test]cd4 count at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv caredates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 countscd4 countsdates of viral load testsviral load resultsart prescription/ dispensing datesdate of  deathhiv research networkyes(> 60% of patients)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes (in vha)yes(in vha)yes (in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyes yeskaiser permanente (kp)yes (at kp)yes (at kp)yes (at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyes yesindian health service (ihs)yesyesyesyes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if during incarceration)yes(if during incarceration)yes(not discrete data in ehr)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yesyes (while incarcerated)yesyesyes(if during incarceration, separate database)housing opportunities for persons with aidsnononohouseholds that had contact with primary provider as specied in client™s plannonononononoappendix table 32a continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 205date of hiv diagnosis [or rst evidence of hiv infection]date of rst visit for hiv care[or date of rst/second cd4/viral  load test]cd4 count at diagnosis/rst visit for hiv caredates of routine hivcare visitsdates of cd4 countscd4 countsdates of viral load testsviral load resultsart prescription/ dispensing datesdate of  deathhiv research networkyes(> 60% of patients)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes (in vha)yes(in vha)yes (in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyes yeskaiser permanente (kp)yes (at kp)yes (at kp)yes (at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyes yesindian health service (ihs)yesyesyesyes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if during incarceration)yes(if during incarceration)yes(not discrete data in ehr)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yesyes (while incarcerated)yesyesyes(if during incarceration, separate database)housing opportunities for persons with aidsnononohouseholds that had contact with primary provider as specied in client™s plannonononononomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 32b data elements for core mental health,  substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsdate of mental health diagnosis or referraldate of rst visit for mental health servicesdate of substance use diagnosis or referraldate of rst visit for substance abuse serviceshousing statusfood security statustransportation statusnational hiv surveillance systemnononononononomedical monitoring projectwhether diagnosed/referred in 12month surveillance period, but not date/prior diagnosiswhether received services in 12month surveillance period, but not datewhether diagnosed/ referred in 12month surveillance period, but not datewhether received services in 12month surveillance period, but not dateyesyesyesryan white services reportnonumber of visits in 12month reporting period, but not datenonumber of visits in 12month reporting period, but not dateyes, also whether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded servicesryan white adap reportsnononononononomedicaid statistical information systemnovisits, but not rst visit specicallynovisits, but not rst visit specicallynononomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyes(in past 12 months)first visit covered by medicareyes(in past 12 months)first visit covered by medicarenonononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyes2012, will collect visits, but not rst visit specicallyyesnonononocfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesvisits, but not rst visit specically yeswhether received services in past yearnononohiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)nononoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyes(in vha)yesyes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)yesyes(at kp)yesyes(at kp)nononoindian health service (ihs)yesyes(in ihs)yesyes(in ihs)variable(provider narrative)variable(provider narrative)variable(provider narrative)federal bureau of prisonsyes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)n/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aids (hopwa)nowhether received hopwafunded servicesnoyes, also whether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded servicesmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 207appendix table 32b data elements for core mental health,  substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsdate of mental health diagnosis or referraldate of rst visit for mental health servicesdate of substance use diagnosis or referraldate of rst visit for substance abuse serviceshousing statusfood security statustransportation statusnational hiv surveillance systemnononononononomedical monitoring projectwhether diagnosed/referred in 12month surveillance period, but not date/prior diagnosiswhether received services in 12month surveillance period, but not datewhether diagnosed/ referred in 12month surveillance period, but not datewhether received services in 12month surveillance period, but not dateyesyesyesryan white services reportnonumber of visits in 12month reporting period, but not datenonumber of visits in 12month reporting period, but not dateyes, also whether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded servicesryan white adap reportsnononononononomedicaid statistical information systemnovisits, but not rst visit specicallynovisits, but not rst visit specicallynononomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyes(in past 12 months)first visit covered by medicareyes(in past 12 months)first visit covered by medicarenonononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyes2012, will collect visits, but not rst visit specicallyyesnonononocfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesvisits, but not rst visit specically yeswhether received services in past yearnononohiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)nononoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyes(in vha)yesyes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)yesyes(at kp)yesyes(at kp)nononoindian health service (ihs)yesyes(in ihs)yesyes(in ihs)variable(provider narrative)variable(provider narrative)variable(provider narrative)federal bureau of prisonsyes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)n/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aids (hopwa)nowhether received hopwafunded servicesnoyes, also whether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded serviceswhether received hopwafunded servicesmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 32c data elements for additional clinical hiv  care indicatorsdiagnosis of aids or aidsdening illnessdates and results of tb testsdates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningdate of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunitydates of hepatitis c testsdate of in˚uenza immunizationdate of pneumococcal immunizationdate of hepatitis b vaccination/ date of documented immunitydates of art resistance testingdate of art initiationart prescription/ dispensing datesdiagnosis/ test results for hiv nephropathy, hepatitis b, tbnational hiv surveillance systemyes(optional)nononononononoyes(optional)yes(selfreport, not required in all areas)whether ever taken arv, arv taken, and dates taken (not required in all areas)nomedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyes(2007œ 2011 cycles only)*yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yesyesyes(2007œ 2011 cycles only)*yes(during surveillance period)yesyesyesryan white services reportyesyes yes (syphilis within 12month reporting period)whether screened within 12month reporting periodwhether screened within 12month reporting periodnonowhether vaccination series is completednonowhether prescribed within 12month reporting periodnoryan white adap reportshiv/aids status at end of reporting periodnonononononononoproposed(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)proposed(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)nomedicaid statistical information systemyestest datesyesyes(screening)yesyesyesyes(vaccination)yesnoyesdiagnosis captured if claim led with appropriate icd9 codes medicare chronic condition data warehousenotest datesyesyes(screening)yesyesyesyes(vaccination)yesnoyesno *starting with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstraction focuses on the 12 months preceding the interview. earlier clinical data is no longer captured.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 209appendix table 32c data elements for additional clinical hiv  care indicatorsdiagnosis of aids or aidsdening illnessdates and results of tb testsdates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningdate of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunitydates of hepatitis c testsdate of in˚uenza immunizationdate of pneumococcal immunizationdate of hepatitis b vaccination/ date of documented immunitydates of art resistance testingdate of art initiationart prescription/ dispensing datesdiagnosis/ test results for hiv nephropathy, hepatitis b, tbnational hiv surveillance systemyes(optional)nononononononoyes(optional)yes(selfreport, not required in all areas)whether ever taken arv, arv taken, and dates taken (not required in all areas)nomedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyes(2007œ 2011 cycles only)*yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yesyesyes(2007œ 2011 cycles only)*yes(during surveillance period)yesyesyesryan white services reportyesyes yes (syphilis within 12month reporting period)whether screened within 12month reporting periodwhether screened within 12month reporting periodnonowhether vaccination series is completednonowhether prescribed within 12month reporting periodnoryan white adap reportshiv/aids status at end of reporting periodnonononononononoproposed(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)proposed(in reporting period: only fully adapfunded drugs)nomedicaid statistical information systemyestest datesyesyes(screening)yesyesyesyes(vaccination)yesnoyesdiagnosis captured if claim led with appropriate icd9 codes medicare chronic condition data warehousenotest datesyesyes(screening)yesyesyesyes(vaccination)yesnoyesnocontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210 monitoring hiv care in the united statesdiagnosis of aids or aidsdening illnessdates and results of tb testsdates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningdate of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunitydates of hepatitis c testsdate of in˚uenza immunizationdate of pneumococcal immunizationdate of hepatitis b vaccination/ date of documented immunitydates of art resistance testingdate of art initiationart prescription/ dispensing datesdiagnosis/ test results for hiv nephropathy, hepatitis b, tbnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyesnoyesyesnononoyesyesyes, dates of starting and stopping individual drugsyescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyesyesyesproposed for 2012proposed for 2012proposed  for 2012yesyesyes, dates of starting and stopping individual drugsyeshiv research networkyesfor a subset of sitesyesyesyesfor a subset of sitesfor a subset of sitesfor a  subset of sitesfor a subset of sitesyesyesfor a  subset of sitesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyesyesyesyes yesyesyesyesyes (in vha)yesyes kaiser permanente (kp)yes yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes (at kp)yesyes indian health service (ihs)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if during incarceration)yesyesyesyes(may not be in ehr)yesyesyesyes(if during incarceration)yes(if during incarceration)yesyeshousing opportunities for persons with aidsnononononononononononoappendix table 32c continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 211diagnosis of aids or aidsdening illnessdates and results of tb testsdates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screeningdate of hepatitis b screening or date of documented immunitydates of hepatitis c testsdate of in˚uenza immunizationdate of pneumococcal immunizationdate of hepatitis b vaccination/ date of documented immunitydates of art resistance testingdate of art initiationart prescription/ dispensing datesdiagnosis/ test results for hiv nephropathy, hepatitis b, tbnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyesnoyesyesnononoyesyesyes, dates of starting and stopping individual drugsyescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyesyesyesproposed for 2012proposed for 2012proposed  for 2012yesyesyes, dates of starting and stopping individual drugsyeshiv research networkyesfor a subset of sitesyesyesyesfor a subset of sitesfor a subset of sitesfor a  subset of sitesfor a subset of sitesyesyesfor a  subset of sitesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyesyesyesyes yesyesyesyesyes (in vha)yesyes kaiser permanente (kp)yes yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes (at kp)yesyes indian health service (ihs)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if during incarceration)yesyesyesyes(may not be in ehr)yesyesyesyes(if during incarceration)yes(if during incarceration)yesyeshousing opportunities for persons with aidsnononononononononononocontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212 monitoring hiv care in the united statespregnancy statusnational hiv surveillance systemyesmedical monitoring projectyes ryan white services reportyesryan white adap reportsyesmedicaid statistical information systemnot specically, but may be extrapolated from related diagnosis/service codesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenonorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyes (as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsyes (as of 2012)hiv research networknoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yeskaiser permanenteyesindian health serviceyesfederal bureau of prisonsyes (via icd9 codes)housing opportunities for persons with aidsnoappendix table 32c continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 213appendix table 32d follows on next pagemonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 32d data elements for additional mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsdate of mental health screeningdate of screening for substance abusedates of housing needs assessmentdates of food security assessmentdates of transportation needs assessmentnational hiv surveillance systemnononononomedical monitoring projectyesyeswhether received/ needed services, but not datewhether received/ needed services, but not datewhether received/ needed services,  but not  dateryan white services reportwhether screened within 12month reporting period, but not datewhether screened within 12month reporting period, but not datenononoryan white adap reportsnononononomedicaid statistical information systemyesyesnononomedicare chronic condition data warehousenonononononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designnononononocfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesnononohiv research networknononononomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 215date of mental health screeningdate of screening for substance abusedates of housing needs assessmentdates of food security assessmentdates of transportation needs assessmentclinical case registry: hiv (vha)nononononokaiser permanenteyesyesnononoindian health serviceyesyesnononofederal bureau of prisonsyesyesn/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aids (hopwa)nononumber of hopwaeligible households with unmet need for housing assistancenonoappendix table 32d continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 32e data elements to estimate indicators for  subpopulationsraceethnicitysex(m/f)gender identitysexual orientationdate of birthzip code/  other geographic markercountry of birthnational hiv surveillance systemyesyesyes(sex at birth)current gender identity (optional)no(but captures sexual history)yesyes(at diagnosis of hiv and aids)yes(optional)medical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(optional eld for local use only)yesryan white services reportyesyesyes(male/female under gender)yesyesyes(year)yes(rst 3 digits)noryan white adap reportsyesyesyes(male/female under gender)yesnoyes(year)nonomedicaid statistical information systemyesyesyesnonoyesyesnomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyesyesyesnonoyesyesnonorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyesyesnonoyesyes(rst 3 digits)yes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyesnosex of patient and current partner collected semiannuallyyesyes(rst 3 digits)yes(as of 2012)hiv research networkyesyesyesyes (transgender persons who selfidentify) yesyesnonoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyesyesnonoyesyesnokaiser permanenteyesyesyesnoyes(but data are not complete)yesyesnoindian health serviceyesyesyesnonoyesyesnofederal bureau of prisonsyesyes(in separate database)yesnonoyesn/ayes(in separate database)housing opportunities for persons with aidsyesyesyesyesnonoyesnomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 217appendix table 32e data elements to estimate indicators for  subpopulationsraceethnicitysex(m/f)gender identitysexual orientationdate of birthzip code/  other geographic markercountry of birthnational hiv surveillance systemyesyesyes(sex at birth)current gender identity (optional)no(but captures sexual history)yesyes(at diagnosis of hiv and aids)yes(optional)medical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(optional eld for local use only)yesryan white services reportyesyesyes(male/female under gender)yesyesyes(year)yes(rst 3 digits)noryan white adap reportsyesyesyes(male/female under gender)yesnoyes(year)nonomedicaid statistical information systemyesyesyesnonoyesyesnomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyesyesyesnonoyesyesnonorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyesyesnonoyesyes(rst 3 digits)yes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyesnosex of patient and current partner collected semiannuallyyesyes(rst 3 digits)yes(as of 2012)hiv research networkyesyesyesyes (transgender persons who selfidentify) yesyesnonoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yesyesyesnonoyesyesnokaiser permanenteyesyesyesnoyes(but data are not complete)yesyesnoindian health serviceyesyesyesnonoyesyesnofederal bureau of prisonsyesyes(in separate database)yesnonoyesn/ayes(in separate database)housing opportunities for persons with aidsyesyesyesyesnonoyesnomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 32f additional data elements for monitoring  hiv carestigmadiscriminationemergency department/ inpatient usesexual risk behaviorspartner hiv statusaccess to dental careincomeemployment statusinsurance status/typenational hiv surveillance systemnononoyesyes(only for persons reporting heterosexual risk)nononoyes(optional)medical monitoring project2011 cycle2011  cycleyesyesyesyesyesnoyesryan white services reportnononoyesnoyes(rwfunded)percent of federal poverty level (fpl)noyesryan white adap reportsnonononononopercent of fplcurrent: percent of clients <200% fplnoyesmedicaid statistical information systemnonoyesnonoyesnonoyesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenonoyesnononononoyes(only medicare and medicaid)north american aids cohort collaboration on research and designnonoyes(as of 2012)nononononoyes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsnonoyesyesyes(current partner status semiannually)nononoyeshiv research networknonoyesyesnonononoyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)nonoyesvariablenoyes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)nonoyesyesnoat kp northwest (oregon) only*noyesyesindian health servicenononononononononofederal bureau of prisonsnononoyes (not as a discrete data element)noyesn/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonononononoyesyesyes *kp northwest is the only provider of dental services in the kp system. only dental services provided within the system are captured.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 219appendix table 32f additional data elements for monitoring  hiv carestigmadiscriminationemergency department/ inpatient usesexual risk behaviorspartner hiv statusaccess to dental careincomeemployment statusinsurance status/typenational hiv surveillance systemnononoyesyes(only for persons reporting heterosexual risk)nononoyes(optional)medical monitoring project2011 cycle2011  cycleyesyesyesyesyesnoyesryan white services reportnononoyesnoyes(rwfunded)percent of federal poverty level (fpl)noyesryan white adap reportsnonononononopercent of fplcurrent: percent of clients <200% fplnoyesmedicaid statistical information systemnonoyesnonoyesnonoyesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenonoyesnononononoyes(only medicare and medicaid)north american aids cohort collaboration on research and designnonoyes(as of 2012)nononononoyes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsnonoyesyesyes(current partner status semiannually)nononoyeshiv research networknonoyesyesnonononoyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)nonoyesvariablenoyes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)nonoyesyesnoat kp northwest (oregon) only*noyesyesindian health servicenononononononononofederal bureau of prisonsnononoyes (not as a discrete data element)noyesn/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonononononoyesyesyes *kp northwest is the only provider of dental services in the kp system. only dental services provided within the system are captured.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 33a data systems mapped to core clinical hiv  care indicatorsproportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion who received 2 or more cd4 tests in past 12 monthsproportion who received 2 or more viral load tests in past 12 monthsproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months and with cd4+ cell count ˛350proportion with a cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load (vl)allcause mortality ratenational hiv surveillance systemyes(most reporting areas)yesmost reporting areas: proxy using cd4/vl test datesyes(most reporting areas)yes(most reporting areas)possible using cd4 test dates as proxy, but not all jurisdictions report all resultsno/variable (minimal data on art status; variable jurisdictional reporting of cd4 counts)no(no longitudinal data on art status; variable jurisdictional reporting of vl results)yesmedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(during surveillance period)ryan white services reportnonoyesyesyesyesyes(within 12month reporting period)possible: depends on availability of longitudinal data on art statusyesryan white adap reportsnononoyes (most recent date)yes (most recent date)nopossible for future, but only for fully adapfunded arvspossible for future, but only for fully adapfunded arvsnomedicaid statistical information systemnonoyesyesyesno(no cd4 results)no(no cd4 results)no(no vl results)yesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenonoyesyesyesno(no cd4 results)no(no cd4 results)no(no vl results)yesmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 221appendix table 33a data systems mapped to core clinical hiv  care indicatorsproportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion who received 2 or more cd4 tests in past 12 monthsproportion who received 2 or more viral load tests in past 12 monthsproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months and with cd4+ cell count ˛350proportion with a cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load (vl)allcause mortality ratenational hiv surveillance systemyes(most reporting areas)yesmost reporting areas: proxy using cd4/vl test datesyes(most reporting areas)yes(most reporting areas)possible using cd4 test dates as proxy, but not all jurisdictions report all resultsno/variable (minimal data on art status; variable jurisdictional reporting of cd4 counts)no(no longitudinal data on art status; variable jurisdictional reporting of vl results)yesmedical monitoring projectyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyes(during surveillance period)ryan white services reportnonoyesyesyesyesyes(within 12month reporting period)possible: depends on availability of longitudinal data on art statusyesryan white adap reportsnononoyes (most recent date)yes (most recent date)nopossible for future, but only for fully adapfunded arvspossible for future, but only for fully adapfunded arvsnomedicaid statistical information systemnonoyesyesyesno(no cd4 results)no(no cd4 results)no(no vl results)yesmedicare chronic condition data warehousenonoyesyesyesno(no cd4 results)no(no cd4 results)no(no vl results)yescontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222 monitoring hiv care in the united statesproportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion who received 2 or more cd4 tests in past 12 monthsproportion who received 2 or more viral load tests in past 12 monthsproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months and with cd4+ cell count ˛350proportion with a cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load (vl)allcause mortality ratenorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyes (but date ofdiagnosis data are not complete)yesyesyesyesyesyesyescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyes (but date ofdiagnosis data are not complete)yesyesyesyesyesyesyeshiv research networkyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(diagnosed in vha)yes(in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyesyeskaiser permanente (kp)yes(diagnosed at kp)yes(at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yesyes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if diagnosed while incarceratedyes(if diagnosed during incarceration)yesyesyesyes(if incarcerated during that period)yesyesyes(in separate database for those who die while incarcerated)housing opportunities for persons with aidsnonoproportion following clientspecic schedule for contact with provider nonononononoappendix table 33a continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 223proportion with cd4+ cell count >200 and without a clinical diagnosis of aidsproportion linked to care for hiv within 3 months of diagnosisproportion in continuous care (2 or more visits in preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)proportion who received 2 or more cd4 tests in past 12 monthsproportion who received 2 or more viral load tests in past 12 monthsproportion in continuous care for 12 or more months and with cd4+ cell count ˛350proportion with a cd4+ cell count <500 who are not on artproportion on art for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load (vl)allcause mortality ratenorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesyes (but date ofdiagnosis data are not complete)yesyesyesyesyesyesyescfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyes (but date ofdiagnosis data are not complete)yesyesyesyesyesyesyeshiv research networkyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(diagnosed in vha)yes(in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyesyeskaiser permanente (kp)yes(diagnosed at kp)yes(at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yesyes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)yesfederal bureau of prisonsyes(if diagnosed while incarceratedyes(if diagnosed during incarceration)yesyesyesyes(if incarcerated during that period)yesyesyes(in separate database for those who die while incarcerated)housing opportunities for persons with aidsnonoproportion following clientspecic schedule for contact with provider nonononononomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 33b data systems mapped to core mental health,  substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsproportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsproportion who experienced food or nutrition insecurity  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsproportion who had an unmet need for transportation services  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsnational hiv surveillance systemnononononomedical monitoring projectno(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)no(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)yesyesyesryan white services reportnonoyes, also whether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded servicesryan white adap reportsnononononomedicaid statistical information systemnononononomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyes, if rst visit covered by medicareyes, if rst visit covered by medicarenonononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designpossible, if a service date is proximate to referral datenonononocfar network of integrated clinical systemspossible, if a service date is proximate to referral datenonononohiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)nononoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(in vha)yes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)yes(at kp)yes(at kp)nononoindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)variable(incomplete data)variable(incomplete data)variable(incomplete data)federal bureau of prisonsyes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)n/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonoyesnonomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 225appendix table 33b data systems mapped to core mental health,  substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsproportion with mental health disorder referred for mental health services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion with substance use disorder referred for substance abuse services who receive these services within 60 daysproportion who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsproportion who experienced food or nutrition insecurity  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsproportion who had an unmet need for transportation services  at least once in the preceding 12 monthsnational hiv surveillance systemnononononomedical monitoring projectno(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)no(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)yesyesyesryan white services reportnonoyes, also whether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded serviceswhether received rwfunded servicesryan white adap reportsnononononomedicaid statistical information systemnononononomedicare chronic condition data warehouseyes, if rst visit covered by medicareyes, if rst visit covered by medicarenonononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designpossible, if a service date is proximate to referral datenonononocfar network of integrated clinical systemspossible, if a service date is proximate to referral datenonononohiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)nononoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(in vha)yes(in vha)nononokaiser permanente (kp)yes(at kp)yes(at kp)nononoindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yes(in ihs)variable(incomplete data)variable(incomplete data)variable(incomplete data)federal bureau of prisonsyes(while incarcerated)yes(while incarcerated)n/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonoyesnonomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 33c data systems mapped to additional clinical  hiv care indicatorsproportion screened for tb since diagnosis and results interpretedproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for hepatitis b since diagnosisproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for in˚uenzaproportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumonia since diagnosisproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion who receive drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b  (when treatment is indicated) or active tb who are not on artproportion hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artnational hiv surveillance systemnononononononononoyes (when pregnancy and art status captured)medical monitoring projectyesyesyes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yesyes(during surveillance period)yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yes(during surveillance period)yesyesryan white services reportyes(but lacks diagnosis date)syphilis within 12month reporting periodyes(within 12month reporting period)yes(within 12month reporting period)nonowhether vaccination series is completednonoyes(art prescribed in last 12 months)ryan white adap reportsnononononononononodata only for fully adapfunded drugsmedicaid statistical information systemyes(but lacks diagnosis date; tb test results)yesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyes(if covered and identiable by code; lacks art initiation date)yes(if claims led with proper diagnosis code/s)yes(if pregnancy captured by relevant diagnostic code/s)medicare chronic condition data warehouseyes(but lacks diagnosis date; tb test results)yesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyes(but lacks art initiation date)nono *starting with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstraction will focus on the 12 months preceding the interview. earlier clinical data will no longer be captured.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 227appendix table 33c data systems mapped to additional clinical  hiv care indicatorsproportion screened for tb since diagnosis and results interpretedproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for hepatitis b since diagnosisproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for in˚uenzaproportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumonia since diagnosisproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion who receive drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b  (when treatment is indicated) or active tb who are not on artproportion hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artnational hiv surveillance systemnononononononononoyes (when pregnancy and art status captured)medical monitoring projectyesyesyes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yesyes(during surveillance period)yes(2007œ2011 cycles only)*yes(during surveillance period)yesyesryan white services reportyes(but lacks diagnosis date)syphilis within 12month reporting periodyes(within 12month reporting period)yes(within 12month reporting period)nonowhether vaccination series is completednonoyes(art prescribed in last 12 months)ryan white adap reportsnononononononononodata only for fully adapfunded drugsmedicaid statistical information systemyes(but lacks diagnosis date; tb test results)yesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyes(if covered and identiable by code; lacks art initiation date)yes(if claims led with proper diagnosis code/s)yes(if pregnancy captured by relevant diagnostic code/s)medicare chronic condition data warehouseyes(but lacks diagnosis date; tb test results)yesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyesyes(but lacks diagnosis date)yesyes(but lacks art initiation date)nonocontinuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228 monitoring hiv care in the united statesproportion screened for tb since diagnosis and results interpretedproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for hepatitis b since diagnosisproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for in˚uenzaproportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumonia since diagnosisproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion who receive drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b  (when treatment is indicated) or active tb who are not on artproportion hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesnoyes(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)yesnononoyesyesyes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyes(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)yesproposed for 2012proposed for 2012(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)proposed for 2012yesyesyes(as of 2012)hiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yesyesyesyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset  of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset  of sites)noclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyeskaiser permanente (kp)yes(at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesfederal bureau of prisonsyesyesyesyes (although data may not be available in ehr)yesyesyesyes(may not be available)yes(would require record abstraction and verication)yeshousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonononononononononoappendix table 33c continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 229proportion screened for tb since diagnosis and results interpretedproportion screened for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilisproportion screened for hepatitis b since diagnosisproportion screened for hepatitis cproportion immunized for in˚uenzaproportion immunized for pneumococcal pneumonia since diagnosisproportion immunized for hepatitis b (if needed)proportion who receive drug resistance testing prior to art initiationproportion with hivassociated nephropathy, hepatitis b  (when treatment is indicated) or active tb who are not on artproportion hivinfected pregnant women who are not on artnorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designyesnoyes(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)yesnononoyesyesyes(as of 2012)cfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesyes(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)yesproposed for 2012proposed for 2012(dateof diagnosis data incomplete)proposed for 2012yesyesyes(as of 2012)hiv research networkyes(for a subset of sites)yesyesyesyes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset  of sites)yes(for a subset of sites)yes(for a subset  of sites)noclinical case registry: hiv (vha)yes(in vha)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyeskaiser permanente (kp)yes(at kp)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesindian health service (ihs)yes(in ihs)yesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesyesfederal bureau of prisonsyesyesyesyes (although data may not be available in ehr)yesyesyesyes(may not be available)yes(would require record abstraction and verication)yeshousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonononononononononomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 33d data systems mapped to additional mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services indicatorsproportion screened for mental health disorders at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion screened for substance use disorders at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for housing at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for food or nutrition at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for transportation at least once in the past 12 monthsnational hiv surveillance systemnononononomedical monitoring projectyesyesno(whether received/ needed services, but not date)no(whether received/ needed services, but not date)no(whether received/ needed services,  but not  date)ryan white services reportyesyesnononoryan white adap reportsnononononomedicaid statistical information systemyesyesnononomedicare chronic condition data warehousenonononononorth american aids cohort collaboration on research and designnononononocfar network of integrated clinical systemsyesyesnononohiv research networknononononoclinical case registry: hiv (vha)nononononomonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 231proportion screened for mental health disorders at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion screened for substance use disorders at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for housing at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for food or nutrition at least once in the past 12 monthsproportion assessed for need for transportation at least once in the past 12 monthskaiser permanenteyesyesnononoindian health serviceyesyesnononofederal bureau of prisonsyesyesn/an/an/ahousing opportunities for persons with aidsnonoyesnonoappendix table 33d continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 34 publicly available data collection  instruments and informationdata systemcollection instrument/slink/snational hiv surveillance system1. adult hiv/aids condential case report1. http://health.utah.gov/epi/forms/adult%20hiv.aids%20report%20form.pdfmedical monitoring project1. 2010 medical history form* 2. 2010 surveillance period inpatient form* 3. 2010 surveillance period summary form* 4. 2010 surveillance period visit form* 5. 2010 standard questionnaire*6. 2011 medical monitoring project response cards1. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mramhfv400ombracejan52009.pdf2. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspifv400jan52009.pdf3. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspsfv400jan52009.pdf4. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspvfv400jan52009.pdf5. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2009mmpstandardenglish.pdf6. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2011englishresponsecards.pdfryan white aids drug assistance program (adap) reports1. aids drug assistance program (adap) data reportšfinal clientlevel data variables (effective october 1, 2012)2. adap data report: grantee report: summary of changes to the granteelevel variables3. adapšquarterly data report (phasing out this year)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/habadrclientlevelvariables.pdf 2. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/adrgranteeleveldatavariablesnal.pdf 3. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/adap/adapformfeb08.pdfryan white services report1. data elements for clientlevel data export (effective for the 2010 annual rsr)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/clientleveldataelds.pdfmedicaid statistical information system1. medicaid analytic extract files (max) user guide2. medicaid and chip statistical information system (msis): file specications and data dictionary1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwmaxuserguide.pdf2. https://www.cms.gov/msis/downloads/msisdd2010.pdfmedicare chronic condition data warehouse1. chronic condition data warehouse user guide2. summary statistics3. data dictionaries4. chronic conditions5. analytic guidance1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwuserguide.pdf2. http://www.ccwdata.org/summarystatistics/index.htm3. http://www.ccwdata.org/datadictionaries/index.htm4. http://www.ccwdata.org/chronicconditions/index.htm5. http://www.ccwdata.org/analyticguidance/index.htmcfar network of integrated clinical systems1. cnics data elements1. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/datacore/cnicsdataelementsindian health service1. his clinical reporting system (bgp): selected measures (local) report performance measure list and denitions1. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv11/selectedmeasuresv111.pdffederal bureau of prisons1. management of hiv: federal bureau of prisons clinical practice guidelinesšmay 20111. http://www.bop.gov/news/pdfs/mgmthiv.pdfhousing opportunities for persons with aids1. annual progress report (apr): measuring performance outcomes2. consolidated annual performance evaluation report (caper): measuring performance outcomes3. homeless management information system (hmis) data standards, revised noticešmarch 20101. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/aprhopwa.docx 2. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwacaper10312014.doc 3. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdatastandardsmarch2010.pdf *link to 2009 version of mmp data collection materials.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 233appendix table 34 publicly available data collection  instruments and informationdata systemcollection instrument/slink/snational hiv surveillance system1. adult hiv/aids condential case report1. http://health.utah.gov/epi/forms/adult%20hiv.aids%20report%20form.pdfmedical monitoring project1. 2010 medical history form* 2. 2010 surveillance period inpatient form* 3. 2010 surveillance period summary form* 4. 2010 surveillance period visit form* 5. 2010 standard questionnaire*6. 2011 medical monitoring project response cards1. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mramhfv400ombracejan52009.pdf2. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspifv400jan52009.pdf3. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspsfv400jan52009.pdf4. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/mmp2009mraspvfv400jan52009.pdf5. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2009mmpstandardenglish.pdf6. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2011englishresponsecards.pdfryan white aids drug assistance program (adap) reports1. aids drug assistance program (adap) data reportšfinal clientlevel data variables (effective october 1, 2012)2. adap data report: grantee report: summary of changes to the granteelevel variables3. adapšquarterly data report (phasing out this year)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/habadrclientlevelvariables.pdf 2. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/adrgranteeleveldatavariablesnal.pdf 3. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/adap/adapformfeb08.pdfryan white services report1. data elements for clientlevel data export (effective for the 2010 annual rsr)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/clientleveldataelds.pdfmedicaid statistical information system1. medicaid analytic extract files (max) user guide2. medicaid and chip statistical information system (msis): file specications and data dictionary1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwmaxuserguide.pdf2. https://www.cms.gov/msis/downloads/msisdd2010.pdfmedicare chronic condition data warehouse1. chronic condition data warehouse user guide2. summary statistics3. data dictionaries4. chronic conditions5. analytic guidance1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccwuserguide.pdf2. http://www.ccwdata.org/summarystatistics/index.htm3. http://www.ccwdata.org/datadictionaries/index.htm4. http://www.ccwdata.org/chronicconditions/index.htm5. http://www.ccwdata.org/analyticguidance/index.htmcfar network of integrated clinical systems1. cnics data elements1. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/datacore/cnicsdataelementsindian health service1. his clinical reporting system (bgp): selected measures (local) report performance measure list and denitions1. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv11/selectedmeasuresv111.pdffederal bureau of prisons1. management of hiv: federal bureau of prisons clinical practice guidelinesšmay 20111. http://www.bop.gov/news/pdfs/mgmthiv.pdfhousing opportunities for persons with aids1. annual progress report (apr): measuring performance outcomes2. consolidated annual performance evaluation report (caper): measuring performance outcomes3. homeless management information system (hmis) data standards, revised noticešmarch 20101. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/aprhopwa.docx 2. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwacaper10312014.doc 3. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/finalhmisdatastandardsmarch2010.pdf *link to 2009 version of mmp data collection materials.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234 monitoring hiv care in the united statesappendix table 35 cd4 and viral load reporting by hiv  surveillance reporting area (as of june 15, 2010)cd4 count (cells/µl)reportable levelall valuesreportable level  <200reportable level  <500no reportingalaska, arkansas, california, delaware, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, louisiana, maine, maryland, massachusetts,* michigan, minnesota, mississippi, missouri, nebraska, new hampshire, new york, north dakota, oregon, south carolina, south dakota, texas, utah, virginia, washington, west virginia, wyomingalabama, arizona, connecticut, idaho, new jersey, new mexico, north carolina, ohio, pennsylvania, rhode island, tennessee, vermont, wisconsincolorado, kansas, nevada, oklahomamontanadistrict of columbiaguam, puerto ricou.s. virgin islandsamerican samoa; marshall islands; micronesia, fs; n. mariana islands; palauviral loadreportable levelany resultreportable leveldetectableno reportingalaska, arkansas, california, colorado, connecticut, delaware, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, indiana, iowa, louisiana, maine, maryland, massachusetts*, michigan, minnesota, mississippi, missouri, nebraska, new hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, new york, north dakota, oklahoma, oregon, south carolina, south dakota, texas, utah, vermont, virginia, washington, west virginia, wisconsin, wyomingarizona, idaho, kansas, kentucky, montana, nevada, north carolina, ohio, pennsylvania, rhode island, tennesseealabamadistrict of columbiaguam, puerto ricou.s. virgin islandsamerican samoa; marshall islands; micronesia, fs; n. mariana islands; palau *as of january 2012.sources: personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and  prevention, october 6, 2011; massachusetts department of public health, 2012.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of data 235appendix table 35 cd4 and viral load reporting by hiv  surveillance reporting area (as of june 15, 2010)cd4 count (cells/µl)reportable levelall valuesreportable level  <200reportable level  <500no reportingalaska, arkansas, california, delaware, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, louisiana, maine, maryland, massachusetts,* michigan, minnesota, mississippi, missouri, nebraska, new hampshire, new york, north dakota, oregon, south carolina, south dakota, texas, utah, virginia, washington, west virginia, wyomingalabama, arizona, connecticut, idaho, new jersey, new mexico, north carolina, ohio, pennsylvania, rhode island, tennessee, vermont, wisconsincolorado, kansas, nevada, oklahomamontanadistrict of columbiaguam, puerto ricou.s. virgin islandsamerican samoa; marshall islands; micronesia, fs; n. mariana islands; palauviral loadreportable levelany resultreportable leveldetectableno reportingalaska, arkansas, california, colorado, connecticut, delaware, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, indiana, iowa, louisiana, maine, maryland, massachusetts*, michigan, minnesota, mississippi, missouri, nebraska, new hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, new york, north dakota, oklahoma, oregon, south carolina, south dakota, texas, utah, vermont, virginia, washington, west virginia, wisconsin, wyomingarizona, idaho, kansas, kentucky, montana, nevada, north carolina, ohio, pennsylvania, rhode island, tennesseealabamadistrict of columbiaguam, puerto ricou.s. virgin islandsamerican samoa; marshall islands; micronesia, fs; n. mariana islands; palau *as of january 2012.sources: personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and  prevention, october 6, 2011; massachusetts department of public health, 2012.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2374barriers to the collection of hiv care datathis chapter addresses question 4 from the committee™s statement of task on barriers to the collection of data to measure core indicators for clinical hiv care and for mental health, substance use, and supportive services. the committee was specically asked to describe policy, reimbursement, and reporting issues that need to be addressed to collect necessary data (statement of task question 4a). because the reimbursement and reporting barriers to the collection of data are sometimes linked to policies, the chapter begins with a discussion of those barriers and then describes other policy barriers to the collection of data. the chapter addresses how data can be collected in a way that will not signicantly increase burden (statement of task question 4b) within the section on reporting barriers. the chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendation pertaining to this portion of its charge. potential reimbursementrelated barriers to the collection of hiv care data reimbursementrelated barriers to the collection of data on care and supportive services received by people living with hiv/aids (plwha) are to a large extent specic to claims data, as providers enter services rendered into claims systems in order to receive reimbursement for those services. as described in chapter 2, there are several advantages to the use of claims data for health care research. for example, claims data represent a large quantity of data, can be made anonymous and used without patient authorization, and are available in an electronic format for easier transmismonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238 monitoring hiv care in the united statession. claims data are an especially important source of information on care received by plwha given the large number who are medicaid beneciaries: an estimated 47 percent of plwha who were receiving regular medical care were medicaid beneciaries in fy 2007 (kates, 2011). as more plwha become eligible for medicaid and commercial health insurance as a result of the patient protection and affordable care act (aca, p.l. 111148), claims data are likely to become an even more useful source of data for monitoring hiv care. despite the many advantages of claims data, the in˚uence of reimbursement policies needs to be taken into consideration when using claims data for health services research (crystal et al., 2007). health plan reimbursement policies may ﬁcarve outﬂ certain services such as behavioral health, transportation, dental, and pharmacy benets so that a separate organization is responsible for payment. as a result, the primary insurer may not have a record of the carvedout service in its claims data (hicks, 2003; joins et al., 2007). carveout arrangements are often used in the medicaid program when medicaid managed care organizations (mcos) contract with other entities to provide services to which beneciaries are entitled, as per the state medicaid agencies™ contract with the mco.1 an mco may decide to carve out a benet because it lacks inhouse expertise to meet a particular patient need or because it does not have the infrastructure necessary to administer a benet (e.g., transportation services) (joins et al., 2007). carveout arrangements parse benets out to multiple entities, and it is often challenging for these entities to communicate and exchange data with one another in order to coordinate patient care effectively (joins et al., 2007).2 carveouts may also make it difcult to combine data at the patient level for research or monitoring purposes. carveout arrangements may pose a challenge to the estimation of indicators that require prescription drug dispensing data, or data on receipt of mental health or transportation services, since these services are among those that are most likely to be carved out of a health plan. a health plan™s claims data also will not contain data on care for which 1 in fy 2007, 71 percent of medicaid enrollees with hiv had some of their care paid for through medicaid managed care (kates, 2011). 2 the lewin group performed an assessment of carveout and carvein arrangements for pharmacy benets within medicaid mcos (joines et al., 2007). among the advantages to mcos with carvein arrangements were that providers were more likely to have realtime access to pharmaceutical data to help prevent potential drug interactions and polypharmacy (unwanted duplication of drugs), identify inappropriate use of drugs, monitor controlled substance usage, and other interventions. some representatives of carveout mcos reported that they do not always have access to realtime claims data to determine what medications patients are taking. the report noted the importance of data system integration to ensure realtime transfer of pharmaceutical information, both for mcos that carve their pharmaceutical services out to other entities and for carvein mcos who may contract with a pharmacy benets management group to manage pharmacy benets (joines et al., 2007).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 239a patient pays out of pocket or for which a claim is submitted before a deductible is exceeded (hicks, 2003). in other cases, services may not be documented because they are provided by nonphysicians or by contract practitioners and providers who cannot be reimbursed for the service. some state medicaid agencies limit the types of providers and practitioners that can bill and receive reimbursement, for example (bachman et al., 2006). furthermore, some states limit the number of services that can be billed to medicaid on the same day (e.g., state medicaid restrictions on sameday billing for a physical health and a mental health service or visit), which may result in inaccurate or incomplete documentation (kautz et al., 2008). another general source of inaccuracy in claims data that is tied to reimbursement is inappropriate or incomplete coding. providers may not use all applicable codes as a way to reduce administrative burden,3 exaggerate condition severity by entering alternate coding as a way to ensure payment, or enter alternate diagnoses for sensitive conditions such as mental illness or hiv in order to protect patients™ condentiality and insurability (hicks, 2003). as will be discussed in greater detail in chapter 5, effective use of health information technology (health it) can make for easier collection and exchange of care delivery data. to reap its full benets, health it will have to be adopted across insurers and a growing number of providers. however, a number of surveys show that adoption of electronic health records (ehrs) and other health it products is occurring slowly in settings where plwha receive care.4 the cost to implement and maintain health it systems is a frequently cited barrier to adoption (lardiere, 2009; rao et al., 2011; reardon and davidson, 2007). a 2011 study estimated the cost of implementation of an ehr into a physician practice to be $162,000 during the rst year (fleming et al., 2011). the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, a component of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 (arra, p.l. 1115), helps to reimburse providers for some of the costs for implementation of ehrs by authorizing incentive payments through medicare and medicaid to health care professionals and 3 surveys of physicians show that there is substantial administrative burden associated with reimbursement processes under medicaid and medicare (ama, 2010; cunningham and o™malley, 2009). this administrative burden includes payment delays, rejection of claims because a billing form was completed incorrectly or the physician was not able to verify a patient™s eligiblity, and complex rules and regulations on how claims are to be led (cunningham and o™malley, 2009). 4 an electronic health record (ehr) is an electronic record of healthrelated information on an individual that conforms to nationally recognized interoperability standards and that can be created, managed, and consulted by authorized clinicians and staff across more than one health care organization (hhs, 2008).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshospitals that implement certied ehrs and demonstrate certain usage requirements.5 this support is likely to increase ehr usage by hiv care providers owing to the large number of plwha who have medicare and/or medicaid coverage. a continuing obstacle to ehr adoption may be the inability of some providers to cover the upfront costs of implementation, however, since providers are reimbursed after demonstrating usage requirements. some have argued that under current provider reimbursement models, the larger share of the monetary benet from health it goes to health care payers (e.g., insurers) and that often the users of health it (e.g., hiv care providers) do not experience much in the way of nancial benet (e.g., johnston et al., 2003; pcast, 2010; sittig and singh, 2011). this could be a barrier to implementation or continued use of ehrs. in addition, questions remain about the role of commercial health insurers, who are major payers in many care settings, in funding health it implementation (sittig and singh, 2011). although most hiv care is nanced through public programs, the number of plwha who are eligible for commercial health insurance is likely to grow under the aca. potential reportingrelated barriers to the collection of hiv care datathe ability to monitor trends in hiv care depends on accurate and timely reporting of data by hiv care providers, laboratories, health departments, and other entities. for example, estimation of several of the committee™s recommended indicators for clinical hiv care require accurate estimates of the number of people living with diagnosed hiv infection in the united states, as well as cd4 and viral load testing information, reported for state and local as well as national hiv/aids surveillance purposes. as of april 2008, all 50 states, the district of columbia, and 6 dependent areas had implemented condential namebased hiv case reporting (in addition to aids case reporting), where the names of individuals who test positive for hiv are reported to state or local public health authorities (cdc, 2010) (table 41). some research has shown underreporting of hiv/aids cases by health care providers and laboratories to public health authorities (hall et al., 2006). past studies conducted in different geographic 5 under a medicare ehr incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive as much as $44,000 over a 5year period. incentive payments for hospitals and critical access hospitals (cahs) are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2million base payment. under a medicaid ehr incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive up to $63,750 over 6 years. as under the medicare program, incentive payments for hospitals and cahs under the medicaid program are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2million base payment (cms, 2012).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 241areas and years show a range of aids case reporting completeness of 60 to 98 percent (buehler et al., 1992; doyle et al., 2002; greenberg et al., 1993, jara et al., 2000; rosenblum et al., 1992; schwarcz et al., 1999). these studies were limited in that they assessed completeness of reporting for a specic geographic area or for an isolated time period (hall et al., 2006). attempting to address the weaknesses of previous studies, hall and colleagues (2006) used capturerecapture methods to assess the completeness of hiv and aids case data reported to surveillance programs during october 1, 2002 to september 30, 2003. over the 1year period, 11,266 hiv diagnoses were reported to surveillance programs in four states and two cities. the estimated completeness of reporting of hiv diagnoses was 76 percent when allowing 6 months of reporting delay and increased to 81 percent with 12 months of follow up. the estimated completeness of aids diagnoses reported to seven states and two cities (11,079 aids diagnoses were reported) was 77 percent when allowing 6 months of a reporting delay (hall et al., 2006). based on this research, in part, the cdc estimates the completeness of reporting of hiv infection to be more than 80 percent (cdc, 2010). barriers to the reporting of notiable diseases, including hiv/aids, may include lack of awareness of reporting requirements and procedures on the part of providers, human error, lack of motivation, and poor system processes (lazarus et al., 2009; overhage et al., 2008; turnberg et al., 2010). evidence suggests that automated electronic reporting facilitates more accurate and complete reporting of notiable diseases to public health authorities. for example, overhage and colleagues (2008) found that use of an automated electronic laboratory reporting (elr) system to report notiable conditions to health departments serving indianapolis, indiana, identied 4.4 times as many cases of such conditions as traditional, spontaneous, paperbased methods, likely by helping to overcome some of the barriers noted above. the elr system also identied cases about 8 days earlier than spontaneous reporting (overhage et al., 2008). despite substantial progress in the implementation of electronic reporting, some reporting mechanisms still depend on practitionerinitiated manual data entry and submission, which are more likely to result in delayed and inaccurate data (lazarus et al., 2009). state and local hiv/aids surveillance systems collect additional laboratory information on established, reported cases of hiv/aids, such as cd4 and viral load counts. these data are used for surveillance purposes, such as to verify existing cases of hiv/aids, to identify potential new cases, and to evaluate unmet medical need (cste, 2009). hiv diagnostic cd4 count and hiv viral load test results are reportable from clinical, hospital, laboratory, or other authorities in all but a few u.s. states and territories (cste, 2011). however, as is discussed in chapter 3, states currently vary monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242 table 41 hiv testing and reporting policiesstate or territoryc/ahiv  reportingname reporting implementationstate or  territoryc/ahiv  reportingname reporting implementationalabamacname1988 jannew hampshirec, aname2005 janalaskac, aname1999 febnew jerseyc, aname1992 janarizonac, aname1987 jannew mexicoc, aname1998 janarkansasc, aname1989 julnew yorkc, aname2000 juncaliforniac, a,name2006 aprnorth carolinacname1990 febcoloradoc, aname1985 novnorth dakotacname1988 janconnecticutc, aname2005 janohioc, aname1990 jundelawarec, a,name2006 feboklahomac, aname1988 jundistrict of columbiac, aname2006 novoregonc, aname2006 aprfloridac, aname1997 julpennsylvaniac, aname2002 octgeorgiac, aname2003 decrhode islandc, aname2006 julhawaiic, aname2008 marsouth carolinacname1986 febidahocname1986 junsouth dakotacname1988 janillinoisc, aname2006 jantennesseecname1992 janindianac, aname1988 jultexasc, aname1999 janiowacname1998 julutahc, aname1989 aprkansasc, aname1999 julvermontc, aname2008 aprkentuckyc, aname2004 octvirginiac, aname1989 jullouisianac, aname1993 febwashingtonc, aname2006 marmainec, aname2006 janwest virginiac, aname1989 janmarylandc, aname2007 aprwisconsinc, aname1985 novmassachusettsc, aname2007 janwyomingc, aname1989 junmichiganc, aname1992 apramerican samoac, aname2001 augminnesotac, aname1985 octguamc, aname2000 marmississippicname1988 augnorth mariana islandsc, aname2001 octmissouric, aname1987 octpalaucname2005 octmontanac, aname2006 septpuerto ricoc, aname2003 jannebraskac, aname1995 septu.s. virgin islandscname1998 decnevadacname1992 febnote: a = anonymous; c = condential.source: adapted from kff, 2011.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 243table 41 hiv testing and reporting policiesstate or territoryc/ahiv  reportingname reporting implementationstate or  territoryc/ahiv  reportingname reporting implementationalabamacname1988 jannew hampshirec, aname2005 janalaskac, aname1999 febnew jerseyc, aname1992 janarizonac, aname1987 jannew mexicoc, aname1998 janarkansasc, aname1989 julnew yorkc, aname2000 juncaliforniac, a,name2006 aprnorth carolinacname1990 febcoloradoc, aname1985 novnorth dakotacname1988 janconnecticutc, aname2005 janohioc, aname1990 jundelawarec, a,name2006 feboklahomac, aname1988 jundistrict of columbiac, aname2006 novoregonc, aname2006 aprfloridac, aname1997 julpennsylvaniac, aname2002 octgeorgiac, aname2003 decrhode islandc, aname2006 julhawaiic, aname2008 marsouth carolinacname1986 febidahocname1986 junsouth dakotacname1988 janillinoisc, aname2006 jantennesseecname1992 janindianac, aname1988 jultexasc, aname1999 janiowacname1998 julutahc, aname1989 aprkansasc, aname1999 julvermontc, aname2008 aprkentuckyc, aname2004 octvirginiac, aname1989 jullouisianac, aname1993 febwashingtonc, aname2006 marmainec, aname2006 janwest virginiac, aname1989 janmarylandc, aname2007 aprwisconsinc, aname1985 novmassachusettsc, aname2007 janwyomingc, aname1989 junmichiganc, aname1992 apramerican samoac, aname2001 augminnesotac, aname1985 octguamc, aname2000 marmississippicname1988 augnorth mariana islandsc, aname2001 octmissouric, aname1987 octpalaucname2005 octmontanac, aname2006 septpuerto ricoc, aname2003 jannebraskac, aname1995 septu.s. virgin islandscname1998 decnevadacname1992 febnote: a = anonymous; c = condential.source: adapted from kff, 2011.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244 monitoring hiv care in the united stateswith respect to the level at which viral load and cd4 test results are reportable. in several states, cd4 cell counts of less than 500 or 200 cells/mm3 are reportable, whereas in other states all cd4 values are reportable. in addition, some states do not report undetectable viral load results (see chapter 3, appendix table 35) (personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and prevention, october 6, 2011). the variability in the legislation and regulations for reporting may result in differences in the completeness of data and make it difcult to compare these measures across states and territories. the committee recommends (see recommendation 32 in chapter 3) that cdc take steps to enhance hiv/aids surveillance by issuing guidelines or criteria for national hiv surveillance system reporting to include all cd4 and viral load test results.nonreporting of hiv/aids cases identied at anonymous testing sites may be another barrier to the completeness of surveillance data. health departments introduced anonymous hiv testing early in the hiv epidemic because of the unique stigma attached to hiv and concern that fear of potential breaches in condentiality might deter individuals from testing (markovitz et al., 2011). unlike condential hiv testing where an individual™s name is recorded with her or his test result, in anonymous hiv testing a number or code is linked to the test, and only the individual being tested knows the code. individuals who test positive for hiv at anonymous testing sites are not reported to state or local health departments unless they choose to have their test results converted from anonymous to condential (cdc, 2011b). anonymous testing is an important service. research has shown that it contributes to earlier testing as well as medical care (as dened by the average number of days in hivrelated medical care before an aids diagnosis) (bindman et al., 1998). a recent study of public testing sites in colorado and washington state showed that anonymous testers were signicantly more likely to have cd4+ cell counts >500 cells/mm3, suggesting an earlier stage of hiv infection. yet because anonymous tests are not reported to condential hiv/aids surveillance systems, surveillance data may not be representative of individuals who are tested at anonymous testing sites (cdc, 1999, 2011b).6 research on the demographic characteristics of anonymous testers shows that they are often msm and younger, more often white, and more likely to report more years of education than individuals who receive condential testing (markovitz et al., 2011). most u.s. states and territories currently offer both anonymous and condential hiv testing, although some have only condential testing (table 41). 6 in addition, in a 2007 survey of hiv/aids surveillance capacity in health departments, only 20 percent of health departments responded that it is permissible in their jurisdiction for a provider or laboratory to report a new hiv or aids case without a name or other personal identier (cste, 2009). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 245many cases of hiv/aids identied at anonymous testing sites, along with cd4 count and viral load information, are added to surveillance after individuals enter care. one of the core functions of health departments in response to the hiv epidemic is the collection and analysis of data on the number of plwha and demographic data on individuals who receive services through federally funded hiv/aids programs within a jurisdiction (nastad, 2007). the data are compiled and analyzed at the local and national levels and serve as the basis for decision making about funding to state and local health departments to support hiv/aids programs. sharing of identiable health information across health departments is often necessary to link data for individuals who receive hiv care and supportive services across multiple jurisdictions. however, local laws designed to protect identiable information may inhibit data sharing among state public health authorities, compromising the accuracy of the analysis of and conclusions drawn from the data (hodge et al., 2011; personal communication, carmine grasso, new jersey department of health and senior services, august 9, 2011).7 funding mechanisms can result in inadequate resources within health departments to support activities related specically to data collection and analysis. when data collection and analysis activities are funded, they may be lumped into the category of administrative costs, which may result in inadequate allocation of nancial and staff resources to these activities. for example, due to budget constraints that impede the employment of staff with expertise in data collection and analysis, health departments may delegate data collection and analysis activities to support staff who may not be sufciently trained to perform these activities (personal communication, carmine grasso, new jersey department of health and senior services, august 9, 2011). reducing provider reporting burdengrantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs are an important source of hiv care and supportive services data. to comply with funding requirements, grantees must generate and submit to federal agencies numerous programmatic reports. these reports contain program information that can inform how well the clinical care and supportive services needs of plwha are being met locally and nationally. the range of data contained in such reports includes, but is not limited to, the number and demographics of plwha within a specic jurisdiction or provider setting who receive 7 the cdc issued guidance on standards for data security, condentiality, and use across surveillance and program areas for hiv, viral hepatitis, std, and tb prevention in state and local health jurisdictions in december 2011 (cdc, 2011a). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246 monitoring hiv care in the united statesmedical services, pharmaceutical assistance, and supportive services such as housing assistance, as well as information on the provision of care and supportive services to communities that are disproportionately affected by hiv. as the recipients of numerous core and supplemental hiv/aids grant awards, health departments are central to the collection and reporting of data to monitor progress in achieving nhas goals. however, health departments are currently overburdened with myriad grantrelated administrative activities. the scope of reporting requirements for state health departments in 2010 included 96 reports for core and supplemental (e.g., std and viral hepatitis) hiv/aids grant awards (figure 41). reporting includes several hundred specic variables (nastad, 2011; pacha, 2011). furthermore, the national alliance of state and territorial aids directors (nastad) reports that the current requirements for reporting on program planning, progress, and performance measures are project specic and inconsistent across related programming (e.g., hiv prevention and std prevention and control; hiv prevention and hiv/aids care). thus, health departments must modify their reporting practices to meet the specications of each grant. projects also operate on different grant cycles, which further complicates reporting. there is also substantial duplication in reporting practices owing to differences in the schedules for reporting on program progress and for local disease reporting and service data collection and validation. health departments often must submit incomplete or inaccurate data on program progress, and then resubmit the data after local data are updated (to ensure the accuracy and completeness of program progress reports) (nastad, 2012).8 according to the presidential advisory council on hiv/aids (pacha), the current reporting requirements for grantees of federally funded programs have not resulted in a set of metrics by which to thoroughly monitor the hiv epidemic. nor have they yielded data of sufcient quality to effectively evaluate and manage federal hiv/aids programs (pacha, 2011). a smaller number of key metrics that are relevant to nhas goals could be used across federal agencies to monitor progress in managing the epidemic. use of metrics that are comparable across funding agencies would also help to streamline reporting requirements for grantees (pacha, 2011). while the committee was preparing this report, there was an effort under way by the u.s. department of health and human services (hhs) to identify a uniform set of hivrelated metrics to be used across funding agencies and reduce reporting burden (hhs, 2011; valdiserri and forsyth, 8 in addition, many health departments currently face staff challenges that affect reporting capacity. budget cuts in many states™ hiv/aids and other infectious disease programs in health departments have resulted in hiring freezes and the elimination of staff positions, resulting in less capacity for the completion of the required reports (nastad, 2010). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 2472011). the committee supports this current effort and recommends that it be maintained and institutionalized (see recommendation 41 at the end of this chapter) so that data needs can be periodically reprioritized based on changes in the hiv epidemic and to facilitate continued minimization of grantee reporting burden. legislative action may also be necessary to reduce reporting burden in certain instances because some of the overlapping and duplicative reporting activities are delineated in federal legislative or appropriations language. for example, per its authorizing legislation, the ryan white hiv/aids program contains multiple parts. each part includes several different funding components and requirements that are often in con˚ict, duplicative, and may be burdensome for grantees. in addition to health departments, sites that provide direct clinical care and supportive services to plwha could stand to benet from the use of a streamlined set of metrics for hiv monitoring. such entities, such as community health centers (chcs), may themselves be the direct grantees of federally funded hiv/aids core or supplemental programs and report program data to funding agencies, or they may provide data to health departments that are then incorporated into reports for federal agencies. providers of hiv clinical care and supportive services have many competing responsibilities and restrictions (e.g., budget or expertise related) on the amount of staff time that can be devoted to reporting activities. as potential users of the collected data, the various providers of hiv care and supportive services can be involved in decision making about what data are figure 41 federal reporting requirements for core and supplemental hiv/aids grant awards administered by state health department hiv/aids directors.source: adapted from nastad, 2011. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248 monitoring hiv care in the united statesimportant to collect as well as processes for collecting them. early and continuous dialogue with providers about the data collection process can help to identify and address any concerns in a timely fashion, and perhaps help to reduce reporting burden later on. some federal hiv/aids data collection efforts are already informed by such input. as one example, proposed data variables for the health resources and services administration™s (hrsa™s) aids drug assistance program data report were vetted with ryan white hiv/aids program grantees (careacttarget.org, 2011). other policy barriers to the collection of hiv care dataseveral other laws and policies may present obstacles to the collection of data elements needed to estimate the committee™s recommended core indicators. these include federal and state policies that result in a fragmented health care system, as well as federal and state policies pertaining to the disclosure of health information. federal and state policies that result in a fragmented health care systemthere are multiple sources of care and care coverage for plwha in the united states. plwha who are insured and in the health care system rely heavily on public insurance programs (i.e., medicaid, medicare, both) to nance their care. plwha who are uninsured or underinsured rely on safety net programs such as the ryan white hiv/aids program, chcs, and public hospitals. other plwha are privately insured. care for many plwha is nanced through multiple sources (kff, 2004). the multiple sources of care and care coverage are uncoordinated, making it difcult for patients to navigate care. furthermore, eligibility for these programs depends on factors such as health or disability status, family status, employment status and income, and assets that will vary over time for any given individual (table 42). eligibility for programs also varies widely by state, particularly for medicaid and the ryan white hiv/aids program. thus, a person may be eligible for a program in one state but not in another, and not all states have the same coverage and care programs (kff, 2004).9 as plwha lose access to care or move from one source of 9 many plwha migrate to different jurisdictions following an hiv diagnosis. one study of migration patterns after hiv diagnosis among 760 hivinfected adults residing in the southern united states found that 226 (30 percent) moved after testing hiv positive (agee et al., 2006). in another study involving a national probability sample of 3,014 plwha, 17 percent of respondents made a move to a different state or noncontiguous county following an hiv diagnosis. these ndings suggested that plwha are more likely to move than noninfected monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 249care or care coverage to another, there may be gaps or losses in care data, or duplicate records, which can complicate collection of data needed to estimate the indicators recommended by the committee. some provisions of the aca will not be implemented by states uniformly, resulting in state variation in eligibility of plwha for health insurance and, by consequence, access to health care. one of several examples relates to the establishment of health insurance exchanges that will serve as points of access to commercial health insurance for individuals and employers. the aca sets broad parameters for the exchanges, but states are given ˚exibility on several features, such as whether to establish their own exchange or rely on the federal government to do so and how the exchange will interact with the state™s medicaid program (carey, 2010). in many states, legislation has been proposed to alter or oppose provisions of the aca. resulting differences in access to health care by state will have to be taken into consideration for the collection and use of program data for purposes of monitoring the impact of the aca on improvements in hiv care. in the current fragmented health care system, the various sources of care and care coverage often have their own policies relating to the sharing of data. data from private sources, such as commercial health insurers, may be proprietary, for example. as noted earlier in this chapter, local privacy laws and lack of data sharing mechanisms among state and local public health authorities can impede the collection and analysis of surveillance data (personal communication, carmine grasso, new jersey department of health and senior services, august 9, 2011). federal and state laws pertaining to the disclosure of health informationprivacy of personal health information is a concern for many plwha. fears of breaches in condentiality and resulting hiv stigma can result in individuals not accessing or adhering to care and treatment (kempf et al., 2010; whettengoldstein et al., 2001). when personally identifying information is disclosed, it can result in stigma, embarrassment, and discrimination. without some assurance of privacy, people may be disinclined to provide honest and complete disclosures of sensitive information, even to their physicians (iom, 2009). this section discusses federal and state privacy laws designed to protect patient health information and how these laws may in˚uence the collection of hiv care data for purposes of estimating the core indicators recommended by the committee. persons in the general population and are almost twice as likely to move out of state (berk et al., 2003). reasons for moving, especially for plwha in small or rural communities, may be to gain access to better hiv medical care, to obtain nancial assistance, or due to fear of stigma and condentiality issues (agee et al., 2006; berk et al., 2003). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.250 table 42 potential eligibility criteria for care coverage for plwha, by major payer/sourcemedicaidmedicareprivate (employer)private (individual)ryan whiteboth low income and categorically eligibleseniors or under65 disabledjobbasedindividual marketbasedlow income and uninsured or underinsuredincome/asset testyesnon/a, but costs involvedn/a, but costs involvedyesu.s. citizenyesyesnot necessarilynot necessarilynopreexisting  condition limitnonosome limitsyes, in most statesnostate variationyesnoyesyesyescapped fundingnonoyesyesyeshivspecic  programnonononoyesnote: n/a = not applicable.source: kff, 2010.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 251health insurance portability and accountability act privacy rule at the federal level, the sharing and use of people™s health information is governed primarily by the health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa, p.l. 104191), which was enacted by congress in 1996 with the goals of making health care delivery more efcient and increasing the number of americans with health insurance. the hipaa privacy rule was developed under administrative simplication provisions of the hipaa, instructing the hhs secretary to issue regulations concerning electronic transmission of health information, which was increasing in the early 1990s (iom, 2009). the privacy rule standardizes requirements for disclosure of individually identiable protected health information (phi) related to ﬁan individual™s past, present, or future physical or mental health condition; the provision of health care to the individual; or, the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health care to the individualﬂ (hhs, 2003). phi includes names, all geographic subdivisions smaller than a state, all elements of dates (except year) directly related to an individual, social security numbers, and other information.10 data elements to estimate indicators of hiv care that are recommended by the committee (see chapter 2) that may be considered phi include zip code, several datebased elements (e.g., date of hiv diagnosis, dates of viral load and cd4 counts), and age. the privacy rule applies to health plans, health care providers, and health care clearinghouses that electronically transmit health information in connection with certain health care transactions11 (hhs, 2003). these entities are collectively designated as ﬁcovered entitiesﬂ (box 41). covered entities, which include providers of care and care coverage to plwha, are required to obtain patient authorization before using or disclosing phi to third parties, except under the following circumstances:˚to the individual (unless required for access or accounting of disclosures);˚for treatment, payment, and health care operations; 10 the full list of phi includes the following: names; postal address information, other than town or city, state and zip code; telephone numbers; fax numbers; electronic mail addresses; social security numbers; medical record numbers; health plan beneciary numbers; account numbers; certicate or license numbers; vehicle identiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers; device identiers and serial numbers; web universal resource locators (urls); internet protocol (ip) address numbers; biometric identiers, including nger and voiceprints; and full face photographic images and any comparable images. 45 cfr § 164.514(e)(2) (hhs, 2003). 11 these transactions include claims, benet eligibility inquiries, referral authorization requests, or other transactions for which hhs has established standards under the hipaa transactions rule (hhs, 2003).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.252 monitoring hiv care in the united states˚to provide an individual the opportunity to agree or object to uses and disclosures of phi (informal permission); ˚for purposes of an incident to an otherwise permitted use and disclosure (i.e., a secondary use or disclosure that cannot reasonably be prevented, is limited in nature, and occurs as a result of another permitted use or disclosure); ˚for public interest and benet activities; and ˚for a limited data set for the purposes of research, public health or health care operations (hhs, 2003).the permitted use and disclosure of phi without patient authorization for ﬁpublic interest and benet activitiesﬂ is particularly relevant to the public health goal of monitoring improvement in hiv care. under this exception, covered entities may disclose phi for public health activitiesšfor example, to public health authorities as required by law to prevent and box 41 hipaa privacy ruleœcovered entitieshealth care provider health plans˚doctors ˚health insurance companies˚clinics ˚health maintenance organizations (hmos)˚psychologists ˚company health plans˚dentists ˚government programs that pay for health˚chiropractors care, such as medicare, medicaid, and the˚nursing homes military and veterans health care programs, ˚pharmacies and the indian health servicehealth care clearinghousesthis includes entities that process nonstandard health information they receive from another entity into a standard (i.e., standard electronic format or data content), or vice versa.other˚researchers employed by a covered entity˚some universities (or parts of universities, such as health centers)˚a public health clinic that is part of a public health agency monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 253control disease (such as hiv/aids), injury, and disability. public health activities include, but are not limited to, ﬁreporting of disease, injury, and vital events, and conducting public health surveillance, investigations, and interventionsﬂ (cdc, 2003). examples of public health authorities include the cdc and state and local health departments, which is why providers are permitted to report new hiv and aids cases with patient identifying information to area public health authorities.12 phi also may be disclosed to health oversight agencies for activities such as audits and investigations necessary for administration of the health care system and government benet programs (hhs, 2003). disclosure of phi by covered entities to hrsa™s hiv/aids bureau (hab) for purposes of monitoring and assessing its grants is permitted under the health oversight exception, for example (hrsa, 2010). phi may also be released for research, dened as ﬁa systematic investigation, including research development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledgeﬂ [45 cfr. §164.501] (hhs, 2003). the collection of data for purposes of monitoring hiv care may also occur under the limited data set permitted use and disclosure, which may be used for public health, health care operations, or research activities (hhs, 2003). a limited data set is phi that excludes direct identiers of an individual, her or his relatives, employers, or household members, but may include the following:˚geographic data other than street address (town, city, state, zip code);˚dates relating to an individual (dates of birth, admission, and discharge); and˚other unique identifying characteristics or codes not listed as direct identiers (hhs, 2003).covered entities are required to condition their disclosure of a limited data set to third parties on establishment of a data use agreement.13 12 ﬁpublic health authoritiesﬂ are ﬁlegally authorized to collect or receive the information for purposes of preventing or controlling disease, injury, or disability.ﬂ they include any ﬁentity working under a grant of authority from a public health authority, or when directed by a public health authority, to a foreign government agency that is acting in collaboration with a public health authorityﬂ (cdc, 2003). 13 a data use agreement establishes the permitted uses and disclosures of such information by the recipient, consistent with the purposes of research, public health, or health care operations; limits who can use or receive the data; and requires the recipient to agree not to reidentify the data or contact the individuals. the agreement must contain assurances that the recipient will use appropriate safeguards to prevent use or disclosure of the data other than as permitted by hipaa and the data use agreement, or as required by law (ocr, 2003). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshipaacovered entities may not disclose data on ﬁsmall cellsﬂ or for data elements for which there is a very small number of observations. for example, there may be a small number of hiv cases among a subpopulation in a geographic area, and release of the data could reveal an individual™s identity. this could be an impediment to analysis of subpopulations of plwha. the privacy rule does not apply to health information that has been deidentied in accordance with the privacy rule (hhs, 2003).14 limited data sets differ from deidentied information in that they may contain dates and some geographic information associated with an individual that are absent from deidentied information. several of the data systems identied in chapter 3 as important for monitoring indicators of hiv care are maintained within hipaacovered entities (i.e., medicaid statistical information system [msis], cms chronic condition data warehouse [ccw], kaiser permanente, north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design [naaccord], cfar network of integrated clinical systems [cnics]). in cases where philinked data are requested from these data systems for purposes of estimating core indicators, the reasons for use of the data may be required to fall within the permitted uses and disclosures of the privacy rule (listed above), which may include the public health and limited data set exceptions. even with the permitted uses and disclosures of phi and the allowable use of deidentied data from hipaacovered entities, the privacy rule and its varying interpretations may impede data collection (gostin and nass, 2009). in an evaluation of the collection of race, ethnicity, and language data in medical practices with ve or fewer physicians, hasnianwynia and colleagues found practices worried that asking questions about race or ethnicity could be a violation of patient privacy rights under the hipaa, even though the collection of race and ethnicity data from patients in health care settings does not violate the hipaa privacy rule and is legal under both federal and state law (hasnianwynia et al., 2010). in another study, health information managers reported increases in the public™s misunderstanding about release of patient information under hipaa to be a major barrier to the release of such information. lack of an umbrella policy or regulation dening infractions and enforcement and challenges in control14 the privacy rule designates two ways in which a covered entity can determine that health information is deidentied. under the ﬁsafe harborﬂ approach, a covered entity may consider data to be deidentied if that entity removes identiers and has no reason to believe that the remaining information could be used to identify a person. alternatively, a covered entity may consider data to be deidentied if ﬁa qualied statistical or scientic expert concludes, through the use of accepted analytic techniques, that the risk the information could be used alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, to identify the subject is very smallﬂ (hhs, 2010). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 255ling safeguards related to the release of information with increased use of health it, such as electronic health records, were other major barriers (houser et al., 2007). the implementation of the privacy rule has changed the way in which covered entities manage health information. concerned about compliance with the privacy rule, many providers have reevaluated the manner in which patient data are stored and disseminated (wilson, 2009). as noted previously, the privacy rule permits the release of phi without patient permission for public health purposes. yet the terms of release are unclear and leave room for interpretation as to whether disclosure is permitted. covered entities and their attorneys (whose job is to minimize clients™ risk rather than improve public health) may decide not to release requested information, given that the release of phi under the public health exception is permitted but not mandatory (wilson, 2009). public health ofcials have found success in gaining access to personal health data to be mixed and note that covered entities cite the privacy rule as a reason not to provide data to researchers and health departments (stoto, 2008). concern that reported data may reveal aspects of a person™s lifestyle such as health status (e.g., hiv) or behaviors (e.g., unsafe sex or needle sharing) may result in reluctance to disclose phi among both patients and providers (gostin, 2002). a potential disincentive to reporting is that covered entities that do release phi for certain public health activities are required to record such disclosures and make an accounting of the disclosures available to patients who request them (wilson, 2009).15 reporting of patient information to authorities can create tensions between physicians, whose primary role is to protect their patients™ interests, and public health, whose primary role is to protect the population™s interests (gostin, 2002; wilson, 2009). as noted in chapter 3, epidemiologic studies are a useful source of data on hiv care. researchers who conduct epidemiologic studies on plwha often have to obtain patient information from hospitals and clinics that are hipaacovered entities (houser et al., 2007). a few studies conducted after the privacy rule became effective in 2003 suggested that the hipaa privacy rule had a negative impact on the conduct of health research, including research related to public health surveillance (e.g., armstrong et al., 2005; linet, 2003; ness, 2007). a 2007 study showed that the privacy rule had little impact on a researcher™s ability to obtain patient medical records. a likely byproduct of hipaa, however, was the refusal of 10 percent of facilities to accept a hipaacompliant release form other than their own, 15 where data are released for public health activities, hipaacovered entities are required to make a listing of all disclosures of an individual™s protected health information made by the covered entity or its business associates for up to 6 years preceding the request (hhs, 2003). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.256 monitoring hiv care in the united statesadding delay time, increasing participant burden, and creating a possible loss of study outcomes (houser et al., 2007). condentiality of alcohol and drug abuse patient records regulationhivinfected drug users have increased prevalence and frequency of medical, substance use, and psychiatric disorders that result in increased morbidity and mortality (altice et al., 2010). left untreated, these comorbid disorders can complicate treatment by impeding adherence to antiretroviral therapy, which is critical to maintaining suppression of viral replication (altice et al., 2010; fiellin, 2004). therefore, screening and referral for substance abuse treatment are important components of hiv care. condentiality has been fundamental to the practice of substance abuse treatment in the united states for more than four decades. in 1975, congress enacted the condentiality of alcohol and drug abuse patient records regulation16 (see 42 cfr § part 2 or ﬁpart 2ﬂ) after it recognized that the stigma associated with substance abuse, as well as fear of prosecution, might deter individuals from entering treatment (fenner, 2009; samhsa, 2004). the regulation, hereafter referred to as ﬁpart 2,ﬂ establishes condentiality requirements for patient records maintained in connection with application for or receipt of services provided by federally assisted programs that provide alcohol and drug treatment, diagnosis, and referral services programs.17 part 2 has been described as ﬁpowerfully preemptiveﬂ of both lesser state laws and hipaa (rosenbaum et al., 2009). part 2 generally requires patient consent for disclosure of identifying information that reveals that a patient is in, has been in, or has applied for substance abuse treatment.18 it also prohibits health care providers and plans that receive information from disclosing it to another entity without patient consent. most substance abuse treatment programs are subject to both part 2 and the privacy rule and must comply with both. according to guidance for alcohol and substance abuse programs developed by samhsa, this generally means that 16 ﬁrecordsﬂ refer to ﬁany information, whether recorded or not, relating to a patient received or acquired by a federally assisted alcohol or drug programﬂ (samhsa, 2004).17 broadly dened, ﬁfederally assistedﬂ programs are those that receive direct federal funding, but also have a taxexempt status from the internal revenue service (white and daniel, 2009). forprot drug and alcohol treatment programs and private practitioners who do not receive federal assistance are not subject to the requirements of part 2, unless state law requires them to comply with part 2 (samhsa, 2004, 2010). 18 this may include name, address information, social security number, ngerprint, photograph, or similar information by which the identity of a patient can be determined with reasonable accuracy and speed either directly or by reference or through verication with another party (42 cfr 2.11).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 257programs will follow part 2 and not disclose information unless they receive patient consent or can point to an exception that permits the disclosure. then programs conrm that the disclosure is also allowed under the privacy rule (samhsa, 2004). there are instances in which patient identifying information can be disclosed without patient consent under part 2, such as (42 cfr part 2, subpart dšdisclosures without patient consent):˚to medical personnel in case of a medical emergency;˚to qualied personnel to conduct research, management audits, nancial audits, or program evaluation (e.g., through a qualied service organization agreement [qsoa]);19˚for communications within a program; and˚for communications between a program and an entity having direct administrative control over the program.unlike the privacy rule, which usually permits the disclosure of phi without patient consent for treatment, payment, or health care operations purposes, part 2 typically requires patient consent for such disclosures (see 42 cfr §§ 2.3, 2.12, 2.13). as with the privacy rule, part 2 does not apply to data that have been deidentied (samhsa, 2004). part 2 does not prohibit drug and alcohol treatment programs from meeting statemandated communicable disease reporting and followup responsibilities. therefore, programs can report cases of hiv/aids and other communicable diseases without patient consent to local public health authorities, such as through a qsoa with the local public health department or by some other mechanism. reported cases of hiv/aids would probably not be linked to substance abuse treatment information; however, most states require reporters to identify themselves (which may disclose that the information is coming from a drug and alcohol abuse treatment program) (samhsa, 2004). part 2 may impede the collection of data on date of diagnosis for substance use disorder, date of referral for substance abuse services, and date of rst visit for substance abuse services. these data elements are needed to estimate the proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these services within 60 days, one of the core indicators recom19 a qualied service organization provides services to a part 2 program, such as data processing, bill collecting, dosage preparation, laboratory analyses, or legal, medical, accounting or other professional services, and has entered into a written agreement with a program under which that person acknowledges that in receiving, storing, processing or otherwise dealing with any patient records from the programs, it is fully bound by these regulations (samhsa, 2010). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.258 monitoring hiv care in the united statesmended by the committee. most drug and alcohol treatment programs receive federal assistance (samhsa, 2010) and therefore are required to be in compliance with part 2. plwha in need of substance abuse treatment, especially those who are low income and under or uninsured, are apt to receive such treatment from federally assisted programs. clinical laboratory improvement amendments several of the committee™s recommended indicators require data from laboratory testing results. clinical laboratory testing performed on humans in the united states is regulated by the federal clinical laboratory improvement amendments (clia). clia may apply to hiv and other tests (e.g., cd4 count, viral load, drug resistance testing, tuberculosis testing, and std and hepatitis screenings) received by plwha that are processed by clinical laboratories. clia regulations allow clinical laboratories to disclose test results to individuals who are authorized under state law to order or receive test results and, if applicable, to the person responsible for using the test results and the referring laboratory, in the case of reference labs (pritts et al., 2009a; 42 cfr § 493.2). in the absence of state guidance, clia allows clinical laboratories to release laboratory results to ﬁthe individual responsible for using the test results and the laboratory that initially requested the testﬂ (42 cfr § 493.1291[f]). who is responsible for using the test results is not dened under clia, however (purington et al., 2010). laboratory reporting of hiv, cd4, and viral load information to public health authorities is required in virtually all u.s. states (although, as discussed earlier, the level at which cd4 count and viral load reporting is required varies by state) (personal communication, amy lansky, centers for disease control and prevention, october 6, 2011). while the clia provisions suggest that test results may be furnished to providers who order tests, whether clinical laboratories may directly provide results to health care providers who did not order the test or to patients varies by state (pritts et al., 2009b; purington et al., 2010). the role of state laws on clinical laboratory reporting is discussed in the following section. state health privacy laws in addition to federal laws, state statutes and regulations govern the disclosure of health information. in general, a state health privacy law that is more stringent about the privacy of individually identiable health information takes precedence over federal law (pritts et al., 2009b). state health privacy laws also are the primary laws governing entities that hold health information but are not covered under federal privacy laws (e.g., monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 259health care providers who do not electronically transmit health information in connection with health care transactions). the landscape of state health privacy laws is uneven because states are diverse in the rights and protections that they provide. because it was peripheral to the study charge, the committee did not conduct an independent review of current laws for all u.s. states and territories pertaining to the privacy of health information needed to estimate the core indicators of hiv care, behavioral health, and supportive services recommended in this report (although, such a review might be helpful to gain a better sense of the full extent to which state laws are barriers to the collection of necessary data). instead, the committee consulted existing reviews of state health privacy laws and independently reviewed code pertaining to the privacy of health information for a few select states.state laws pertaining to hiv and other communicable disease reporting consistent with federal notiable disease reporting, many states™ laws articulate that hiv test results, as well as results from tests for other communicable diseases, may be reported without patient permission to public health authorities. under current new york state law, for example, a person who obtains condential hivrelated information may not disclose such information except to ﬁa federal, state, county or local health ofcer when such disclosure is mandated by federal or state lawﬂ (new york state article 27f, hiv and aids related information). similarly, under illinois law, no person is permitted to disclose the identity of a person who receives hiv testing or the results of the test in a manner that permits the identication of the person, except to ﬁthe department or the local health authority, in accordance with rules for reporting and controlling the spread of disease, or as otherwise provided by state lawﬂ (illinois title 77: public health, subchapter k: communicable disease control and immunizations). disclosure of health information to other health care providers for treatment purposes the exchange of health information among providers for treatment purposes is essential both for the provision of coordinated care for plwha and for accurate and complete data collection. a review of state law requirements for the disclosure of health information that is often considered ﬁsensitiveﬂ and provided heightened legal protections showed that almost all u.s. states and territories have statutes or regulations that specically address disclosure of hivrelated information or communicable diseases including hiv (pritts et al., 2009b). the scope of state laws governing disclosure of hivrelated information between care providers includes information related to hiv test taking and results, other (i.e., nonhiv testing) hivrelated information, and/or the redisclosure of monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.260 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshivrelated information (i.e., from a recipient to someone else) (table 43). as of 2008, when the review of state health information laws was conducted, laws in 41 u.s. states and territories addressed information related to hiv testing and results. at least 19 of these states had hivspecic laws that apply to a wide range of hivrelated information and limit disclosure of all information that identies, or could identify, a person as having hiv/aids. laws in 15 states and territories expressly prohibited recipients of hivrelated information from redisclosing the information (pritts et al., 2009a).20 pritts and colleagues (2009b) note that the scope of the laws in states that address the disclosure of hivrelated information beyond hiv testing appear broad enough to possibly include valuable care information, such as information on antiretroviral medications. for example, the code for one of these states, new york, denes ﬁcondential hivrelated informationﬂ as: any information, in the possession of a person who provides one or more health or social services or who obtains the information pursuant to a release of condential hiv related information, concerning whether an individual has been the subject of an hiv related test, or has hiv infection, hiv related illness or aids, or information which identies or reasonably could identify an individual as having one or more of such conditions, including information pertaining to such individual™s contacts (part 63 hiv/aids testing, reporting and condentiality of hivrelated information). some states permit the disclosure of hivrelated information for treatment purposes without patient permission absent any qualifying conditions. in many states, the disclosure of information without patient permission is 20 states expressly prohibiting redisclosure of hivrelated information were arizona, california, connecticut, delaware, florida, hawaii, maine, new mexico, new york, ohio, oregon, pennsylvania, washington, west virginia, and wisconsin. table 43 scope of state and territorial statutes and regulations governing hivrelated informationnumber of states and territoriesinformation related to hiv test taking and results41other information related to hiv19recipient expressly prohibited from redisclosing informationa15source: adapted from pritts et al., 2009a.adoes not include statutes and regulations that, as a general rule, apply to holders of hivrelated information. includes only provisions that expressly restrict recipient™s redisclosure of information. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 261allowed under specied circumstances, such as for continuing or emergency care purposes or when necessary for treatment, and is subject to various interpretations. as of 2008, ve states, the district of columbia, and four u.s. territories did not allow the disclosure of hivrelated information for treatment purposes without patient permission (pritts et al., 2009b). states that require patient permission to disclose hivrelated information often require that the permission be in writing, although in some of these states, separate permission is not required for each release of information. a current provision of massachusetts public health law on the disclosure of hiv testing results, for instance, states that no health care facility, physician, or health care provider shall ﬁdisclose the results of such test to any person other than the subject thereof without rst obtaining the subject™s written informed consent; or identify the subject of such tests to any person without rst obtaining the subject™s written informed consentﬂ (massachusetts laws ch.111 70f). almost every state has a statute or regulation that governs the disclosure of information related to substance abuse treatment. state laws generally impose condentiality requirements on both substance abuse treatment records as well as the patient™s identity. the laws also focus primarily on patient information and records generated by substance abuse treatment programs and facilities, rather than those generated in the context of clinical care. the entities covered by statutes and regulations vary across states (e.g., in some states the law applies to programs that operate under or who have a contract with the state while other states™ laws have broader application) (pritts et al., 2009b). as of 2008, laws in more than 30 states incorporate the federal standards (part 2) for protection of condentiality in federally funded programs and/or statefunded programs. pritts and colleagues noted that in at least one state (pennsylvania) restrictions on the disclosure of substance abuse treatmentrelated information for treatment reasons appear to be more restrictive than part 2. a number of states™ laws specify the circumstances under which providers may disclose substance abuse treatmentrelated information without patient permission, such as for continuityofcare purposes (pritts et al., 2009b).while there is no federal equivalent, nearly every state also has a statute or regulation that governs the disclosure of information maintained by mental health treatment facilities that provide inpatient treatment.21 the scope of entities covered varies; in some states the law applies to services provided by state, local, or county government, while in others the law applies to any establishment that provides mental health treatment. most states™ mental health laws allow inpatient mental health treatment facilities 21 at the federal level, mental health treatment information is protected under the hipaa privacy rule, which addresses all types of health care information.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262 monitoring hiv care in the united statesto disclose health information for treatment reasons but for very limited circumstances. some states have limitations on disclosures that may be made for treatment, such as restricting the type of information that can be shared and with whom. in several states, recipients are prohibited from further disclosure of the information except as authorized under the terms of the law. a few states™ mental health laws treat mental health information the same as other types of health information and generally permit disclosure without patient permission for treatment purposes. (the review did not include outpatient mental health treatment facilities.)with respect to general clinical information, pritts and colleagues (2009b) found that the hipaa privacy rule sets the standard for disclosure of information by hospitals and medical doctors in many states (either expressly or implicitly). in other states, statutory or regulatory provisions independently allow for disclosure of health information without patient permission for treatment purposes. a handful of states have laws that either limit disclosures to providers who previously provided treatment to the patient, or allow patients to opt out of such disclosures (pritts et al., 2009b). under the texas health and safety code, for example, disclosure of a patient™s health care information by hospitals without the patient™s authorization is permitted only: to a health care provider who is rendering health care to the patient when the request for the disclosure is made . . . [or] . . . to a prospective health care provider for the purpose of securing the services of that health care provider as part of the patient™s continuum of care, as determined by the patient™s attending physician (texas health and safety code § 241.153). most states™ laws appear to permit pharmacists to disclose general clinical information for treatment reasons without patient permission. however, a few states indicate that the decision as to whether to provide such information is based on the pharmacists™ own professional judgment. in other states, pharmacists may disclose clinical health information without patient consent only to specic types of care providers (pritts et al., 2009b).disclosure of information maintained by clinical laboratories state law controls who is authorized to receive the results of tests performed by clinical laboratories, as described in the discussion of clia above. a survey of state laws on the release of clinical laboratory test results by independent (rather than public health) laboratories showed that clinical laboratory licensing laws often restrict the release of test results to the person who ordered the test or the person authorized to use the test (pritts et al., 2009a). most states do not expressly allow results to be released to other monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 263providers.22,23 in addition, a few states have laws that limit the release of test results to health care providers who are licensed to practice within the state, presenting obstacles to the provision of care across state lines. pritts and colleagues (2009a) observe that states that provide heightened condentiality for specic medical conditions such as hiv/aids impose an additional layer of complexity on the manner in which clinical laboratories may release test results. it is not always apparent whether clinical laboratories are subject to these statutes and regulations, which are written to cover a broad range of entities. as of 2008, laws in a handful of states with hiv/aids condentiality laws that are broad enough to possibly include independent clinical laboratories expressly indicate that hiv test results must or may be provided to the person who ordered the test. in about half of the states, hiv/aids condentiality laws appear to permit the disclosure of hiv test results to health care providers and health care facilities for treatment reasons without the patient™s permission. some states have a ﬁneedtoknowﬂ standard on the release of hiv test results, perhaps leaving disclosure open to various interpretations (pritts et al., 2009a). for example, ohio™s code on the disclosure of hiv test results to providers states: the results of an hiv test or a diagnosis of aids or an aidsrelated condition may be disclosed to a health care provider, or an authorized agent or employee of a health care facility or a health care provider, if the provider, agent, or employee has a medical need to know the information and is participating in the diagnosis, care, or treatment of the individual on whom the test was performed or who has been diagnosed as having aids or an aidsrelated condition (ohiorev.code.ann.3701.243 [b]). privacy issues in state public health agencies the public health data standards consortium conducted a survey of past, present, and future privacyrelated issues faced by public health agencies in 2008. among current issues, public health agencies identied the need for a standardized way to ensure data deidentication, because statutes (federal and state) have different denitions of deidentication. agencies also identied the need for secure and reliable methods for linkages across databases. how to handle data breaches and identity theft in an environment where more 22 as of 2008, about half of the states had laws that expressly allowed or required clinical laboratories to release test results to authorized providers who requested the test. in some of these states, test results may be released only to the person who ordered the test; in other states, the law enumerates the health care providers who are authorized to order tests and receive results (pritts et al., 2009a). 23 where state law does not specify who is authorized to receive test results, clinical laboratories may send results only to persons who ordered the test or who are responsible for using the test (pritts et al., 2009a).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264 monitoring hiv care in the united statesinformation is being collected electronically was another concern. privacy ofcers in public health agencies noted challenges to ensuring privacy and securityrelated training and education of the workforce as well as a need for clarication on oversight responsibilities and enforcement. one hivspecic issue noted by privacy ofcers was the new federal requirement to report hiv/aids data to states with identiable information (name), which required amendments to regulations as well as assurances to plwha that their data will be protected (phdsc, 2008). participating health agencies also noted several new and emerging health information privacy issues. privacy ofcers in health agencies identied the need to develop state public health privacy frameworks to simplify understanding and documentation of privacy regulations pertaining to the reporting of health information. the growing demand for identiable information for research purposes that is occurring as a result of increased availability of data in electronic form creates greater opportunity for linking data across systems and tracking individuallevel data longitudinally. however, privacy ofcers reported that these changes present more complex privacy issues for state agency institutional review boards and raise ethical challenges in balancing increased access to data for research and ensuring the privacy and security of health information (phdsc, 2008). conclusions and recommendationsreimbursementrelated barriers to the collection of hiv care data˚reimbursement policies and practices can result in the dispersal of care information across multiple entities. for example, care services that are carved out of a health plan (e.g., behavioral health, transportation, dental, and pharmacy benets) may not be recorded in the primary insurer™s claims records. therefore, the primary insurer™s records will not provide a complete medical history of the patient. means to link data across reimbursement systems will be required to gain access to a complete medical history for many plwha.reportingrelated barriers to the collection of hiv care data˚several of the core indicators recommended by the committee require estimates of the total number of people diagnosed with hiv in the united states, as well as dates and values of cd4 count and viral load tests. incomplete hiv/aids case reporting by providers to public health authorities; variability in the levels at which cd4 counts and viral loads are reportable across states; and a monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 265lack of mechanisms for health departments to share data across jurisdictions may in˚uence the comprehensiveness and accuracy of reported data. stafng, administrative, and budgetary constraints are other potential barriers to reporting for health departments and other providers of hiv care and supportive services. ˚current national estimates of the number of people who are tested for hiv at anonymous sites were not available at the time of this report. most states do offer anonymous hiv testing, however. although anonymous testing should be acknowledged as a minor barrier to the completeness of hiv surveillance data, its benets may outweigh this drawback since the availability of anonymous testing may promote testing among individuals who are concerned about potential breaches in the condentiality of their testing information. reducing data reporting burden˚grantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs are a vital source of hiv care and supportive services data, but are currently overburdened by the many reporting obligations they are required to fulll as a condition of program funding. the reporting requirements for core and supplemental hiv/aids programs administered by health departments are often project specic, even across related programming (e.g., hiv prevention and hiv/aids care), requiring staff to modify their reporting practices for each grant. reporting is further complicated by the fact that programs operate on different grant cycles so that reports for related programs are due a different times during the year. according to the presidential advisory council on hiv/aids, the current reporting requirements for grantees of federally funded hiv/aids programs have not resulted in a set of metrics by which to thoroughly monitor the hiv epidemic or to evaluate federal hiv/aids programs. a smaller number of metrics that are aligned with nhas goals could be used across federal agencies to monitor progress in managing the epidemic. as it was preparing this report, the committee learned that there is an effort under way by hhs to identify a set of hivrelated metrics to be used across funding agencies and reduce reporting burden for program grantees. the committee supports this current effort and recommends that it be maintained so that data needs can be periodically reprioritized based on changes in the hiv epidemic and to facilitate continued minimization of grantee reporting burden. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.266 monitoring hiv care in the united states recommendation 41. the department of health and human services should maintain and institutionalize the existing effort to streamline data collection and reduce reporting requirements for federally funded hiv/aids programs. this will allow for periodic reprioritization of data needs based on changes in the hiv epidemic that occur over time, and ensure the continuous availability of data to effectively monitor hiv care while minimizing reporting requirements for grantees. the data reprioritization should involve health departments, hiv provider organizations, and federal agencies that are major funders of hiv/aids programs, including hhs, the department of veterans affairs, and the department of housing and urban development. ˚engagement of health departments, hiv care clinicians, and other stakeholders in the planning of an hiv/aids data collection effort can help to identify what data are most important to collect (since these groups are often users of the collected data) as well as processes for collecting those data. involvement of stakeholders may foster greater investment in data collection and reduce reporting burden since the data collected will be more closely aligned with stakeholders™ own data needs. other policy barriers to the collection of hiv care data˚the various sources of care and care coverage in the united states each have their own eligibility requirements. as a result, many plwha shift in and out of care and change providers over the course of their illness, which creates opportunities for gaps or losses of patient data and impedes longitudinal tracking of care. improved exchange of data across systems maintained by insurers and providers would help to address this problem, as discussed in chapter 5. ˚several provisions of the aca are being implemented differently by states. resulting differences across states in access to health insurance and health care will have to be taken into consideration for purposes of monitoring the improvements hiv care resulting from the aca and more generally. ˚providers of hiv care and supportive services contend with numerous federal laws and state statutes and regulations on the proper use and disclosure of patient information. the inconsistent nature of these protections, which often leave the decision of whether or monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 267not to disclose requested patient information open to various interpretations, may result in discrepancies in data sharing and reporting across states and providers. such discrepancies may in˚uence the availability and quality of data needed to estimate indicators of hiv care and supportive services.  recommendation 42. the department of health and human services should issue guidance to the hiv care community to clarify what is permissible patient information to share given federal and state privacy laws. referencesagee, b. s., e. funkhouser, j. m. roseman, h. fawal, s. d. holmberg, and s. h. vermund. 2006. migration patterns following hiv diagnosis among adults residing in the nonurban deep south. aids care 18(suppl 1):s51s58. altice, f. l., a. kamarulzaman, v. v. soriano, m. schechter, and g. h. friedland. 2010. treatment of medical, psychiatric, and substanceuse comorbidities in people infected with hiv who use drugs. the lancet 376:367387. ama (american medical association). 2010. the impact of medicare physician payment on seniors™ access to care http://media.washingtonpost.com/wpsrv/outlook/documents/medicaresurveyresults061810.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).armstrong, d., e. klinerogers, s. m. jani, e. b. goldman, j. fang, d. mukherjee, b. k. nallamothu, and k. a. eagle. 2005. potential impact of the hipaa privacy rule on data collection in a registry of patients with acute coronary syndrome. archives of internal medicine 23:11251129. bachman, j., h. a. pincus, j. k. houtsinger, and j. unutzer. 2006. funding mechanisms for depression care management: opportunities and challenges. general hospital psychiatry 28: 278288.berk, m. l., c. l. schur, j. l. dunbar, s. bozzette, and m. shapiro. 2003. short report: migration patterns among persons living with hiv. social science & medicine 57:10911097. bindman, a. b., d. osmond, f. m. hecht, j. s. lehman, k. vranizan, d. keane, and a. reingold. 1998. multistate evaluation of anonymous hiv testing and access to medical care. journal of the american medical association 280(16):14161420.buehler, j. w., r. l. berkelman, and j. k. stehrgreen. 1992. the completeness of aids surveillance. journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes 5:257264.careacttarget. 2011. adap data report proposed clientlevel and granteelevel data variables. grantee worksheets. http://www.careacttarget.org/library/media/adap/adapdatareportproposedcldvarworksheet.pdf and http://www.careacttarget.org/ library/media/adap/adapdatareportproposedgldvarworksheet.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). carey, r. 2010. health insurance exchanges: key issues for state implementation. http://www.rwjf.org/les/research/70388.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). cdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 1999. guidelines for national human immunodeciency virus case surveillance, including monitoring for human immunodeciency virus infection and acquired immunodeciency syndrome. morbidity and mortality weekly report 48(rr13):128.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.268 monitoring hiv care in the united statescdc. 2003. hipaa privacy rule and public health. guidance from the cdc and the u.s. department of health and human services. morbidity and mortality weekly report 52:112. cdc. 2010. hiv infection reporting. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/reporting.htm (accessed march 7, 2012).cdc. 2011a. data security and condentiality guidelines for hiv, viral hepatitis, sexually transmitted disease, and tuberculosis programs: standards to facilitate sharing and use of surveillance data for public health action. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/guidelines/securitycondentialityhiv.htm?source=govdelivery (accessed march 7, 2012).cdc. 2011b. hiv surveillance report. diagnoses of hiv infection and aids in the united states and dependent areas, 2009. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2009report/pdf/2009surveillancereport.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). cms (centers for medicare & medicaid services). 2012. overview: ehr incentive program. https://www.cms.gov/ehrincentiveprograms/ (accessed march 7, 2012).crystal, s., a. akincigil, s. bilder, and j. t. walkup. 2007. studying prescription drug use and outcomes with medicaid claims data: strengths, limitations, and strategies. medical care 45(10 suppl):s58s65.cste (council of state and territorial epidemiologists). 2009. national assessment of hiv/aids surveillance capacity. june. http://www.cste.org/dnn/portals/0/hiv%20 capacity%20assessment%20report.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). cste. 2011. state reportable conditions assessment. http://www.cste.org/dnn/programs andactivities/publichealthinformatics/statereportableconditionsqueryresults/tabid/261/default.aspx (accessed march 7, 2012). cunningham, p. j., and a. s. o™malley. 2009. do reimbursement delays discourage medicaid participation by physicians? health affairs 28(1):w17w28.doyle, t. j., m. k. glynn, and s. l. groseclose. 2002. completeness of notiable infectious disease reporting in the united states: an analytical literature review. american journal of epidemiology 155:866874.fenner, j. j. 2009. mum™s the word: mental health and substance abuse treatment information and other specialized medical records issues. http://lldlaw.com/linkclick.aspx? leticket=nwje5zv78be%3d&tabid=81 (accessed march 7, 2012). fiellin, d. a. 2004. substance use disorders in hivinfected patients: impact and new treatment strategies. topics in hiv medicine 12(3):7782.fleming, n. s., s. d. culler, r. mccorkle, e. r. becker, and d. j. ballard. 2011. the nancial and nonnancial costs of implementing electronic health records in primary care practices. health affairs 30(3):481489.gostin, l. o. 2002. surveillance and public health research: privacy and the ﬁright to know.ﬂ in: public health law and ethics: a reader. edited by l.o. gostin. berkeley, ca: university of california press. pp. 295.gostin, l. o., and s. nass. 2009. reforming the hipaa privacy rule: safeguarding privacy and promoting research. journal of the american medical association 301(13):13731375.greenberg, a. e., r. hindin, a. g. nicholas, e. l. bryan, and p. a. thomas. 1993. the completeness of aids case reporting in new york city. journal of the american medical association 269:29953001.hall, h. i., r. song, j. e. gerstle, and l. m. lee. 2006. assessing the completeness of reporting of human immunodeciency virus diagnoses in 20022003: capturerecapture methods. american journal of epidemiology 164:391397. hasnianwynia, r., k. vandyke, m. youdelman, c. krautkramer, s. l. ivey, r. gilchick, e. kaleba, and m. k. wynia. 2010. barriers to collecting patient race, ethnicity, and primary language data in physician practices: an exploratory study. journal of the national medical association 102(9):769775.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 269hhs (department of health and human services). 2003. summary of the hipaa privacy rule. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/privacysummary.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).hhs. 2008. the national alliance for health information technology report to the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology on dening key health information technology terms. http://cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/ collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8 (accessed march 7, 2012). hhs. 2010. workshop on the hipaa privacy rule™s deidentication standard http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/coveredentities/deidentication/deidentication workshop2010.html (accessed may 29, 2012)hhs. 2011. review reporting and recordkeeping requirements to reduce burdens (may 31). http://www.hhs.gov/open/recordsandreports/execorders/13563/draft/candidates/5a2review.html (accessed march 7, 2012). hicks, j. 2003. the potential of claims data to support the measurement of health care quality. http://www.rand.org/pubs/rgsdissertations/rgsd171.html (accessed march 7, 2012). hodge, j. g., t. kaufman, and c. jaques. 2011. legal issues concerning identiable health data sharing between state and local public heath authorities and tribal epidemiology centers in selected u.s. jurisdictions. http://www.cste.org/webpdfs/legalissuesconcerning identifiablehealthdatasharingbetweenstatelocalpublichealthauthoritiesandtribal epidemiologycentersinselectedusjurisdictionsfinal.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). houser, s. h., h. w. houser, and r. m. shewchuk. 2007. assessing the effects of the hipaa privacy rule on release of patient information by healthcare facilities. perspectives in health information management 4(1):111.hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2010. using data to measure public health performance: a guide for ryan white hiv/aids program grantees. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/les/datatomeasure2010.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).iom (institute of medicine). 2009. beyond the hipaa privacy rule: enhancing privacy, improving health through research. washington, dc: the national academies press.jara, m. m., k. m. gallagher, and s. schieman. 2000. estimation of completeness of aids case reporting in massachusetts. epidemiology 11:209213.johnston, d., e. pan, j. walker, d.w. bates, and b. middleton. 2003. the value of computerized provider order entry in ambulatory settings. center for information technology leadership. www.partners.org/cird/pdfs/citlacpoefull.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). joines, w., j. menges, and j. tracey. 2007. programmatic assessment of carvein and carve out arrangements for medicaid prescription drugs. the lewin group. http://www.lewin.com/~/media/lewin/sitesections/publications/assessmentcarveincarveout.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). kates, j. 2011. medicaid and hiv: a national analysis. october. kaiser family foundation publication 8218. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).kautz, c., d. mauch, and s. a. smith. 2008. reimbursement of mental health services in primary care settings (hhs pub. no. sma084324). rockville, md: center for mental health services, substance abuse and mental health services administration.kempf, m. c., j. mcleod, a. k. boehme, m. w. walcott, l. wright, p. seal, w. e. norton, j. e. schumacher, m. mugavero, and l. moneyham. 2010. a qualitative study of the barriers and facilitators to retentionincare among hivpositive women in the rural southeastern united states: implications for targeted interventions. aids patient care and stds 24(8):515520.kff (kaiser family foundation). 2004. financing hiv/aids care: a quilt with many holes. hiv/aids policy issue brief. publication 160702.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.270 monitoring hiv care in the united stateskff. 2010. overview: assessing the patchwork of care and service for people living with hiv/aids in the u.s. powerpoint presentation by jennifer kates at committee on hiv screening and access to care workshop 2: facilitators and barriers to hiv/aids care, iom, june 21, washington, dc. kff. 2011. hiv testing in the united states. hiv/aids policy fact sheet. publication 609411.lardiere, m. r. 2009. a national survey of health information technology adoption in federally qualied health centers. national association of community health centers. http://www.nachc.org/client/nachc%202008%20hit%20survey%20analysis final69091.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). lazarus, r., m. klompas, f. x. campion, s. j.n. mcnabb, x. hou, j. daniel, g. haney, a. demaria, l. lenert, and r. platt. 2009. electronic support for public health: validated case nding and reporting for notiable diseases using electronic medical data. journal of the american medical informatics association 16:1824. linet, m. 2003. american college of epidemiology (ace) testimony on impact of hipaa on research. http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/031120p3.htm (accessed march 7, 2012). markovitz, a. r., c. s. thibault, p. w. brandauer, and s. e. buskin. 2011. primary antiretroviral drug resistance in newly human immunodeciency virusdiagnosed individuals tested anonymously and condentially. microbial drug resistance 17(2):283289. nastad (national alliance of state and territorial aids directors). 2007. the role of state health departments in administering federal hiv/aids programs. http://www.nastad.org/docs/highlight/200759role%20of%20states.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). nastad. 2010. 2010 state general revenue cuts in hiv/aids, std and viral hepatitis programs. http://www.nastad.org/docs/public/infocus/2011223state%20budget%20cuts%202010%20final.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). nastad. 2011. u.s. state health department hiv/aids, viral hepatitis, and std federal program reporting requirements. http://www.nastad.org/docs/034156federal%20 reporting%20requirements%20%20june%202011%20update.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).nastad. 2012. draft recommendations for streamlining reporting requirements. submission to committee. february 16.ness, r. b. 2007. in˚uence of the hipaa privacy rule on research. journal of the american medical association 298(18):21642170.ocr (ofce of civil rights). 2003. health information privacy. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/research/index.html (accessed march 7, 2012).overhage, j. m., s. grannis, and c. j. mcdonald. 2008. a comparison of the completeness and timeliness of automated electronic reporting and spontaneous reporting of notiable conditions. american journal of public health 98(2):344350. pacha (presidential advisory council on hiv/aids). 2011. letter to president and hhs secretary kathleen sebelius. august 8. http://aids.gov/federalresources/policies/pacha/meetings/august2011/august2011pachaletter.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).pcast (president™s council of advisors on science and technology). 2010. report to the president: realizing the full potential of health information technology to improve healthcare: the path forward. washington, dc. december. phdsc (public health data standards consortium). 2008. health information privacy in state public health agencies. a review of past, present, and future privacyrelated issues and priorities affecting public health practice. http://www.phdsc.org/privacysecurity/pdfs/phdsc%20best%20priv%20pract%20proj%20%20full%20 report%20%20final%20%2011509.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012).pritts, j., s. lewis, r. jacobson, k. lucia, and k. kayne. 2009a. privacy and security solutions for interoperable health exchange: releasing clinical laboratory test results: report on survey of state laws. http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/groups/public/documents/government/bok1046379.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to the collection of hiv care data 271pritts, j., s. lewis, r. jacobson, k. lucia, and k. kayne. 2009b. privacy and security solutions for interoperable health exchange: report on state law requirements for patient permission to disclose health information. purington, k., s. t. alfreds, j. pritts, and j. buxbaum. 2010. electronic release of clinical laboratory results: a review of state and federal policy. http://www.nashp.org/sites/default/les/electroniclabresultsexchangepolicy.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). rao, s. r., c. m. desroches, k. donelan, e. g. campbell, p. d. miralles, and a. k. jha. 2011. electronic health records in small physician practices: availability, use, and perceived benets. journal of the american medical informatics association 18:271275.reardon, j., and e. davidson. 2007. an organizational learning perspective on the assimilation of electronic health records among small physician practices. european journal of information systems 16:681694. rosenbaum, s., s. abramson, and p. mactaggart. 2009. health information law in the context of minors. pediatrics 123 (suppl 2):s116s121. rosenblum, l., j. w. buehler, m. w. morgan, s. costa, j. hidalgo, r. holmes, l. lieb, a. shields, and b. m. whyte. 1992. the completeness of aids case reporting, 1988: a multisite collaborative surveillance project. american journal of public health 82:14951499.samhsa (substance abuse and mental health services administration). 2004. condentiality of patient records for alcohol and other drug treatment. technical assistance publication (tap) series 13. http://kap.samhsa.gov/products/manuals/taps/13b.htm (accessed march 7, 2012).samhsa. 2010. frequently asked questions: applying the substance abuse condentiality regulations to health information exchange. http://www.samhsa.gov/healthprivacy/docs/ehrfaqs.pdf (accessed march 7, 2012). schwarcz, s. k., l. c. hsu, m. k. parisi, and m. h. katz. 1999. the impact of the 1999 aids case denition on the completeness and timeliness of aids surveillance. aids 13(9):11091114.sittig, d. f., and h. singh. 2011. legal, ethical, and nancial dilemmas in electronic health record adoption and use. pediatrics 127(4): e1042e1047.stoto, m. a. 2008. public health surveillance in the twentyrst century: achieving population health goals while protecting individuals™ privacy and condentiality. the georgetown law journal 96:703719.turnberg, w., w. daniell, and j. duchin. 2010. notiable infectious disease reporting awareness among physicians and registered nurses in primary care and emergency department practices. american journal of infection control 38(5):410412.valdiserri, r., and a. forsyth. 2011. dhhs/ohap consultation on hiv/aids core indicators, data streamlining, and federal reporting requirements. washington, dc, september 19.whettengoldstein, k., t. q. nguyen, and j. sugarman. 2001. so much for keeping secrets: the importance of considering patients™ perspectives on maintaining condentiality. aids care 13(4):457465. wilson, a. 2009. missing the mark: the public health exception to the hipaa privacy rule and its impact on surveillance activity. houston journal of health law and policy 131156.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2735the role of health information technology and data system integration in the collection of hiv care datathis chapter describes potential improvements in the collection of hiv care and supportive services data from health information technology (health it) and data system integration. specically, the chapter addresses how health it can be utilized and congured to improve the collection of comprehensive data describing the care experiences of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) (statement of task question 7), and discusses models and best practices in data system integration to make existing data systems and core indicators interoperable (statement of task question 6). the chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations on these aspects of its charge. utilization and configuration of health information technology to improve the collection of hiv care datahealth it generally refers to the various computer technologies that are used by providers, consumers, payers, insurers, and other groups to manage and transmit health information (pcast, 2010). some of the more common health it applications are computerized physician order entry (cpoe), clinical decision support (cds), and electronic prescribing (table 51). these applications are often housed in an electronic medical record (emr), an electronic record of a patient™s health information created, managed, and consulted by providers, or an electronic health record (ehr) that generally has the same features as an emr but conforms to nationally recognized monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274 monitoring hiv care in the united statesinteroperability1 standards and can be used by providers across more than one health care organization (hhs, 2008). personal health records (phrs) are electronic records of a patient™s healthrelated information that are controlled by the patient and can be shared with others, such as providers and family members. phrs are usually web based so that patients may access 1 in health care, interoperability refers to the ability of different it systems and software applications to communicate; to exchange data accurately, effectively, and consistently; and to use the information that has been exchanged (hhs, 2008). table 51 descriptions of health it products and functionalitiesproduct or functionalitydescriptionelectronic health record (ehr)an electronic record of healthrelated information on an individual that conforms to nationally recognized interoperability standards and that can be created, managed, and consulted by authorized clinicians and staff across more than one health care organizationelectronic medical record (emr)an electronic record of healthrelated information on an individual that can be created, gathered, managed, and consulted by authorized clinicians and staff within one health care organizationpersonal health record (phr)an electronic record of an individual™s healthrelated information that is managed, shared, and controlled by the individual. may conform to nationally recognized interoperability standards. healthrelated information may be drawn from multiple sources (e.g., providers, insurance claims, pharmacy data). eprescribing (erx)enables a physician to transmit a prescription electronically to the patient™s pharmacy. also enables physicians and pharmacies to obtain information about the patient™s eligibility and medication history from drug plans. may come with alerts for drugdrug, drugallergy, and drugdisease interactionscomputerized physician order entry (cpoe)a computerbased system of ordering medications and other tests. physicians enter orders into a computer system that can have varying levels of sophistication. basic cpoe ensures standardized, legible, complete orders and thus primarily reduces errors due to poor handwriting and ambiguous abbreviationsclinical decision support (cds)any system designed to improve clinical decision making related to diagnostic or therapeutic processes of care. addresses activities ranging from the selection of drugs or diagnostic tests to detailed support for optimal drug dosing and support for resolving diagnostic dilemmas. often incorporated as part of cpoe or emrehr systemssource: adapted from detmer et al., 2008; hhs, 2008; moiduddin and moore, 2008.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 275their information remotely. some phrs can be populated with information from a variety of sources (e.g., provider ehrs, insurance claims, pharmacy data) to provide a more complete picture of the patient™s healthrelated information (table 51) (cms, 2012a; detmer et al., 2008; hhs, 2008). the full benets of health it cannot be realized without an infrastructure that supports the secure exchange of health information beyond an individual provider or health care delivery system. health information exchange (hie) enables the electronic sharing of patientlevel health information across organizations and health it products (principally ehrs and phrs) using nationally recognized interoperability standards (hhs, 2008). hie is a solution to barriers to the exchange of health information across organizations posed by the fragmented health care system (hhs, 2008; vest et al., 2011). hie gives providers access to more accurate and complete information on their patients and, thus, may help to improve the safety and quality of care (cbo, 2008; vest et al., 2011; wright et al., 2010). a number of regional health information organizations (rhios) across the country have developed networks to enable secure hie among local clinicians, provider organizations, pharmacies, laboratories, health departments and other entities (shapiro et al., 2011). when used appropriately, health it has the potential to generate savings. for example, health it could result in savings by lowering the costs of providing health care, eliminating unnecessary services (e.g., duplicate tests), and improving care quality in a way that may reduce costs. savings may be internal in the form of reductions in the costs of providing care for health care providers directly. savings also can be external, meaning the savings accrue beyond individual providers to other providers, patients, health insurance plans, or othersšfor example, from increased ability of participants to engage in hie (cbo, 2008). as discussed below, compared with large integrated health organizations, small provider groups may be less likely to internalize the nancial benets from health it because there is less incentive for improvements in administrative efciency and because costs are distributed across a smaller number of providers and patients (pcast, 2010). uses of health information technology for the collection of hiv care data and management of hiv care clinical data needed to monitor indicators of hiv care are often contained in ehrs or emrs. as discussed in chapter 2, clinical data include information on individuals™ health status, ndings from examinations, and medical history information. ehrs and emrs also document patient demographic information such as sex, date of birth, insurance status, and race and ethnicity. standalone and ehr or emrembedded cpoe applicamonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.276 monitoring hiv care in the united statestions contain data on pharmacy, laboratory, and other types of provider orders. eprescribing features also provide prescription drug information. because the clinical data are maintained in an electronic format, they can be more easily retrieved and transmitted. some it systems can be used to compile and summarize information from patients™ medical records to identify trends in a specic population or to track compliance with clinical standards or other quality measures. they also may be used to generate reports such as to identify noshow rates for hiv patients or to monitor trends in laboratory test results. such features can help hiv care providers comply with mandated reporting requirements (hrsa, 2011). integrated ehrs can organize patient information across providers (within or across organizations) and facilitate faster distribution of data so that providers can obtain uptodate views of a patient™s health information (pcast, 2010). this is important for plwha who often receive care and supportive services across several providers and organizations over the course of their illness. another benet of ehrs and emrs in hiv/aids care is supporting research. ehrs and emrs have become a rich source of data for both retrospective and prospective cohort studies, which can improve understanding of plwha and their health care. as discussed in chapter 3, the cfar network of integrated clinical systems (cnics) is an emrbased research network containing data collected at point of care on more than 23,000 plwha. research using cnics data has helped to inform several important questions in hiv care, including, but not limited to, factors associated with linkage to and retention in care and the comparative effectiveness of different hiv treatment strategies (kitahata, presentation to iom, april 28, 2011; uab, 2012). preliminary research from the louisiana public health information exchange (laphie)ša partnership between the louisiana ofce of public health and the louisiana state university health care services division (lsu hcsd)šshows that the electronic exchange of emr and surveillance data can be used to identify plwha who have not been linked to care or who have fallen out of care (herwehe et al., 2012). using a secure bidirectional hie linking state public health surveillance data with medical record data, laphie sends alerts to lsu hcsd care providers when individuals who have not received cd4 or viral load monitoring for more than a year present to care for nonhivrelated conditions (herwehe et al., 2012). over a 2year period, laphie issued alerts for 488 patient encounters and identied, matched, and exchanged messages on 345 unduplicated plwha who were in need of treatment. the majority of the individuals identied followed up with care within the study period; 82 percent received one or more cd4 counts within the 18month followup period, and 62 percent had at least one hiv specialty visit. both providers and patients were accepting of the exchange. a patient acceptability evaluation showed that monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 277patients preferred the sharing of their information to be limited to public health authorities and health care providers when there is benet to the patient and/or the community. the evaluation also showed that the health care delivery setting is the preferred environment for communication about the need for followup, as opposed to communitybased outreach methods traditionally used by public health (herwehe et al., 2012). one limitation of ehrs and emrs is that, like hard copy medical charts, the completeness and quality of data they contain, and therefore their usefulness for research and patient monitoring, depend on the inputting of data by users. some research has shown data to be frequently missing from emrs (lau et al., 2011). incomplete and inaccurate information can also diminish the potential for improvements in patient safety and quality resulting from health it. for example, drug alerts and cds functions will be of little use if the relevant data in the emr or ehr to activate such functions are not complete and accurate. a datarelated benet of phrs is that providers may use them to document and verify a patient™s healthrelated information (e.g., in the ehr), thus improving data quality (detmer et al., 2008). phrs may include clinical data populated from a provider ehr, and some phrs allow patients to input information such as demographic and emergency contact information, diagnoses, drug allergies, immunizations, and other information. some phrs also include features that allow patients to schedule and receive reminders about their appointments, rell prescriptions, research medical conditions, and communicate with their providers. like ehrs, many phrs conform to nationally recognized interoperability standards and therefore can be used in hie (hhs, 2008). because phrs allow patients to view and manage their own health information, they are thought to facilitate better patient engagement in care (chf, 2010; hhs, 2008; kahn et al., 2010; mcinnes et al., 2011).2 phrs may be especially useful to individuals with chronic conditions such as hiv as well as for those with comorbidities because they help patients manage information across multiple care providers, appointments, and medications (hhs, 2009; kahn et al., 2009, 2010). a recent study evaluated phr usage patterns of 211 patients attending san francisco general hospital™s hiv/aids clinic (kahn et al., 2010). data retrieved from the phr website log showed that participants commonly accessed their phrs to view cd4 count and viral load information (891 visits by 110 persons, and 542 visits by 104 persons, respectively) as well as ofce visits, medical conditions, 2 adherence research has shown that patients, including hiv/aids patients, who perceive themselves to be more highly engaged with their health care providers have better adherence to medication, provider advice, and appointments (bakken et al., 2000; osterberg and blaschke, 2005).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.278 monitoring hiv care in the united statesand medications. of 51 patients who completed a usage survey, 80 percent agreed that the phr helped them to manage their medical conditions (kahn et al., 2010). results from a national consumer survey on health it showed that phr users who had less education and lower incomes, and those with chronic illnesses, derive the most value from phrs (chf, 2010). webbased phrs may aid in continuity of care for plwha as they change providers or relocate. electronic laboratory reporting (elr), the electronic reporting of communicable diseases and laboratory test results to public health authorities for surveillance, is another health it tool that is relevant to the collection of hivrelated data. as discussed in chapter 2 of this report, several of the data elements (e.g., hiv/aids cases, cd4 counts and viral load information) needed to estimate the committee™s core indicators come from surveillance data. evidence suggests that methods for electronic reporting of communicable disease information facilitates more accurate and complete reporting of data to public health authorities (cdc, 2011; nguyen et al., 2007; overhage et al., 2008), while providerinitiated, manual systems often provide delayed and inaccurate data with many omissions and errors (birkhead et al., 1991; jajosky and groseclose, 2004; ward et al., 2005).3 a special projects of national signicance (spns)sponsored project identied key considerations in the adoption of health it for hiv care providers based on the experiences of 6 hiv care sites conducting comprehensive evaluations of health it interventions between 2002 and 2005 (magnus et al., 2007). the project encompassed care delivered to 24,232 clients by 700 providers. each site was implementing a different type of health it ranging from a webbased information tool for hiv care providers to an application to allow hiv patients to complete a questionnaire on medication adherence, depression, and substance abuse via touch screen computers prior to meeting with their health care provider. the investigators identied 6 key considerations for it adoption across the spns sites. these were: programmatic capacity (e.g., assessment of computer resources and existing it infrastructure); elucidating stakeholder expectations of the value added by it; participation (the involvement of all key stakeholders in the development of the it plan); organization models (whether the it effort was pioneered by leadership, support staff, or was selfcontained within a specic hiv clinic); enduser types (assessment of the various ways that end users will interact with the it system); and consideration of the challenges to adoption under different care models (see box 51). the project also showed that it is essential to have an evaluation process in place to monitor 3 although there has been substantial progress in the use of electronic reporting, many surveillance mechanisms still depend on manual data entry and submission (cdc, 2005; lazarus et al., 2009; lober et al., 2003). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 279box 51 key considerations for the adoption of health it by hiv care providersprogrammatic capacityprior to implementation of new health it strategies, it is important to assess computer resources and explore existing it infrastructure to see whether new capabilities can be added in to it, rather than implementing a completely new system. the it intervention should be developed with future growth and sustainability in mind. selection of well supported software that protects the condentiality of patient data, is capable of addressing current and future compatibility standards, and has ongoing technical assistance is also important. expectationsit is important to determine whether stakeholder expectations of the value added by it are realistic and address system needs, or barriers to it utilization may result. understanding the reasons for suboptimal care, and the ability of it to improve them prior to implementation of the it intervention, helps to ensure that the it will address system needs. participationall key stakeholders, including providers, end users, ancillary staff, clients, patients, and other community members, should be consulted and involved in the it creation and implementation processes.organizational models grantees noted that it interventions were implemented in one of three the intervention was selfsufcient in a preexisting context of care, not requiring extensive organizational support. enduser typesfore, during the preadoption phase, it is important that each potential user be consulted and their usage assessed to understand the relative value of the system for them and how they expect to use it. this information can help to identify the scope of the it or, if the assessment determines that the proposed it is not an ideal solution, determine that other changes may be necessary.continuedmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.280 monitoring hiv care in the united statesit use and its impact on patient outcomes. feedback from the evaluation can improve it implementation and provide data that may assist with sustainability (magnus et al., 2007). challenges to the adoption of health information technologydespite its potential benets, evidence suggests that adoption of health it is occurring at a slow pace in settings where plwha receive care, such as physician ofces, hospitals, and community health centers (chcs). data from a nationally representative survey of ofcebased physicians show that 25 percent of physician ofces were using a basic ehr or emr system in 2010, up from 22 percent in 2009. ten percent of physicians were using a fully functional system in 2010, compared with 7 percent in 2009 (hsiao et al., 2010).4 a report on progress in ehr adoption by acute care, nonfederal hospitals in the rst year following passage of the 2009 american recovery and reinvestment act (arra; p.l. 1115), which authorized incentive payments through medicaid and medicare to providers who implement certied ehrs, found only small gains in ehr adoption. the proportion of hospitals (n=3,101) meeting criteria for a basic ehr rose from 7.2 to 9.2 percent between 2008 and late 2009 while the proportion 4 a ﬁbasicﬂ ehr or emr system as dened in the study has functionalities for patient history and demographics, patient problem lists, physician clinical notes, medications taken by patients, computerized orders for prescriptions, and viewing laboratory and imaging results. a ﬁfully functionalﬂ ehr or emr system has each of the basic functionalities as well as functionalities for prescription and test orders, warnings of drug interactions or contraindications, highlighting of outofrange test levels, and reminders for guidelinebased interventions or screening tests (hsiao et al., 2010). challengesit is important to be aware of challenges to the implementation of it under a and providers may resent a particular system being imposed upon them and resist using the system, while in a groundup model it may not have administration supcan be used to address barriers to success of the it intervention. box 51 continued monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 281of hospitals meeting criteria for a comprehensive ehr increased from 1.5 to 2.7 percent. hospitals likely to serve more disadvantaged populations (e.g., critical access, public, nonteaching, and rural hospitals) were among the least likely to have adopted even a basic ehr in the 12 months preceding the survey. eightynine percent and 74 percent of hospitals, respectively, did not have key meaningful use functions for engagement in hie and the ability to report quality measures to the state or to the centers for medicare and medicaid services (cms) (jha et al., 2010). in a 2008 survey of 362 federally qualied health centers (which include chcs), 23 percent responded that they use an ﬁallelectronicﬂ ehr. none of the health centers met the criteria for a fully functional ehr (lardiere, 2009).5 the practice of hie, or the exchange of health care information across organizations, also remains the exception rather than the rule (pcast, 2010; vest, 2009; vest et al., 2011; wilcox et al., 2006). the national health it consumer usage survey mentioned above found that just 7 percent of respondents were using a phr (chf, 2010). part of the explanation for the lack of broad adoption and use of health it is linked to the organizational and economic structure of the u.s. health care system (pcast, 2010). many physicians, including those who provide care to plwha, practice in small groups and are reimbursed for care on a feeforservice basis. physicians who practice in this type of environment may not garner the benets of health it, such as increased sharing of patient information, enhanced coordination of care, or the ability to aggregate care data. therefore, there is little incentive for these providers to invest in health it. adoption of health it has occurred at a faster pace in large health care organizations, such as in the veterans health administration (vha) and kaiser permanente, that directly gain from health it and have a greater incentive to provide care efciently and reduce duplication of services. large organizations are also better situated to shoulder the costs of implementing health it, since costs are spread across a larger number of patients and providers (pcast, 2010). besides the costs of installing and maintaining health it systems, a number of other barriers and challenges to the adoption of health it have been described in the research literature. these include the inability to integrate new and existing systems (lardiere, 2009; pcast, 2010); concerns about the security and privacy of data (pcast, 2010); productivity loss (e.g., during transition to a new ehr) (lardiere, 2009; pcast, 2010; poon et al., 2006; reardon and davidson, 2007; shields et al., 2007); lack of support from providers (bhattacherjee and hikmet, 2007; lardiere, 5 ﬁfully functionalﬂ was dened as having functionalities for collection of patient demographic information, electronic prescribing, computerized physician order entry, clinical notes, clinical decision support, and public health reporting (lardiere, 2009). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.282 monitoring hiv care in the united states2009; liu et al., 2011); and perceived incompatibility with work processes (bhattacherjee and hikmet, 2007; pcast, 2010). some providers may be concerned about the potential liabilities associated with use of health it and participation in hie. for example, it has been suggested that since integrated ehrs can store large amounts of instantly accessible information on several aspects of care, providers may be more likely to be found responsible for missing critical details in a given patient™s ehr that affect treatment decisions (sittig and singh, 2011). providers who care for the underserved may face additional barriers to the implementation of health it. in chcs, which disproportionately serve patients who are low income, for example, the integrated service approach to care may make health it implementation more complicated (moiduddin and moore, 2008). health it can improve care quality when used effectively. therefore, these unique challenges must to be addressed to ensure that health disparities are not exacerbated by uneven adoption and use of health it. the benets of health it, both within a practice and for purposes of monitoring care on a broader scale, may not be evident to many providers. education on possible functions and benets of health it is important for implementation and use (gibbons, 2011; samentaray et al., 2011; torda et al., 2010). surveys of physicians have reported that nancial incentives for the purchase and use of health it systems, receipt of technical assistance, and protections from personal liabilities would facilitate adoption and use (desroches et al., 2008; patel et al., 2011). there may be a particular need for improved incentives to smaller providers who are less likely to internalize the nancial benet from health it.although adoption of health it has occurred at a slow pace thus far, the nancial incentives and technical assistance being provided as a result of the arra could help to promote broader use of ehrs among hiv providers in coming years. the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, a component of the arra, supports adoption and use of ehrs by authorizing incentive payments through medicare and medicaid, major payers of care for plwha, to physicians and hospitals that use ehrs and demonstrate their ﬁmeaningful useﬂ (jha et al., 2010).6 the three main components of meaningful use for the rst phase of the hitech act, which began in 2011, are the use of certied 6 under the medicare ehr incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive as much as $44,000 over a 5year period. incentive payments for hospitals and critical access hospitals (cahs) are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2million base payment. under the medicaid ehr incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive up to $63,750 over 6 years. as under the medicare program, incentive payments for hospitals and cahs under the medicaid program are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2 million base payment (cms, 2012a). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 283ehrs (1) in a meaningful manner (e.g., for electronic prescribing); (2) for secure electronic exchange of health information to improve the quality of health care; and (3) to submit clinical quality and other measures (cms, 2011). because providers must use an ehr that has been certied to support objectives of meaningful use to qualify for the incentive, a possible outcome of meaningful use is the increased development of functions in ehrs to document various clinical quality measures and other health data.7,8 hitech act programs also offer technical support to providers that are in particular need of assistance (e.g., solo and small group practices, chcs, critical access hospitals) to attain adoption and meaningful use of ehrs, including assistance with implementation, workforce training, and hie (onc, 2011a). the array of data contained in health it systems is largely limited to clinical care data. resources to support effective use of health it are particularly lacking among mental health and supportive services providers who were not eligible for ehr meaningful use incentives under arra (samhsa, 2011). efforts to expand the use of health it by behavioral health providers and to address barriers to the inclusion of behavioral health information in hie would improve the availability of data to monitor indicators for referral for and receipt of mental health and substance abuse services among people with diagnosed hiv infection, as well as for other populations (samhsa, 2011).data privacy and security considerationsas noted previously, some of the existing ambivalence about integrating health it into the health care system is related to concerns about privacy 7 the criteria by which meaningful use of ehrs will be determined is being rolled out in three phases. phase 1 (2011 and 2012) ﬁsets the baseline for electronic data capture and information sharingﬂ (cms, 2011). it is anticipated that future stages of meaningful use will be increasingly rigorous. for example, by 2015, in order to qualify for meaningful use of ehrs, providers will have to demonstrate greater use of decision support tools, higher levels of information exchange, and improvement in care coordination and patient outcomes (pcast, 2010).8 since the hitech act was passed, the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology (onc) has moved forward on several additional activities that will help to improve the health it infrastructure. one of these activities, the nationwide health information network (nwhin), is composed of standards, services, and policies to enable secure health information exchange over the internet. the nwhin is meant to help achieve the goals of the hitech act by enabling ﬁhealth information to follow the consumer, be available for clinical decision making, and support appropriate use of health care information beyond direct patient care so as to improve population healthﬂ (onc, 2011b). this project has convened stakeholders and created an appropriate forum for the discussion of options to improve the health it infrastructure (pcast, 2010). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.284 monitoring hiv care in the united statesand security of information (pcast, 2010). the privacy and security of health information is particularly important to plwha and their providers. hiv continues to be a stigmatized disease (sengupta et al., 2011). besides hiv status, other information about plwha contained in health it systems (e.g., information on drug use, sexually transmitted diseases, etc.) may be considered sensitive information and, if released, could potentially be used to discriminate against plwha. increased use of health it and hie heightens privacy and security concerns because the accessibility of information may increase the potential for access and misuse by authorized and unauthorized users. a lack of protections to keep health information private and secure would undermine trust in health it as a means for data collection and storage and its ability to improve care (nrc, 1997; onc, 2011a). the federal government has initiated several efforts to improve privacy and security protections that are relevant to increased use of health it. for example, the hhs ofce of civil rights (ocr) is fullling hitech act obligations to modify privacy and security rules under the health information portability and accountability act (hipaa), which establishes a federal ˚oor of protection for health information, to strengthen the privacy and security of health information and the enforcement of penalties for violating hipaa rules.9 ocr and onc are working with providers and consumers of health it to educate and inform them of the importance of health it security and ways to ensure that personal health information is kept secure (onc, 2011a). lessons from the veterans health administration and kaiser permanente on the use of integrated electronic health recordsalthough not representative of other health care organizations, the experiences of large integrated care organizations, such as vha and kaiser permanente (kp), provide important lessons on the uses and limitations of integrated ehrs. the veterans health information systems and technology architecture (vista) integrated emr system has enabled vha to provide a highly regarded level of information technology that supports better 9 see chapter 4 for a fuller discussion of hipaa. the hipaa privacy rule regulates the use and disclosure of identiable health information held by health plans, health clearinghouses, and health care providers who engage in administrative electronic transactions. in general, the privacy rule permits the disclosure of identiable health information for treatment, payment, and health care operations without written patient permission. the privacy rule also permits the disclosure of identiable information for research and public health purposes without patient permission as long as certain conditions are met. however, the privacy rule does not supersede state laws that are more stringent, such as those that require patient permission to exchange health information. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 285care (asch et al., 2004; pcast, 2010). for instance, vista enabled vha to reduce medication errors to a rate of 7 per million prescriptions, compared to a national average of 1 error in 20 prescriptions. use of electronic reminders and performance measurement to improve pneumonia vaccination rates for veterans with emphysema is estimated to have saved the lives of thousands of vha patients (pcast, 2010). kp™s healthconnect system connects all kp members over nine states and the district of columbia to throusands of physicians in hundreds of medical ofces and hospitals. physicians can retrieve data on patient care received from anywhere within the network. in addition to providing alerts to providers on overdue preventive screenings, kp™s system also produces quality measures and feedback for providers. data from the system can be aggregated to track adverse events and trends (pcast, 2010). improved quality and efciency of care have been attributed to patient access to kp™s system via the internet. one study showed that patients™ use of secure messaging and scheduled phone visits enabled by healthconnect resulted in a 26.2 percent decrease in total ofce visits over 4 years (chen et al., 2009). the vista and healthconnect systems were expensive to implement, and they require substantial resources to maintain and to extract and utilize the information (pcast, 2010). as noted previously, there is often little incentive for providers outside of integrated networks, which may include care sites such as chcs where many plwha receive care, to invest in integrated ehrs. both vista and healthconnect are currently limited with regard to interoperability or the ability to share patient information with other providers. the lack of interoperability means that a complete record of patient care often will not be available, even for many plwha in large integrated health networks. in a presentation before the committee, jamie ferguson, vice president of health it strategy and policy at kaiser permanente, described a partnership between kp and the vha to share data on patients who receive care in both systems. the exchange was the rst nationwide health information network exchange conducted for treatment purposes. information exchanged included patient demographics, medications, lab results, immunizations, allergies, and vital sign information. participating patients opted into the exchange and were permitted to opt out at any time. an important lesson learned from the exchange was that the healthcare information technology standards panel (hitsp) specications to enable interoperability were much easier to implement than expected. patient id matching was the biggest unresolved issue. mr. ferguson also noted that operational processes for patient optin need to be streamlined and automated. key success factors for the exchange were the alignment of incentives (quality of care and patient safety as drivers for participation in the exchange); a data use agreement (describing the permitted purposes for data exchange; breach monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.286 monitoring hiv care in the united statesnotication, privacy and security requirements; and dispute resolution, liability, and governance terms); and data content (use of hitsp specication enabled interoperability) (ferguson, 2011).models and best practices in data system integration the committee was asked to identify models and best practices in data system integration to improve interoperability of data systems and core indicators. in health care, ﬁinteroperabilityﬂ is generally dened as ﬁthe ability of different it systems and software applications to communicate, exchange data accurately, effectively, and consistently, and to use the informationﬂ (hhs, 2008). interoperability is not fully possible in the united states at this time (onc, 2011a). for the most part, the various sources of care and care coverage have their own health it systems with their own digital language. systems also vary in their complexity, length, and technical vocabulary and are run using different information architectures, protocols, and software programs (edwards et al., 2010). as plwha move through the health care system, each provider™s health it system captures a portion of the patient information, and care data cannot easily be tracked across these systems. methods of data system integration can help to address challenges of interoperability. some examples of data system integration involve direct information exchange across settings, which simply makes information available between systems. the indiana network for patient care has been an operational statewide health information exchange for more than 10 years, linking hospitals, public health departments, and state medicaid data to deliver clinical data to care settings throughout indiana and has served as a model of hie across the nation. new york state in 2006 began a signicant investment in health data integration with the healthcare efciency and affordability law for new yorkers (healny) capital grant program (kern et al., 2009). initially this program distributed $53 million to 26 rhios across the state, each of which pursued a specic implementation of health it and exchange. although most of the recipients focused more heavily on health it adoption, among the rhios were prominent examples that facilitated direct information exchange, such as the bronx rhio, brooklyn health information exchange (bhix), long island patient information exchange (lipix), and the new york clinical information exchange (nyclix). other information exchange initiatives have also been developed in other states.other examples go beyond just data integration to actually monitor patient populations. the academic model providing access to healthcare (ampath) medical record system is used specically to monitor hiv patients and was implemented to support hiv care in subsaharan africa monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 287(tierney et al., 2007). ampath includes standard ehr components, as well as data entry capabilities for clinical observations relevant to hiv care. from the system, data can be extracted and reported to national aids programs or funding agencies. the data in structured form can also support research queries. the new york city department of health and mental hygiene™s (nyc dohmh™s) primary care information project (pcip) promoted ehr adoption in clinics and doctors™ private ofces, with technology supporting both cds and electronic reporting of required health measures to public health organizations. data exchange focused more on reporting than on access across providers, which created an informationsupported centralized data model at the dohmh (mostashari et al., 2009). this allowed the use of the pcip infrastructure for the nyc dohmh in population monitoring. integrated delivery networks with extensive information systems, such as kaiser permanente, geisinger, and intermountain healthcare, have created patient monitoring systems by gathering data from multiple sites of care. common examples are the various diabetes or chronic disease registries, which can be used to both monitor patient status with accepted guidelines and prompt care providers to bring patients back into care. national research registries have also exchanged health informationšbut to support research rather than to direct patient care. the national registry for myocardial infarction collects health information for patients in multiple institutions to monitor the effectiveness of various treatments and patient outcomes. other examples include the surveillance, epidemiology and end results (seer) program, a source for cancer statistics in the united states, and the national program of cancer registries.various lessons learned throughout these examples might be applied to a strategy of data monitoring for hiv care. most of these examples are focused on hie, and integration is done through the clinicians only on individual cases. data integration does exist for patient monitoring, but usually this is done within delivery networks where systems are already integrated and/or incentives can better justify data integration. these examples are relevant to plwha in these systems, but most plwha receive care outside of integrated delivery networks. ampath was applied directly to hiv/aids care, but that was in an environment where the disease prevalence was sufciently high to promote monitoring systems. lessons learned from ampath are thus best applied to settings where the prevalence of hiv/aids in the patient population is high enough to standardize the integration of data, such as specialty hiv/aids clinics. the pcip project was interesting in that it centered data exchange with the public health organization. data reporting was facilitated, and data integration could occur within a centralized system. since public health reporting is ubiquitous among sites where plwha receive care, this is the most relevant example for patients monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.288 monitoring hiv care in the united statesoutside of integrated delivery networks and specialty clinics. a nal lesson is learned from research registries. many registries require manual abstraction of data from patient records at the institutions providing data. where this information is available electronically, registry reporting can be more efcient, but only when the data are collected consistently. indicators of care are more efcient when they can be based on data that are collected consistently and are available electronically.as noted in the onc™s federal information technology strategic plan for 2011œ2015, future stages of meaningful use for ehrs may become more rigorousšfor example, by requiring that providers not only adopt health it but use it to exchange health information (onc, 2011a). if implemented as planned, these changes could help to lay the groundwork for increased data system interoperability and to simplify the assessment of the state of hiv care at the national level. the federal government is currently developing a standards and interoperability framework (s & i framework) to broaden interoperability across different organizations and federal agencies.10 to support health it adoption and information exchange for public health and populations with unique needs, onc is working with cdc, cms, the national institutes of health (nih), the food and drug administration (fda), the assistant secretary for preparedness and response (aspr), and the health resources and services administration (hrsa) to ensure that meaningful use of certied ehrs supports the needs of public health agencies. in particular, these agencies are working to ensure that ehrs include capabilities to submit electronic syndromic surveillance data, immunization registries, and electronic lab reporting (as based on current stage 1 meaningful use criteria). this may help set the stage for twoway communication between providers and public health agencies (onc, 2011a). data system linkageone means of data system integration is data linkage. data linkage refers to the bringing together of information from one or more disparate data sources for the same individual, family, event, or place, removing the need to extract data from several sources. data linkage has been used frequently for medical and population health research (brook et al., 2008; herzog et al., 2007; jutte et al., 2011; karmel and rosman, 2008). rather than initiating new data collection efforts, linkage allows researchers to 10 the framework will focus on identifying transport standards (that enable one provider to exchange data with another provider, or one system with another system, securely); content standards (that allow data to be packaged or ﬁreadﬂ in a way that is useful for the provider); and vocabulary and terminology standards and value sets (to achieve semantic interoperability at the level of individual data elements) (onc, 2011a).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 289make better use of data that are already collected for other purposes (e.g., claims or registry data) (jutte et al., 2011). data linkage can improve the costeffectiveness of data collection, can reduce the amount of time needed for data collection in research, and has the potential to improve the quality of the data collectedšfor example, through the detection of duplications that otherwise may not have been identied (herzog et al., 2007; holman et al., 2008). methods for record linkage are described elsewhere in the research literature (see fellegi and sunter, 1969; herzog et al., 2007). in general, linkage is achieved using individual identiers to reliably identify an individual across two or more data systems (jutte et al., 2011; tromp et al., 2011).11 identiers may include social security numbers, names, dates of birth, zip codes, and other information. the use of a unique individual identier (e.g., social security number, patient medical record number) across data sources can help to overcome problems of inaccuracies in identication of matches across systems based on other types of identiers. however, in the united states, unique identiers are not applied ubiquitously across the various sources of care and care coverage for plwha. some of the best examples of successful data linkage while maintaining patient privacy and condentiality come from the international realm (jutte et al., 2011). for the most part, countries that have demonstrated successful data linkages for most of their residents have singlepayer health care systems that do not face the same administrative and legal barriers to sharing of health information encountered within the u.s. health care system (see chapter 4). in sweden, the migmed2 database was developed by linking data from several national registers, including those containing population, death, hospital discharge, multigenerational (i.e., identities of the biological and adopted parents), and immigration data. the national 10digit civic registration identication number that each person uses for her or his lifetime are used to link individuallevel data across registers. prior to inclusion in the database, the identication numbers are replaced with serial numbers to ensure anonymity. migmed2 has been used for research in a number of areas including, but not limited to, prostate cancer mortality and patterns of breast cancer survival within families (hemminki et al., 2008; ji et al., 2010; li et al., 2011). population data bc (british columbia), formerly the british columbia linked health database, contains data on nearly every person in british columbia and links individuallevel health care utilization, population demographics and vital statistics, 11 the two primary methods for data linkage are deterministic linkage and probabilistic linkage. in deterministic linkage, a predened subset of linking variables have to agree to be considered a match and linked. in probabilistic linkage, record pairs are linked based on the probabilities of agreement of a set of identiers (tromp et al., 2011). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.290 monitoring hiv care in the united statescancer registry, and occupational and early childhood information for use in research. population data bc uses identiers (e.g., names, birth dates) to link data, but it does not store data in a linked format, and data are reported only at an aggregate level to protect condentiality. this resource has been used by researchers to identify determinants of health for the entire population of bc as well as for health disparities research (population data bc, 2012). other international examples of successful record linkage for populationbased research include the scottish record linkage system, the oxford record linkage study, and the western australia data linkage system (holman et al., 2008; jutte et al., 2011). in keeping with the fragmented nature of the u.s. health care system, a number of successful examples of data linkage in the united states have occurred more locally. one example involving plwha is the hiv/aids cancer match study, which uses anonymized data collected by state and regional hiv/aids and cancer registries to study cancer in plwha. the study data are pulled from computerized linkages between databases that are maintained by study sites in 13 states and the district of columbia (nci, 2012). data from the linked registries have helped to identify cancers that occur more often among plwha; describe changes in cancer burden among plwha over time; and identify predictors of cancer outcomes for plwha (shiels et al., 2010, 2011a,b; simard et al., 2011). the results from the study provide important information on the impact of hiv on cancer risk and trends in morbidity and mortality to the national cancer institute and other policy makers (nci, 2012). data linkage has been used in several hivrelated research studies carried out in the united states to improve the completeness of data for surveillance and for monitoring hiv care. a study of linkage of hiv/aids surveillance data in the district of columbia department of health with death registries showed that the linkage improved the accuracy of estimation of the prevalence of individuals living with hiv/aids (cdc, 2008). in the laphie study described earlier in this chapter, state public health surveillance data was linked to realtime emr data to successfully identify plwha who had fallen out of care (herwehe et al., 2011). efforts are under way to improve data linkage among sources of care and care coverage for plwha. as discussed in chapter 3, the aids drug assistance program (adap) data report will begin to capture clientlevel data during the april 1 through september 30, 2012, data collection period and will employ a unique client identier using the same algorithm and encryption process as is currently used for the ryan white services report. eventually the systems will be merged to link data for ryan white clients who are receiving adap services (personal communication, faye malitz, health resources and services administration, october 25, 2011). in 2009, the cms developed a database of linked medicaid and medicare data to monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 291improve tracking and coordination of care for individuals who are enrolled in both programs (chcs, 2010). further enhancements in linkages among data systems could enhance the completeness of data for monitoring hiv care. examples include, but are not limited to, linkage of surveillance systems that collect cd4 and viral load information to other public health data systems. for example, linking surveillance data with the medical monitoring project (described in chapter 3) could enhance understanding of the transition from newly diagnosed hiv infection to chronic clinical outcomes. other linkages to more comprehensive data collection systems such as cnics and the north american aids cohort collaboration on research and design ([naaccord] described in chapter 3) could provide rich data but may require new datause agreements given that the data for these studies were obtained via informed consent. conclusions and recommendationshealth care data and directly improve patient care. although little research has been conducted on the use and conguration of health it for the collection of hiv care data in particular, general improvements in the collection and exchange of data resulting from health it would increase the availability of data to monitor hiv care. education for hiv care providers on the potential uses and benets of health it for their own practices, technical assistance, and nancial incentives (including, but not limited to, that being offered to providers who demonstrate meaningful use of ehrs under the hitech act) could help to promote more widespread use of health it. of hiv care and supportive services has the potential to improve care coordination and longitudinal tracking of care. some integrated health care systems, such as the veterans health administration and kaiser permanente, effectively manage patient information across providers within their networks, but most plwha receive care and supportive services outside of these networks and many receive care across multiple organizations. the committee identied local efforts in health information exchange that have resulted in improved monitoring of patient care and outcomes. however, these efforts have not been scaled broadly among entities serving plwha. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.292 monitoring hiv care in the united states recommendation 51. the department of health and human services should review existing mechanisms for the condential and secure exchange of health information to provide a platform to increase the exchange of such information among entities serving individuals with hiv. these entities may include, but are not limited to, state and local health departments and government agencies or communitybased organizations funded to provide medical care, substance abuse and mental health services, and housing and other supportive services. applications to communicate, exchange, and use informationšis not fully possible in the united states at this time due to a lack of infrastructure to support it. for the most part, the various sources of care and care coverage for plwha have their own health it systems with disparate architectures and vocabularies, posing a challenge to the exchange of data across systems.  recommendation 52. the department of health and human services and the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology should provide technical assistance and policy guidance to state and local health departments, clinical providers, and other agencies serving individuals with hiv to improve the interoperability of data systems relevant to monitoring hiv care and supportive services.referencesasch, s. m., e. a. mcglynn, m. m. hogan, r. a. hayward, p. shekelle, l. rubenstein, j. keesey, j. adams, and e. a. kerr. 2004. comparison of quality of care for patients in the veterans health administration and patients in a national sample. annals of internal medicine 141:938945. bakken, s., w. l. holzemer, m. brown, g. powellcope, j. g. turner, j. inouye, k. m. nokes, and i. b. corless. 2000. relationships between perception of engagement with health care provider and demographic characteristics, health status, and adherence to therapeutic regimen in persons with hiv/aids. aids patient care and stds 14(4):189197.bhattacherjee, a., and n. hikmet. 2007. physicians™ resistance toward healthcare information technology: a theoretical model and empirical test. european journal of information systems (16):725737. birkhead, g., t. l. chorba, s. root, d. n. klaucke, and n. j. gibbs. 1991. timeliness of national reporting of communicable diseases: the experience of the national telecommunications system for surveillance. american journal of public health 81(10):13131315.brook, e. l., d. l. rosman, and c. d. j. holman. 2008. public good through data linkage: measuring research outputs from the western australian data linkage system. australian and new zealand journal of public health 32(1):1923. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 293cbo (congressional budget ofce). 2008. evidence on the costs and benets of health information technology. http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=9168 (accessed march 1, 2012). cdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 2005. progress in improving state and local disease surveillancešunited states, 20002005. morbidity and mortality weekly report 54(33):822825. cdc. 2008. electronic record linkage to identify deaths among persons with aidsšdistrict of columbia, 20002005. morbidity and mortality weekly report 57(23):631634.cdc. 2011. electronic laboratory reporting (elr). http://www.cdc.gov/ehrmeaningfuluse/elr.html (accessed march 1, 2012). chcs (center for health care strategies, inc.). 2010. integrating medicare and medicaid data to support improved care for dual eligibles. http://www.chcs.org/usrdoc/ integratingmedicareandmedicaid dataforduals.pdf (accessed february 22, 2012).chen, c., t. garrido, d. chock, g. okawa, and l. liang. 2009. the kaiser permanente electronic health record: transforming and streamlining modalities of care. health affairs 28:323333.chf (california healthcare foundation). 2010. consumers and health information technology: a national survey. http://www.chcf.org/publications/2010/04/consumersandhealthinformationtechnologyanationalsurvey (accessed march 1, 2012). cms (centers for medicare & medicaid services). 2011. the ofcial web site for the medicare and medicaid electronic health records (ehr) incentive programs. https://www.cms.gov/ehrincentiveprograms/ (accessed march 1, 2012). cms. 2012a. overview: ehr incentive program. https://www.cms.gov/ehrincentive programs/ (accessed march 4, 2012).cms. 2012b. personal health records. overview. https://www.cms.gov/perhealthrecords/ (accessed march 4, 2012). desroches, c. m., e. g. campbell, s. r. rao, k. donelan, t. g. ferris, a. jha, r. kaushal, d. e. levy, s. rosenbaum, a. e. shields, and d. blumenthal. 2008. electronic health records in ambulatory careša national survey of physicians. new england journal of medicine 359(1): 5060.detmer, d., m. bloomrosen, b. raymond, and p. tang. 2008. integrated personal health records: transformative tools for consumercentric care. bmc medical informatics and decision making 8:45 doi:10.1186/14726947845.edwards, a., i. hollin, j. barry, and s. kachnowski. 2010. barriers to crossinstitutional health information exchange: a literature review. journal of healthcare information management 24(3):2234. fellegi, i. p., and a. b. sunter. 1969. a theory for record linkage. journal of the american statistical association 40:11831210.ferguson, j. 2011. our journey in health it and health information exchangešworking towards ubiquitous, computable care data in kaiser permanente. powerpoint presentation before the committee, san francisco, ca, july 8. gibbons, m. c. 2011. use of health information technology among racial and ethnic underserved communities. perspectives in health information management 8(winter):1f. hemminki, k., j. jianguang, a. forsti, j. sundquist, and p. lenner. 2008. survival in breast cancer is familial. breast cancer research and treatment 110:177182.herwehe, j., w. wilbright, a. abrams, s. bergson, j. foxhood, m. kaiser, l. smith, k. xiao, a. zapata, and m. magnus. 2012. implementation of an innovative, integrated electronic medical record (emr) and public health information exchange for hiv/aids. journal of the american medical informatics association 19(3):448452.herzog, t. n., f. scheuren, and w. e. winkler. 2007. data quality and record linkage techniques. new york: springer.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294 monitoring hiv care in the united stateshhs (department of health and human services). 2008. the national alliance for health information technology report to the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology on dening key health information technology terms. http://cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8 (accessed march 1, 2012). hhs. 2009. personal health records and people living with hiv. http://blog.aids.gov/2009/05/personalhealthrecordsandpeoplelivingwithhiv.html (accessed march 1, 2012).holman, c. j., a. j. bass, d. l. rosman, m. b. smith, j. b. semmens, e. j. glasson, e. l. brook, b. trutwein, i. l. rouse, c. r. watson, n. h. de klerk, and f. j. stanley. 2008. a decade of data linkage in western australia: strategic design, applications and benets of the wa data linkage system. australian health review 32(4):766777.hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2011a. health it for hiv/aids care toolbox. http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/hivaidscaretoolbox/index.html (accessed march 1, 2012).hsiao, c., e. hing, t. c. socey, and b. cai. 2010. electronic medical record/electronic health record systems and ofcebased physicians: united states, 2009 and preliminary 2010 state estimates. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/emrehr09/emrehr09.pdf (accessed march 1, 2012). jajosky, r. a., and s. l. groseclose. 2004. evaluation of reporting timeliness of public health surveillance systems for infectious diseases. bmc public health 4:29. jha, a. k., c. m. desroches, p. d. kralovec, and m. s. joshi. 2010. a progress report on electronic health records in u.s. hospitals. health affairs 29(10):19511957.ji, j., k. hemminki, j. sundquist, and k. sundquist. 2010. ethnic differences in incidence of type 1 diabetes among secondgeneration immigrants and adoptees from abroad. journal of endocrinology metabolism 95(2):847850.jutte, d. p., l. r. roos, and m. d. brownell. 2011. administrative record linkage as a tool for public health research. annual review of public health 32:91108. kahn, j. s., v. aulakh, and a. bosworth. 2009. what it takes: characteristics of the ideal personal health record. health affairs 28(2):369376.kahn, j. s., j. f. hilton, t. v. nunnery, s. leasure, k. m. bryant, c. b. hare, and d. h. thom. 2010. personal health records in a public hospital: experience at the hiv/aids clinic at san francisco general hospital. journal of the american medical informatics association 17:224228. karmel, r., and d. rosman. 2008. linkage of health and aged care service events: comparing linkage and event selection methods. bmc health services research 8:149 doi:10.1186/147269638149.kern, l. m., y. barron, e. l. abramson, v. patel, and r. kaushal. 2009. heal ny: promoting interoperable health information technology in new york state. health affairs (millwood) 28(2):493504. lardiere, m. r. 2009. a national survey of health information technology adoption in federally qualied health centers. national association of community health centers. http://www.nachc.org/client/nachc%202008%20hit%20survey%20analysis final69091.pdf (accessed march 1, 2012). lau, e. c., f. s. mowat, m. a. kelsh, j. c. legg, n. m. engelnitz, h. n. watson, h. l. collins, r. j. nordyke, and j. l. whyte. 2011. use of electronic medical records (emrs) for oncology outcomes research: assessing the comparability of emr information to patient registry and health claims data. clinical epidemiology 3:259272.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 295lazarus, r., m. klompas, f. x. campion, s. j. n. mcnabb, x. hou, j. daniel, g. haney, a. demaria, l. lenert, and r. platt. 2009. electronic support for public health: validated case nding and reporting for notiable diseases using electronic medical data. journal of the american medical informatics association 16:1824. li, x., k. sundquist, and j. sundquist. 2011. neighborhood deprivation and prostate cancer mortality: a multilevel analysis from sweden. prostate cancer and prostatic diseases doi:10.1038/pcan.2011.46.liu, l. s., p. c. shih, and g. r. hayes. 2011. barriers to the adoption and use of personal health record systems. http://www.staruci.org/wpcontent/uploads/2011/01/iconfphrcameraready.pdf (accessed march 1, 2012).lober, w. b., d. bliss, m. r. dockrey, a. j. davidson, and b. t. karras. 2003. communicable disease case entry using pdas and public wireless networks. american medical informatics association annual symposium proceedings 2003:916.magnus, m., j. herwehe, r. j. proescholdbell, f. lombard, a. canjina, z. dastur, m. millery, and b. p. sabundayo. 2007. guidelines for effective integration of information technology in the care of hivinfected populations. journal of public health management practice 13(1), 3948.mcinnes, d. k., j. l. solomon, b. g. bokhour, s. m. asch, d. ross, k. m. nazi, and a. l. gifford. 2011. use of electronic personal health record systems to encourage hiv screening: an exploratory study of patient and provider perspectives. bmc research notes 4:295.moiduddin, a., and j. moore. 2008. the underserved and health information technology: issues and opportunities. http://aspe.hhs.gov/sp/reports/2009/underserved/report.html#toc214201537 (accessed march 1, 2012). mostashari, f., m. tripathi, and m. kendall. 2009. a tale of two large community electronic health record extension projects. health affairs 28(2):345356.nci (national cancer institute). 2012. hiv/aids cancer match study: background. http://www.hivmatch.cancer.gov/background.html (accessed march 1, 2012). nguyen, t. q., l. thorpe, h. a. makki, and f. mostashari. 2007. benets and barriers to electronic laboratory results reporting for notiable diseases: the new york city department of health and mental hygiene experience. american journal of public health 97(suppl 1):s142s145. nrc (national research council). 1997. for the record: protecting electronic health information. washington, dc: national academy press. onc (ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology). 2011a. federal health information technology strategic plan, 20112015. http://web.mediacdt.com/oncemerg/finalfederalhealthitstrategicplan0911.pdf (accessed march 1, 2012). onc. 2011b. nationwide health information network:overview. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt?open=512&objid=1142&parentname=communitypage&parentid=4&mode=2 (accessed march 1, 2012). osterberg, l., and t. blaschke. 2005. adherence to medication. new england journal of medicine 353:487497.overhage, j. m., s. grannis, and c. j. mcdonald. 2008. a comparison of the completeness and timeliness of automated electronic reporting and spontaneous reporting of notiable conditions. american journal of public health 98(2):344350. patel, v., e. l. abramson, a. edwards, s. malhotra, and r. kaushal. 2011. physicians™ potential use and preferences related to health information exchange. international journal of medical informatics 80(3):171180. pcast (president™s council of advisors on science and technology). 2010. report to the president: realizing the full potential of health information technology to improve healthcare: the path forward. washington, dc. december. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.296 monitoring hiv care in the united statespoon, e. g., a. k. jha, m. christino, m. m. honour, r. fernandopulle, b. middleton, j. newhouse, l. leape, d. w. bates, d. blumenthal, and r. kaushal. 2006. assessing the level of healthcare information technology adoption in the united states: a snapshot. bmc medical informatics and decision making 6:1; doi:10.1186/1472694761.population data bc. 2012. http://www.popdata.bc.ca/ (accessed february 18, 2012). reardon, j., and e. davidson. 2007. an organizational learning perspective on the assimilation of electronic health records among small physician practices. european journal of information systems 16:681694. samantaray, r., v. o. nioku, j. w. m. brunner, v. raghavan, m. l. kendall, and s. c. shih, 2011. promoting electronic health record adoption among small independent primary care practices. american journal of managed care 17:353358.samhsa (substance abuse and mental health services administration). 2011. strategic initiative #6: health information technology. http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//sma114629/08healthinformationtechnology.pdf (accessed february 24, 2012). sengupta, s., b. banks, d. jonas, m. s. miles, and g. c. smith. 2011. hiv interventions to reduce hiv/aids stigma: a systematic review. aids and behavior 15(6):10751087.shapiro, j. s., f. mostashari, g. hripcsak, n. soulakis, and g. kuperman. 2011. using health information exchange to improve public health. american journal of public health 101(4):616623.shields, a. e., p. shin, m. g. le, d. e. levy, r. m. betancourt, d. hawkins, and m. proser. 2007. adoption of health information technology in community health centers: results of a national survey. health affairs 26(5):13731383. shiels, m. s., j. j. goedert, and e. a. engels. 2010. recent trends and future directions in human immunodeciency virusassociated cancer. cancer 116(23):53445347.shiels, m. s., r. m., pfeiffer, h. i. hall, j. li, j. j. goedert, l. m. morton, p. hartge, and e. a. engels. 2011a. proportions of kaposi sarcoma, selected nonhodgkin lymphomas, and cervical cancer in the united states occurring in persons with aids, 19802007. journal of the american medical association 305(14):14501459. shiels, m. s., r. m. pfeiffer, m. h. gail, h. i. hall, j. li, a. k. chaturvedi, k. bhatia, t. s. uldrick, r. yarchoan, j. j. goedert, and e. a. engels. 2011b. cancer burden in the hivinfected population in the united states. journal of the national cancer institute 103(9):753762.simard, e. p., r. m. pfeiffer, and e. a. engels. 2011. cumulative incidence of cancer among individuals with acquired immunodeciency syndrome in the united states. cancer 117(5):10891096.sittig, d. f., and h. singh. 2011. legal, ethical, and nancial dilemmas in electronic health record adoption and use. pediatrics 127(4):e1042e1047.tierney, w. m., j. k. rotich, t. j. hannan, a. m. siika, p. g. biondich, b. w. mamlin, w. m. nyandiko, s. kimaiyo, k. woolskoloustian, j. e. sidle, c. simiyu, e. kigotho, b. musick, j. j. mamlin, and r. m. einterz. 2007. the ampath medical record system: creating, implementing, and sustaining an electronic medical record system to support hiv/aids care in western kenya. studies in health technology and informatics 129 (pt 1):372376. torda, p., e. s. han, and s. h. scholle. 2010. easing the adoption and use of electronic health records in small practices. health affairs 29(4):668675.tromp, m., a. c. ravelli, g. j. bonsel, a. hasman, and j. b. reitsma. 2011. results from simulated data sets: probabilistic record linkage outperforms deterministic record linkage. journal of clinical epidemiology 64(5):565572.uab (university of alabama at birmingham). 2012. the cnics research network. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/ (accessed february 21, 2012). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of health information technology 297vest, j. r. 2009. health information exchange and healthcare utilization. journal of medical systems 33:223231.vest, j. r., h. zhao, j. jasperson, l. d. gamm, and r. l. ohsfeldt. 2011. factors motivating and affecting health information exchange usage. journal of the american medical informatics association 18:143149. ward, m., p. brandsema, e. van straten, and a. bosman. 2005. electronic reporting improves the timeliness and completeness of infectious disease notication, the netherlands, 2003. eurosurveillance 10(1):2730. wilcox, a., g. kuperman, d. a. dorr, g. hripcsak, s. p. narus, s. n. thorton, and r. s. evans. 2006. architectural strategies and issues with health information exchange. amia annual symposium proceedings 2006:814818. wright, a., c. soran, c. a. jenter, l. a. volk, d. w. bates, and s. r. simon. 2010. physician attitudes toward health information exchange: results of a statewide survey. journal of the american medical informatics association 17:6670. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2996efcient analysis of hiv care indicators and dissemination of data by federal agenciesin this chapter the committee describes how federal agencies can efciently analyze indicators and disseminate data to improve the quality of hiv care (statement of task question 5). the chapter begins with an overview of the challenges to the analysis of indicators, including those related to combining data drawn from multiple sources, and how to address those challenges. the committee then describes how federal agencies can efciently disseminate hiv care data to improve care quality. the chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations. efficient analysis of hiv care indicators by federal agenciesas discussed in chapter 3, no single data system can be used to gauge the impact of the national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) and the patient protection and affordable care act (aca) on improvements in hiv care. rather, estimates of the indicators of clinical hiv care and mental health, substance use, and supportive services recommended by the committee often will require the use of data elements from two or more data systems. combining data from multiple systems may also be necessary to compensate for the weaknesses of any individual data system, such as a lack of representativeness of the population of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) or incompleteness of data (e.g., due to a low response rate). the committee was asked to describe how federal agencies can efciently analyze indicators. the data systems described in chapter 3 that are maintained by federal entities represent a mix of surveillance (e.g., the monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.300 monitoring hiv care in the united statesnational hiv surveillance system [nhss]), claims (e.g., medicaid statistical information system), and programmatic (e.g., ryan white hiv/aids program) data sources, as well as epidemiologic studies of plwha (e.g, the medical monitoring project). efcient analysis of the indicators will require overcoming challenges to combining data across these disparate systems. one analytic challenge to the efcient analysis of indicators relates to differences in the way that data systems operationalize data elements or dene concepts to allow them to be measured. an area in which this may be relevant is in the calculation of indicators for subgroups of plwha, because data systems may vary in how they dene certain demographic data such as income, geographic marker of residence, race or ethnicity, and sex or gender. another challenge is differences across data systems in the periodicity for particular data elements. although claims systems will have continuous data on dispensing of antiretroviral drugs, the ryan white hiv/aids program collects information on whether antiretroviral drugs were prescribed within a 12month reporting period. this presents an obstacle to combining data from these systems for purposes of estimating the proportion of plwha who were or were not on antiretroviral therapy (art) during a given period. although technically difcult, there are approaches to deal with the analytic challenges of combining data, as discussed below.additional impediments to the efcient analysis of the indicators by federal agencies that relate to combining data from multiple systems include the current lack of an infrastructure to support the secure exchange of health information across health information technology systems (e.g., electronic health records) and organizations, and other barriers to data sharing. these issues are discussed in chapters 4 and 5 of this report.an example of challenges to the efcient analysis of an indicator for clinical hiv careone of the core indicators for clinical hiv care recommended by the committee (see recommendation 21 in chapter 2) is the proportion of people with diagnosed hiv infection and a cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on art among all patients who receive such counts. to dene this indicator more precisely, one must take timing into account. for example, one might ask: what proportion of individuals who received a cd4+ cell count measurement of <500 cells/mm3 in 2011 also received art at any point in 2011. although this denition is clear, it suffers from the problem that those who received such a count late in 2011 had less opportunity to receive art in that year. therefore, it may make more sense to rephrase the question: how many individuals who received a cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 in 2011 received art treatment within a xed window of time (e.g., 6 months) of receipt of that measurement. in addition monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 301to estimating a population average, there is also interest in estimating the effects of demographic factors or insurance status on this indicator. to estimate such an indicator requires information on date of measurement and level of cd4 count as well as date of art prescriptions given or lled. some data sources, such as health maintenance organizations (hmos; e.g., kaiser permanente), the department of veterans affairs (va), and federal prisons provide all of the relevant information needed, permitting a relatively straightforward estimation for subsets of the population. however, analytic issues arise from the fact that patients may leave these systems at any pointšpossibly after a cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 is measured but before the prescription is provided or 6 months have elapsed. furthermore, delays in reporting (e.g., of hiv/aids cases, cd4 counts) must be taken into account, particularly if the goal is to investigate trends over time. in addition, patients may die within 6 months of receiving a cd4 countša situation that makes it impossible to obtain the indicator. for patients who leave a system before their contribution to the indicator can be assessed, it is important to make use of the available partial followup information in an attempt to avoid, or at least reduce, bias. this is fairly straightforward using methods for failuretime data if the loss to followup is not informative (i.e., unassociated with greater or lower risk of starting treatment). if it is informative, appropriate methods must be used to minimize bias; however, unbiased estimation is possible only if all potentially confounding variables are available (a very unlikely situation). to investigate the effect of demographic and other factors on the risk of not receiving appropriate art, regression methods can be used. limitations arise from losses to followup, as described above, as well as from the fact that with the exception of the nhss, which captures data on the vast majority of people identied with hiv/aids in the united states, none of the data sources is representative of either the american population as a whole or any particular demographic group.the limitation of representativeness can be addressed by making use of other sources of data that have broader coverage. to do so, however, one must make use of data systems that provide only part of the necessary information by combining them in some way. for example, the nhss provides dates of measurements and cd4 counts but not (reliably) the time of receiving art. by contrast, medicare and medicaid databases provide information about dates of art prescriptions lled but not cd4 counts. in the absence of unique identiers, no direct linkage between databases can be made. however, combining across sources is still feasible through linkage by demographic factors. for example, suppose one knew that for one demographic group in a given state, 400 people had cd4+ cell counts <500 cells/mm3 at some point in 2011 among 600 people who had cd4+ cell counts drawn. suppose one also knew for this group that 300 people monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302 monitoring hiv care in the united statesreceived or lled prescriptions for art. one then would know that at a minimum, there had to be 100 patients who should have been on art but were not. in fact, however, the number might be considerably greater because some of the art use may have been among patients who had cd4+ cell counts of 500 cells/mm3 or greater. however, if one could estimate this number from other sources (for example, from people within hmotype systems who are similar in demographic category to those under study), the estimate could be rened further. suppose that of the 200 people who never had a cd4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 during the year, one estimates, from some other data source, that about 100 of them were on art. then one could estimate that about 200 of the 400 patients who should have been receiving art were not.the above discussion illustrates the underlying logic for making inference but does not address the question of uncertainty in estimation. of course there would be errors associated with all of these estimates. how to calculate the variability in estimates obtained by combining data from different sources is an area of active research. bayesian methods have been used in a variety of settings to characterize the uncertainty associated with such estimates, re˚ecting the limitations of the data and the need to combine across sources. similarly, bayesian methods can also be used to conduct regression analyses that would allow for estimation of the effect of demographic factors on risk of receiving inadequate treatment.issues in combining information many problems can bedevil analyses of data sets that are derived from clinical program or public health systems and from which treatment or intervention effects are being estimated; these include missing data, unknown population sizes and denominators, and sampling bias. analysis of randomized studies generally also suffers from these challenges, since they are subject to some level of participant attrition, unplanned crossovers, and inadvertent unblinding. combining sources of information can help to overcome shortcomings in each source but creates new challenges for the analyst, as described in the illustration above. these challenges arise from the fact that linkage between sources at the individual subject level may be uncertain or impossible, and even when linkages with high levels of certainty are possible, all of the relevant information may not be available on all subjects. furthermore the level of precision of information may not be equal across studies and optimal estimation may have to take this factor into account as well. a large and growing body of work regarding strategies and methods for combining information is now available. in 1992, the national research council issued an important report titled combining information: statistical issues and opportunities for monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 303research which described many of the principles and methods associated with combining information (nrc, 2002). since that time, a number of developments in methods for combining data from different sources have occurred that could be applied to hiv research. for example, bayesian twostage hierarchical models have been employed in environmental health studies that relate air pollution to mortality. the rst stage of such studies estimates the impact on mortality of air pollution for different cities of interest, after controlling for confounding factors. the second stage combines the estimates across cities using a bayesian hierarchical model (lindley and smith, 1972; morris and normand, 1992) to obtain an overall estimate and to explore whether some of the geographic variation can be explained by sitespecic explanatory variables (dominici et al., 2000). such techniques would also be useful if, for example, there was interest in relating communitylevel factorsšsuch as prevalence or incidence of disease, access to health care, poverty or homelessness ratesšto such health outcomes as hiv morbidity or mortality.many of the problems that arise in combining information can be viewed as related to the issue of missing data. for example, the indicator for a link between individuals may be seen as missing. missing data are handled in a wide variety of ways from the ad hoc (analyze only complete cases) to sophisticated methods for accommodating incomplete observations. one approach to dealing with missing data is imputationšreplacement of the missing observation with the best estimate of what it would have been had it not been missing. such methods, however, tend to underestimate the uncertainty that arises from the missing data. multiple imputation addresses this concern using bayesian methods (little and rubin, 1987). likelihoodbased methods are also useful; these involve the development of a likelihood for just the observed data. in either case, one must have a statistical model for the generation process of the data, including the probability of its being observed. given the importance of such models, considerable effort has been made to expand their ˚exibility, by allowing not only fully parametric but also semiparametric models (tsiatis, 2006).in some cases it may be possible to make inferences about the sizes of populations of interest using capturerecapture methods; these are useful in settings when collection of complete data (i.e., a full enumeration of the populations) is not feasible or affordable. for example, as described below, these have been used to estimate the size of an injection drugusing population. in addition to the problem of missing data, analyses of observational data intended to produce causal estimates of the impact of factors, such as demographics or insurance status, on outcomes must take into account confounding factors. there is an enormous literature on adjustment for confounding factors, as well as increased interest in causal modeling for monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.304 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthis purpose. one approachšuse of marginal structural modelsšhas received increasing attention because of its ability to handle confounding factors that vary over time (suarez et al., 2008). all of these techniques are relevant to the charge to the committee to explore the opportunities and limits of data sources for hiv program and outcome evaluation in the united states, but they by no means capture the breadth of methodology available to cope with data limitations that may bias or confound results and distort conclusions.multiple imputation for missing datamissing data can arise from settings in which people are asked about sensitive personal data, when resource constraints limit the completeness of data collection, or when certain items of information are not routinely collected. when a given variable is essential for a particular evaluation, analyses only of complete cases introduces many threats to inference: (1) bias can be introduced because persons with missing data may be systematically different from those with complete data; (2) statistical power can be reduced when many cases are deleted from analyses due to missing data; (3) resources can be wastedšfor example, when 95 percent of data are collected on someone, but due to the 5 percent missing data, the entire data block is left unused; and (4) ethical obligations to research subjects can be compromised when they have inconvenienced themselves under the assumption that they were doing this for biomedical or behavioral research, but the investigator discards their data due to missing variables. data on sensitive topics such as sexual risk behaviors or drug use may be limited by nonresponse bias or biases stemming from socially sensitive responding. these biases present a special challenge to the collection of data for surveillance and for epidemiologic research studies where sexual behaviors or drug use may be relevant (fenton et al., 2001). multiple imputation helps to circumvent the need to eliminate subjects with partially observed data imputing (predicting) values for missing variables. such imputation requires a statistical model for the complete data (including the unobserved portions) and for the process that led to the observed pattern of missing observations. this model is used to predict the missing observation based on the individuals for whom the data were observed. the posterior distributions of the unobserved values given the observed data can then be calculated. since such calculations may be difcult, little and rubin (1987) propose a resamplingbased approach for their calculation. like any approach for handling missing data, its validity depends on the correct specication of a model for the process that generated the missing data. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 305capturerecapture methodswhen the population of interest has not been enumerated and a survey of the prevalence of a condition or size of a subgroup in a community is impractical or otherwise unfeasible, the capturerecapture method may be used. this technique derived from the eld of population ecology (stephen, 1996). for example, one can capture mosquitoes, dust them with harmless ˚orescent material, and release them. the proportion of recaptured mosquitoes in a day or two (allowing sufcient time for remixing but not allowing time for signicant mortality) can be used to estimate the total number of mosquitoes in the local population, assuming random mixing and equal probability of selecting labeled and unlabeled mosquitoes. similarly, small mammals may be trapped, tagged, and released, and then a second trapping recaptures new and old (tagged) mammals, enabling a population estimate. in human biology and epidemiology, the completeness of population ascertainment can be indirectly estimated using capturerecapture, as with estimations of persons who need hiv therapy, drug addiction services, or other social or medical services. thus, persons must be ﬁcapturedﬂ and ﬁmarked,ﬂ to borrow the ecology model, such that they are available for recapture after release. sometimes in epidemiology, this is literal, as with prisoners who are injection drug users (idus), who are arrested but released after a short time in jail. the proportion who return to jail may be used to estimate the proportion of drug users at risk of being arrested (presumably a large proportion of idus); combined with population hiv estimates, the absolute number of hivinfected drug users can be estimated (drucker and vermund, 1989; dunn and ferri, 1999).one may estimate the size of a population from just two samples or through multiple samples. capture histories may be analyzed to estimate migration, life span, or size in the population of interest. a simple formula re˚ects the core principle of the basic capturerecapture approach. this simple model requires strong assumptions such as full mixing of persons who have been ﬁcapturedﬂ and ﬁreleasedﬂ (as with hospitalized patients who go home) with the general population. the timetorecapture estimation must be long enough to permit remixing and short enough for estimation to be relatively unaffected by deaths, out and inmigrations, and failure to identify ﬁmarks.ﬂ the latter may occur, for example, when rehospitalized patients use different names when entering an institution. if the assumptions are met, the formula is expressed as: n = mc/r (where n = total population size estimated; m = total number of persons ﬁcapturedﬂ and ﬁmarkedﬂ [i.e., identied] on the rst occasion; c = total number of persons ﬁcapturedﬂ on the second visit; and r = number of identied persons ﬁmarkedﬂ from the rst occasion that were then reidentied on the second monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.306 monitoring hiv care in the united statesoccasion) (chao et al., 2001; hook and regal, 1995; international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting, 1995a,b; stephen, 1996). marginal structural methods and modelsmarginal structural models estimate treatment or intervention effects in observational studies by statistical strategies of controlling for selection bias and confounding variables (robins, 1999). the fundamental concept behind marginal structural modeling can be explained as follows: suppose one wishes to compare exposures a and b, which may vary over time, in some population and suppose that, at each time, one could create an identical copy of each study subject. if the actual subject had exposure a at a given time, we would give the copy exposure b and vice versa. one could then compare each subject to his or her copy. we refer to the outcomes for each of the imaginary copies as ﬁcounterfactualsﬂ and treat them as missing data. inverseprobability weighting (ipw) is an approach to handling missing data that reweights observations by the inverse of the probability that they are made. marginal structural models use ipw to deal with the unobserved (ﬁmissingﬂ) counterfactuals. using ipw and marginal structural model procedures reweight data sets so that treatment and covariates are not confounded.in ﬁconfounding by indication,ﬂ an ﬁexposureﬂ is linked to a true causal exposure (e.g., condom use and commercial sex work) but does not itself contribute to the outcome. for example, condom use may be statistically and positively linked to hiv risk, which is counterintuitive (holmes et al., 2004), but this association may arise because of confounding by indication (e.g., disproportionate use of condoms by sex workers in the population studied). when this occurs in an observational study, the association of the putative risk factor cannot be accurately attributed to the outcome of interest unless one has measured all of the exposures and the relevant confounding factors. estimation of causality must take into account timedependent confounding, and marginal structural models can address selection bias and/or confounding in such analyses. however, inclusion of such factors as timevarying covariates in longitudinal models does not correct for this bias. such bias occurs most often when ﬁ(1) conditional on past treatment history, a timedependent variable is a predictor of the subsequent outcome and [is] also a predictor of subsequent treatment; and (2) [when] past treatment history is an independent predictor of the timedependent variableﬂ (suarez et al., 2008). marginal structural models can be used for causal inference even from nonexperimental designs, comparing treatments or interventions, as long as information is reasonably accurate, all confounders are measured, and cenmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 307soring either is noninformative or can be modeled accurately as a function of known covariates. better control of confounding than available from simple parametric regression models alone may bring some observational data closer to values that would be measured in a randomized controlled clinical trial. one recent example comes from a study showing that hormonal contraception is a risk factor for hiv acquisition in african women (heffron et al., 2011). marginal structural model analyses were used to assess the validity of the cox proportional hazards regression from this large observational couples study. here the committee describes only a few of the challenges that arise in the use of observational data to make inferences about outcomes or service coverage (teresi, 1994) and the approaches to dealing with them. nonetheless, the committee seeks to illustrate a few modern statistical methods to make surveillance and programmatic data more useful for evaluation purposes and to illustrate the inherent challenges, both to data collection and to analyses. correct application of these and other relevant techniques can improve the chances that inferences drawn from imperfect data are valid. analysis of indicators involving small subgroups of people living with hiv/aidstracking reductions in hivrelated health disparities will require analysis of indicators by race and ethnicity, sexual orientation, and other demographic variables. the nhas is aimed at improving access to care and health outcomes for plwha and reducing hivrelated health disparities at the national level. yet, analysis of indicators may occur at a local level, such as to disseminate information to local health departments and hiv care providers on the status of the hiv epidemic in their jurisdictions. in some communities of the united states, the number of individuals who comprise a specic demographic group (e.g., racial and ethnic minority men who have sex with men) may be small. because the statistical power of an indicator estimate is linked to the number of observations in a sample, small subgroups limit the precision of estimates of care indicators and the ability to compare them with other subpopulations of plwha. in epidemiologic studies, investigators may have little choice but to pool very small subpopulations with the larger study population because there is insufcient power to extract the effects of dening subgroup characteristics. with respect to the nhas, however, this would defeat the purpose of using indicators to track improvements in hivrelated disparities. statistical methods for inference may be used for the analysis of indicators involving small subgroups of plwha. in general, bayesian methods are useful for combining information about prevalence, incidence, or treatment effects across different population subgroups (han and chaloner, monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.308 monitoring hiv care in the united states2005). groupspecic bayesian estimates are ﬁshrunkﬂ toward (moved closer to) the mean of the quantity of interest over the population included in the combined data set. because the amount of shrinkage depends on the amount of available information, the smaller the size of the subgroup, the greater will be the reliance on the estimate of the mean. in addition, groupspecic bayesian estimates are sensitive to assumptions regarding the distributions of the random effects; the most common approach of assuming normal distributions leads to the greatest shrinkage. using other types of random effects distributions, such as student t or mixtures, can reduce the amount of shrinkage, since they have longer tails and, therefore, allow for a greater probability of outlying values. as an alternative, one can base inference on nonparametric approaches, which can achieve the same goal. posterior distributions may also tend to be ˚atteršimplying lower precision in estimatesšbecause the strong normal assumption can convey a sense that there is more information on which to base inference than is truly the case if the distributions are nonnormal. while bayesian methods provide posterior distributions for any subgroup, no matter its size, the inference for that group will rest most heavily on the mean and on underlying assumptions if the subgroup is small. more advanced statistical methods, such as those that do not require parametric assumptions for the distributions of the random effects, can provide more reliable and robust results in this setting. growing numbers of studies indicate that social status modiers such as race and ethnicity, nativity (place of birth), sexual orientation, geographic location, and drug use status often have an impact on important measures of hiv care (e.g., kempf et al., 2010; lillieblanton et al., 2009; mcgowan et al., 2011). for these subpopulations, among whom social status contributes to their risk environment (farley, 2006; rhodes, 2009) and treatment access, assumptions of normality of the distribution of random effects may be especially problematic, and approaches that allow for the existence of outliers are particularly needed. one potential consequence of overshrinkage is underestimation of the impact of indicators of social status, such as geographic location, economic status, or drug status, on care experiences. and so although parametric approaches can provide some care data on individuals in these subpopulation groups, they lie within a more restrictive set of assumptions that could temper the use of the results for policy changes.epidemiologic studies are an important source of data on care and supportive services received by plwha. health research in general has historically been plagued by an inability to recruit and retain large numbers of racial and ethnic and socioeconomically diverse populations, particularly of sexual minorities or the homeless (levkoff and sanchez, 2003; morenojohn et al., 2004; sengupta et al., 2000), although studies of plwha may monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 309do better than studies of other populations in terms of representativeness. although helpful, statistical methods cannot make up for a lack of sufcient data to estimate indicators for small populations of plwha. the development of precise indicator estimates would be facilitated to a greater degree by inclusion of those groups in greater numbers in hivrelated studies.in a given community, there may be subpopulations of plwha that are small in number and have complex health care and supportive service needs for whom the ability to maintain health care regimens depends on access to supportive services. improvements in linkages between data systems that collect information on clinical care and those that collect information on supportive services (e.g., housing and transportation services) would help to ensure the availability of the full range of data needed to estimate indicators for these subpopulations. although data system linkages will not address the problem of low statistical power in analyses designed specically to provide estimates for small subpopulations of plwha, nonparametric methods can be used to provide some insights into care needs.increased support for training of hiv/aids researchers in statistics and methodologies may facilitate the development of expertise in the analysis of data for subpopulations of plwha. such investment could speed the provision of effective treatment to all communities and thereby improve control of hiv transmission. dissemination of data to improve hiv care qualityanalysis of the hiv care and related indicators identied by the committee will generate data of interest to a number of stakeholders, including federal and state agencies and policy makers, state and local health departments, health care systems (e.g., hmos, va, prisons), individual providers, consumers (patients), and academic researchers. properly presented, the information provided to each audience has the potential to improve the quality of hiv care in the united states. policy makers, agencies, and health departments may use the information to direct resources and policies toward areas that are most problematic (e.g., access to health care or mental health, substance use, or supportive services to improve linkage to or retention in care). health care systems and individual providers may use the information to inform their provision of quality hiv care and to target patient education efforts. individual patients, patient groups, and patient advocates could use the information to direct personal and group advocacy efforts for access to needed services. academic researchers could use the information to support research proposals and projects that might generate additional information to further improve the quality of hiv care.the committee™s review of the existing systems that capture data relevant to hiv care shows that many data on various aspects of hiv care monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.310 monitoring hiv care in the united statescurrently exist. however, existing data often are not used to the fullest extent possible. although government agencies and some state and local health departments make some deidentied data available publicly, in other cases the data reside with the agencies that require the reporting and are not made accessible to the public (hhs, 2010), including to the programs and providers who reported the data in the rst place. not only is broad dissemination of data on hiv care important for improving care by engaging as many stakeholders as possible; the return of information to reporting programs and providers increases the collaborative nature of the relationship, provides them with useful feedback, and may motivate them to further increase reporting compliance (cdc, 2011, p. 532).data dissemination by federal agenciesfederal agencies, including the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), the health resources and services administration (hrsa), and the national institutes of health (nih), have been disseminating healthrelated information for decades. until the advent of the internet, which enabled agencies to disseminate large amounts of information, dissemination had primarily involved making paper copies of documents available to the public (omb, 2011). in the context of increasing federal information dissemination, congress passed the information quality act (iqa), also referred to as the data quality act, in december 2000. the iqa required the ofce of management and budget (omb) to issue guidance to federal agencies to ensure the ﬁquality, objectivity, utility, and integrityﬂ of information disseminated to the public. in response, the omb issued guidelines for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated by federal agencies, effective october 2001. these guidelines require that information quality be treated as an integral step in the information development process. federal agencies must adopt a basic standard of quality as a performance goal and take steps to incorporate information quality criteria into agency information dissemination. in addition, agencies are to develop a process for reviewing the quality of information before it is disseminated. omb designed the guidelines to apply to a variety of government dissemination activities and to be generic enough to t all media (hhs, 2006a).the iqa also required that government agencies issue their own information quality guidelines and establish mechanisms to allow individuals to seek correction of information maintained and disseminated by federal agencies that does not comply with omb guidance (omb, 2011). therefore, guidelines for ensuring the quality of information disseminated to the public have been issued for several agencies of the u.s. department of monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 311health and human services (hss). these guidelines describe the types of information disseminated by the agency to the public; types of dissemination methods; agency standards for ensuring the quality of information disseminated; agency administrative complaint procedures; in˚uential scientic, nancial, and statistical information; and any special considerations for agency dissemination. as one hivspecic example, the types of information disseminated by hrsa listed in its guidelines include hrsa hiv/aids bureau state proles that describe spending and service information for ryan white hiv/aids programs, including provider characteristics (e.g., the number and types of organizations in the state that receive ryan white hiv/aids program funding), client demographic information, service utilization information (e.g., number of patient visits for core medical services), and characteristics of aids drug assistance program clients (hhs, 2006b; hrsa, 2012). under ﬁdissemination methodsﬂ the guidelines say that the state proles are available through the hrsa hiv/aids bureau website and that further requests or feedback can be made by phone or email (hhs, 2006c). within cdc, dissemination guidance applies to hiv/aids surveillance reports and reports for other infectious and noninfectious conditions (hhs, 2006b).considerations in data disseminationeffective and efcient dissemination of data requires careful attention to several considerations, including audience, denition and presentation of the message, data quality and interpretation, and method of dissemination (cdc, 2009; marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a,b).in hrsa guidelines for ensuring the quality of information disseminated to the public, careware, a software package used by ryan white hiv/aids program providers to track clients and services, is listed as a means to ensure the quality of information disseminated to the public (hhs, 2006c). according to the guidelines, careware helps to ensure the quality of data because it contains consistency and edit checks on input data. hiv/aids bureau state proles, which present statelevel data derived from these data, providešfor each data elementšinformation on data limitations, rounding, and restrictions where appropriate (hhs, 2006c). cdc guidance notes that surveillance information is often obtained from third parties, such as states and grantees, which places limits on quality assurance. however, the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the information are subject to sample audits, site visits, and an ﬁevaluation for completeness and consistency with trends and external controlsﬂ (hhs, 2006b).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.312 monitoring hiv care in the united statesaudiencedening and understanding the target audience is one of the rst steps in developing a plan for data dissemination (marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010b). potential audiences for data derived from the full set of hiv care indicators identied by the committee already have been identied (federal and state agencies and policy makers, state and local health departments, health care systems, individual providers, consumers [patients], and academic researchers). selection of the appropriate audience involves consideration of what the data show, the purpose for which the data are being disseminated, and the message that is to be conveyed.federal, state, or local policy makers and agencies would be the primary target audience/s if the purpose is to increase or redirect the allocation of resources or to affect policy changes, including the development of new programs to address specic areas of need. such programs could focus on points in the hiv care continuum that the data might indicate are particularly problematic (e.g., continuity of care) or mediators known to affect those areas (e.g., access to stable housing). information about improvements on indicators would be useful as well, by showing which current policies and programs are working.public and private health care systems, as well as individual providers, might be interested in the data for the purpose of evaluation of, and possible changes in, the hiv care they provide. such information could permit systems and providers to identify their areas of strength, as well as areas for improvement, in the provision of quality hiv care. research indicates that dissemination of clinical practice guidelines alone has a minimal effect on provider knowledge and performance, while combination strategies, including those with an education component, are more effective (marriott et al., 2000). results of performance indicators also may be more effective in changing provider behavior (marriott et al., 2000).plwha, and advocacy groups for plwha, are other potential audiences for the information on indicators. the information could be used to educate individuals regarding areas in which increased attention and advocacy could improve hiv care.depending on what the data show, the dissemination process might target any of these general audiences or a more specic audience within a group, such as policy makers representing a particular region of the united states, hiv care providers who serve patients in a specic demographic group, or patients of a particular race or ethnicity. ultimately, audience selection should depend on the applicability of the data for that audience and the purpose the data serve (sofaer and hibbard, 2010b). once the audience is dened, the message and the remainder of the dissemination process should be geared to that audience (cdc, 2009).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 313denition and presentation of the messageanother critical consideration in effective data dissemination is the message to be conveyed. many audiences are not equipped to understand and process vast quantities of data (sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). data provided without the expertise to interpret them can cause more harm than good. even the language used to present the information may result in unanticipated misinterpretation (hibbard and sofaer, 2010). it is important therefore for an agency to have a clear understanding of the message it wants to transmit and then relay that message to the target audience clearly and concisely, along with the data to support it (hibbard and sofaer, 2010; marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). the details of the message may vary depending on the target audience, as will the way in which the message is presented.presentation of the message in the most appropriate way for the target audience is critical to ensure that the message the agency wants to convey is the one that is received by the audience (cdc, 2009; marriott et al., 2000). considerations of health literacy and numeracy are important when preparing information for dissemination (hibbard and sofaer, 2010; iom, 2004). presentations of data from the hiv care and supportive services indicators and trends in the quality of hiv care over time will use different language depending on the audience (e.g., clinical care professionals, policy makers, program administrators, members of the public). clinical indicators of hiv care that are fully comprehensible to hiv care providers may be incomprehensible to patients or to policy makers. it is important to make the information relevant to what the audience understands and the purpose for which it will use the data. three papers on ﬁbest practices in public reportingﬂ on health care performance data, prepared for the agency for healthcare research and quality, discuss a number of the pitfalls in and solutions to presenting performance data to health care consumers (hibbard and sofaer, 2010; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a,b). although the papers focus on a specic type of data and target audience, the concepts presented may be generalized to other audiences and types of information.data quality and interpretationas discussed, the iqa mandates that federal agencies develop quality assurance guidelines for information releases to the public, and a number of hhs agencies have issued guidelines for ensuring the quality of information disseminated to the public. although it is important for agencies to present the message clearly, concisely, and in language that is understood by and resonates with the target audience, it is also important that they include information about the quality of the data that support the message and the methods used to interpret them (sofaer and hibbard, 2010a).monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.314 monitoring hiv care in the united statesfactors affecting data quality include the source of the data, quality within the system, coverage of the data, condence range, use of proxies, and analytic methodology applied. the challenge lies in providing sufcient information to permit independent assessment of the data, while not overwhelming the target audience with information that it cannot or will not use (marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). one approach is to include with the disseminated information a summary, presented in language accessible to the target audience, of the data and the data analysis, including discussion of limitations or gaps in the data and any other relevant information that would enhance the audience™s understanding and evaluation of the data (hhs, 2006b; marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). at the same time, the agency could make available to interested parties full information on the data set and the methodologies used to assess it (sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). cdc, for example, clearly documents and makes publicly available the statistical processes and methodologies used to derive published information, which allows independent statisticians to replicate the results (hhs, 2006b).evidence suggests that an audience™s acceptance of data is affected by its perception of the credibility of the data source and the source reporting the information (e.g., professional medical journal versus popular press), as well as proximity of the source to the target audience (marriott et al., 2000; sofaer and hibbard, 2010a). information intermediaries can help in this regard. engagement with organizations knowledgeable about and trusted by the target audience may assist in the dissemination of information and help to support the credibility of the information and its source (sofaer and hibbard, 2010b).methods of disseminationa nal consideration for effective and efcient data dissemination is selection of the most appropriate and costeffective method of dissemination. as previously mentioned, federal agencies have a variety of dissemination methods at their disposal, including traditional print media (e.g., reports, peerreviewed articles, fact sheets, newsletters), electronic media (e.g., websites, podcasts), and public forums (e.g., conferences, planned meetings) (cdc, 2009), and frequently more than one method may be employed.the target audience and the message and data to be conveyed are factors in the choice of dissemination method. an agency might choose to prepare a report or paper for a peerreviewed professional journal if the goal is transmit the information to health care systems or providers. reports, newsletters, and fact sheets might be more effective in reaching policy makers or other agencies. websites will reach a larger and broader audience, including members of the public. the type of information and style of monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 315presentation used for a professional journal will differ markedly from that prepared for dissemination on the agency website. the speed or urgency with which a message needs to be conveyed is another consideration in the selection of dissemination method.conclusions and recommendationscare and supportive services will often require combining data from multiple data systems. making valid inferences about the indicators across different populations and over time using data from multiple data systems presents a range of analytic and logistical challenges. such challenges will change over time and will have to be reevaluated periodically.  recommendation 61. at least once every 2 years, the department of health and human services should reevaluate mechanisms for combining data elements to estimate key indicators of hiv care and access to supportive services, analyze the combined data, and identify and address barriers to the efcient analysis of such data, including relevant statistical methodologies. to facilitate this process, hhs should engage a center of excellence representing broad areas of expertise that include information technology, statistical methodologies for combining data, and data system content. the center of excellence might also include experts in epidemiology and surveillance; laws and policies that affect access to hivrelated data; health services research, including insurance; medical informatics, including integration of public and private data sources to estimate populationlevel parameters; clinical hiv care and relevant social services; and community and patient perspectives.  the center of excellence could address questions such as the extent to which proxy data elements can be used to estimate indicators; whether knowledge of an indicator for a subpopulation rather than the whole cohort of plwha might be acceptable for some indicators; and the level of accuracy to be demanded for any given indicator (e.g., whether estimates are needed within 1, 5, or 10 percentage points) given the potential costs of data collection and of obtaining very accurate indicator estimates. be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, including policy makers, health departments, hiv care providers, patients, and researchers. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.316 monitoring hiv care in the united statesthe disseminated information can be used in numerous waysšfrom informing policy decisions to supporting the development of research projectsšthat have the potential to improve the quality of hiv care.  recommendation 62. the department of health and human services should report to the public at least once every 2 years on indicators of hiv care and access to supportive services to foster improvements in the quality of hiv care and in monitoring progress toward meeting the goals of the national hiv/aids strategy. the reporting interval of at least once every 2 years allows for regular reporting of the indicator data to monitor the nhas while minimizing reporting burden and associated costs. to facilitate understanding and use of the indicator information by stakeholders, dissemination products and strategies may vary depending on the target audience and message to be conveyed. information about the quality of the indicator data (e.g., condence ranges for indicators estimates, use of proxy data elements) might be included in the dissemination product so that stakeholders are aware of the limitations of the data. referencescdc (centers for disease control and prevention). 2009. basic concepts for disseminating and communicating surveillance data. http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/howto/disseminatedata/basicconcepts.htm (accessed january 19, 2012).cdc. 2011. principles of epidemiology in public health practice. third edition. selfstudy course ss1000. atlanta, ga: cdc. http://www.cdc.gov/training/products/ss1000/ss1000ol.pdf (accessed january 19, 2012).chao, a., p. k. tsay, s. lin, w. shau, and d. chao. 2001. the applications of capture recapture models to epidemiologic data. statistics in medicine 20:31233157.dominici, f., j. m. samet, and s. l. zeger. 2000. combining evidence on air pollution and daily mortality from the 20 largest u.s. cities: a hierarchical modelling strategy. journal of the royal statistical society 163(3):263302. drucker, e., and s. vermund. 1989. estimating population prevalence of human immunodeciency virus infection in urban areas with high rates of intravenous drug use: a model of the bronx in 1988. american journal of epidemiology 130(1):133142.dunn, j., and c. p. ferri. 1999. epidemiologic methods for research with drug misusers: review of methods for studying prevalence and morbidity. revista de saúde pública 33(2):206215.farley, t. a. 2006. sexually transmitted diseases in the southeastern united states: location, race, and social context. sexually transmitted diseases 33(7):s58s64.fenton, k. a., a. m. johnson, s. mcmanus, and b. erens. 2001. measuring sexual behavior: methodological challenges in survey research. sexually transmitted infections 77:8492.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.efficent analysis of hiv care indcators 317han, c., and k. chaloner. 2005. design of population studies of hiv dynamics. in deterministic and stochastic models of hiv epidemics and hiv infections with intervention, edited by w. tan and h. wu. hackensack, nj: world scientic publishing co. heffron, r., d. donnell, h. rees, c. celum, n. mugo, e. were, g. de bruyn, e. nakkujoloba, k. ngure, j. kiarie, r.w. coombs, and j. m. baeten. 2011. use of hormonal contraceptives and risk of hiv1 transmission: a prospective cohort study. lancet infectious diseases doi:10.1016/s14733099(11)70247x. hhs (u.s. department of health and human services). 2006a. hhs guidelines for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated to the public. part 1: hhs overview. http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/part1.shtml (accessed january 19, 2012).hhs. 2006b. guidelines for ensuring the quality of information disseminated to the public. centers for disease control and prevention and agency for toxic substances and disease registry. http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/cdcinfo2.shtml (accessed january 19, 2012).hhs. 2006c. guidelines for ensuring the quality of information disseminated to the public. health resources and services administration. http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/hrsainfo2.shtml (accessed january 19, 2012). hhs. 2010. putting data and innovation to work to help communities and consumers improve health. news release. http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2010pres/06/20100602a.html (accessed january 19, 2012). hibbard, j., and s. sofaer. 2010. best practices in public reporting no. 1: how to effectively present health care performance data io consumers. ahrq publication no.100082ef. bethesda, md: agency for healthcare research and quality. holmes, k. k., r. levine, and m. weaver. 2004. effectiveness of condoms in preventing sexually transmitted infections. bulletin of the world health organization 82(6):454461.hook, e. b., and r. r. regal. 1995. capturerecapture methods in epidemiology: methods and limitations. american journal of epidemiology 17(2):243264.hrsa (health resources and services administration). 2012. ryan white hiv/aids program. 2009 state proles. http://hab.hrsa.gov/stateproles/index.htm (accessed march 6, 2012). international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting. 1995a. capturerecapture and multiplerecord systems estimation i: history and theoretical development. american journal of epidemiology 142(10):10471058.international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting. 1995b. capturerecapture and multiplerecord systems estimation ii: applications in human diseases. american journal of epidemiology 142(10):10591068.iom (institute of medicine). 2004. health literacy: a prescription to end confusion. washington, dc: the national academies press.kempf, m., j. mcleod, a. k. boehme, m. w. walcott, l. wright, p. seal, w. e. norton, j. e. schumacher, m. mugavero, and l. moneyham. 2010. a qualitative study of the barriers and facilitators to retentionincare among hivpositive women in the rural southeastern united states: implications for targeted interventions. aids patient care and stds 24(8):515520.levkoff, s., and h. sanchez. 2003. lessons learned about minority recruitment and retention from the centers on minority aging and health promotion. gerontologist 43:1826.lillieblanton, m., v. e. stone, a. s. jones, j. levi, e. t. golub, m. h. cohen, n. a. hessol, and t. e. wilson. 2009. association of race, substance abuse, and health insurance coverage with use of highly active antiretroviral therapy among hivinfected women, 2005. american journal of public health 100:14931499.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.318 monitoring hiv care in the united stateslindley, d. v., and a. f. m. smith. 1972. bayes estimates for the linear model. journal of the royal statistical society 34(1):141.little, r. j. a., and d. b. rubin. 1987. statistical analysis with missing data. first edition. hoboken, new jersey: wiley and sons, inc.marriott, c., c. palmer, and p. lelliott. 2000. disseminating healthcare information: getting the message across. quality in health care 9:5862.mcgowan, c. c., d. d. weinstein, c. p. samenow, s. e. stinnette, g. barkinic, p. f. rubiero, t. r. sterling, r. d. moore, and t. hulgan. 2011. drug use and receipt of highly active antiretroviral therapy among hivinfected persons in two u.s. clinic cohorts. plos one 6(4):e18462. morenojohn, g., a. gachie, c. m. fleming, a. napolesspringer, and e. mutran. 2004. ethnic minority older adults participating in clinical research: developing trust. journal of aging and health 16:93s123s.morris, c. n., and s. l. normand. 1992. hierarchical models for combining information and for metaanalysis. in bayesian statistics 4, edited by j. m. bernardo, j. o. berger, a. p. dawid, and a. f. m. smith. oxford, uk: oxford university press. pp. 321344 (with discussion).nrc (national research council). 2002. combining information: statistical issues and opportunities for research. washington, dc: national academy press. omb (ofce of management and budget). 2011. guidelines for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated by federal agencies. http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedregnalinformationqualityguidelines (accessed january 19, 2012). rhodes, t. 2009. risk environments and drug harms: a social science for harm reduction approach. international journal of drug policy 20(3):193201. robins, j. m. 1999. association, causation, and marginal structural models. synthese 121: 151e79.sengupta, s., r. p. strauss, r. devellis, s. c. quinn, b. devellis, and w. b. ware. 2000. factors affecting africanamerican participation in aids research. journal of acquired immunodeciency syndromes 24(3):275284.sofaer, s., and j. hibbard. 2010a. best practices in public reporting no. 2: maximizing consumer understanding of public comparative quality reports: effective use of explanatory information. ahrq publication no. 1000821ef. bethesda, md: agency for healthcare research and quality. sofaer, s., and j. hibbard. 2010b. best practices in public reporting no. 3: how to maximize public awareness and use of comparative quality reports through effective promotion and dissemination strategies. ahrq publication no. 1000822ef. bethesda, md: agency for healthcare research and quality. stephen, c. 1996. capturerecapture methods in epidemiological studies. infection control and hospital epidemiology 17(4):262266.suarez, d., j. m. haro, d. novick, and s. ochoa. 2008. marginal structural models might overcome confounding when analyzing multiple treatment effects in observational studies. journal of clinical epidemiology 61:525530.teresi, j. 1994. overview of methodological issues in the study of chronic care populations. alzheimer™s disease and associated disorders 8(suppl 1):s247s273.tsiatis, a. a. 2006. semiparametric theory and missing data. new york: springer science and business media, llc.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.319appendixbiographical sketches of committee memberspaul a. volberding, m.d. (chair), is a professor in the department of medicine and codirector of the center for aids research at the university of california, san francisco (ucsf). he received his medical degree from the university of minnesota and nished training at the university of utah and ucsf, where he studied for 2 years as a research fellow in the virology laboratory of dr. jay levy, later a codiscoverer of hiv. dr. volberding™s professional activities initially centered at san francisco general hospital, where he established a model program of aids patient care, research, and professional education. his research career began with investigations of hivrelated malignancies, especially kaposi™s sarcoma. his primary research focus, however, shifted to clinical trials of antiretroviral drugs. he was instrumental in testing many compounds but is best known for groundbreaking trials establishing the benet of treatment in earlystage hiv infection. dr. volberding has written many research and review articles. he is coeditor in chief of the journal of acquired immune deciency syndromes and is the founder and chair of the board of the international aids societyusa and a past president of the international aids society. he was president of the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america (idsa). he is a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science, the american college of physicians, and of idsa, and he is a member of the institute of medicine, where he has served on several committees addressing the hiv epidemic.angela a. aidala, ph.d., is an associate research scientist at the joseph l. mailman school of public health at columbia university in the departmonitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320 monitoring hiv care in the united statesment of sociomedical sciences. her primary interest is the intersection of economic, social, and cultural in˚uences on health and illness among disadvantaged populations. dr. aidala™s work focuses on research, teaching, and service delivery strategies to work effectively with hardertoreach or ﬁhiddenﬂ populations in urban settings, including the homeless, mentally ill, substance users, hivpositive adults, and youth. dr. aidala has directed over 20 collaborative community health or services research projects. her recent work is studying housing/lack of housing and hiv prevention and care, and methodological and statistical approaches to improve ﬁpracticebasedﬂ evidence. dr. aidala is coprincipal director and study director of the community health advisory & information network (chain), an ongoing study of persons living with hiv or at high risk of infection in new york city, now in its 18th year. chain is conducted in collaboration with the hiv planning council and the new york health department of health and mental hygiene and is a main source of data for service planning in the region. formerly, she directed the multiple diagnoses initiative, a department of housing and urban developmentœdepartment of health and human services joint initiative that worked with housing providers to better understand the reciprocal relationship between housing and health care among persons living with hiv/aids who also struggle with mental illness and/or chronic substance abuse problems. dr. aidala received her ph.d. in sociology from columbia university.david d. celentano, sc.d., m.h.s., is professor and charles armstrong chair of the department of epidemiology in the johns hopkins bloomberg school of public health, with joint appointments in medicine, international health, and health, society, and behavior. his research integrates behavioral science theory and research with epidemiologic methods in the study of behavioral and social epidemiology. although originally trained in a chronic disease paradigm (alcoholism and cancer control), he began his research in hiv/aids and sexually transmitted diseases (stds) in the early 1980s. he has worked on some of the major cohort studies (aids link to the intravenous experience [alive], multicenter aids cohort study [macs]) in hiv epidemiology, as well as conducted intervention research in the united states for heterosexual men and women, injection drug users, and young men who have sex with men. he began international hiv research in 1990 through a longterm collaboration with chiang mai university in northern thailand. he has worked on and directed numerous hiv/aids and std epidemiological investigations and preventive interventions. he and his collaborators demonstrated that a behavioral intervention with young military conscripts led to a sevenfold reduction in incident stds and halved the hiv incidence rate. in addition, the role of stds and alcohol monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix 321use in hiv acquisition has been shown. his research group conducted a prospective study of hormonal contraception in relation to hiv seroconversion and elucidated the epidemiology of human papillomavirus prevalence, incidence, and clearanceša study with signicant family planning policy and health implications. today, he is the principal investigator of four studies in thailand supported by the national institutes of health, focusing on interventions to in˚uence the association between drug use, sexual risk, and hiv treatment in hiv transmission. additional research is being conducted in vietnam, india, south africa, and tanzania.moupali das, m.d., m.p.h., is director of research in the hiv prevention section at the san francisco department of public health and assistant clinical professor in the divisions of infectious diseases and hiv/aids at san francisco general hospital, at the university of california, san francisco. she is a boardcertied infectious disease clinicianœhiv specialist with research expertise in implementation science and evaluation research, in particular, using routinely collected hiv surveillance data to evaluate the impact of a comprehensive public health approach to hiv, including multilevel hiv prevention interventions. dr. das coauthored a key modeling study using san francisco™s surveillance data to evaluate the effect of expanding access to antiretroviral therapy on the hiv epidemic among men who have sex with men. she has developed a novel populationbased biologic indicator, community viral load, for monitoring the hiv epidemic prevention and control. her manuscript on community viral load (das, plos one 2010) has been cited as the basis for measuring community viral load in president barack obama™s national hiv/aids strategy (nhas) and provides the framework for the nhas recommendation that community viral load be used as an outcome measure to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy. dr. das has examined geographic and sociodemographic disparities in community viral load as well as the relationship between community viral load and new hiv infections. she is evaluating the relationship between differences in community viral load among different subpopulations in san francisco and corresponding disparities in hiv incidence. dr. das is currently rening the community viral load methodology and exploring using community viral load as a marker for multiple planned multilevel hivprevention trials. dr. das has been honored by invitations to participate in the department of health and human services and ofce of management and budget consultations on developing a parsimonious set of harmonized indicators to evaluate the impact of the nhas and health care reform. dr. das has been privileged to mentor junior investigators to support publication of their manuscripts on community viral load (castel, aids 2011). monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.322 monitoring hiv care in the united statesvictor g. degruttola, sc.d., m.s., is a professor of biostatistics and chair of the department of biostatistics at the harvard school of public health. his research activities focus on developments of statistical methods required for appropriate public health response to the aids epidemic both within the united states and internationally. the aspects of the epidemic on which he has worked include transmission of, and natural history of infection with, hiv, as well as research on antiretroviral treatments, including the development and consequences of resistance and other adverse consequences of treatments. the broad goals of his research include developing treatment strategies that provide tolerable and durable virologic suppression while preserving treatment options after failure, and evaluating the communitylevel impact of packages of prevention interventions, including antiviral treatment itself. he served as the director of the statistics and data analysis center of the adult project of the aids clinical trials group during the period in which highly active antiretroviral treatment was developed, and he was instrumental in designing and analyzing studies of the best means of providing such therapy. most recently, he has been engaged in development and application of methods for prevention of hiv infection.carlos del rio, m.d., is hubert chair and professor of global health in the department of global health at the rollins school of public health, and professor of medicine in the division of infectious diseases at the emory university school of medicine. he is also codirector of the emory center for aids research. he has held numerous leadership roles, including executive director of the national aids council of mexico, the federal agency of the mexican government responsible for aids policy in that country; program director and principal investigator of the emory aids international training and research program; and member of the boards of the international aids society usa, the hiv medicine association, and the infectious diseases society of america. dr. del rio™s research interests include the epidemiology of opportunistic infections in hiv and other immune deciencies, the epidemiology and transmission dynamics of hiv and other sexually transmitted diseases, hiv testing, access to and retention in care, and compliance with antiretroviral drug regimens. he is also interested in the impact of hiv in developing countries and the optimal use of antiretroviral drugs in limitedresource settings. dr. del rio is associate editor of aids clinical care and senior clinical editor for aids research and human retroviruses and is a member of the editorial boards of journal of aids and global public health. he has coauthored more than 150 scientic papers.marshall forstein, m.d., is an associate professor of psychiatry at harvard medical school and director of adult psychiatry residency training at the monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix 323cambridge health alliance. he attended the college of medicine, university of vermont, after a career of teaching high school english, where he developed a lifelong interest in teaching and education. he completed an internship at presbyterian hospital, pacic medical center in san francisco, and a residency in psychiatry at massachusetts general hospital. for 12 years he served as medical director of mental health and addiction services of the fenway community health center in boston, a dedicated center for the care of sexual minorities and people at risk for and living with hiv infection. dr. forstein teaches medical students and is a core faculty member in the division of palliative care at harvard medical school. dr. forstein has been treating people with hiv since the beginning of the epidemic, and he cofounded an integrated medical/psychiatric hiv clinic that has been treating a diverse population of people infected with hiv for over 25 years. he served as a member of the board of directors of the aids action committee of massachusetts. dr. forstein has been a principal investigator on an hiv education and training grant through the federal center for mental health services, and later served as a member of the advisory board of the center for mental health services of the substance abuse and mental health service administration. he teaches and has published on the neuropsychiatry and psychosocial aspects of the hiv/aids epidemic. he currently chairs the steering committee on hiv psychiatry for the american psychiatric association for research and education. he is a distinguished fellow of the american psychiatric association and is currently serving on the residency review committee for psychiatry of the accreditation council for graduate medical education.carmine grasso, m.s.w., m.p.h., is currently a consultant working on hiv policy and funding issues. he recently retired from public service from the new jersey department of health and senior services, where he served as director of the care and treatment unit. the care and treatment unit oversaw the development of integrated systems designed to address the care and treatment needs of persons living with hiv in new jersey. this unit served as the ryan white part b grantee in new jersey and oversaw care act activities, which included the aids drug distribution program, the hiv home care program, the health insurance continuation program, and regional hiv care services. mr. grasso has served as a consultant for the centers for disease control and prevention global aids program and the national alliance of state and territorial aids directors. from 1979 to 1981, mr. grasso served as a peace corps volunteer in the republic of kiribati, where he worked as an outerisland health education and sanitation worker in a primary health care program sponsored by the world health organization. mr. grasso received his m.p.h. and m.s.w. degrees from columbia university. monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.324 monitoring hiv care in the united statesshannon houser, ph.d., m.p.h., rhia, is an associate professor in the health information management program in the department of health services administration, school of health professions of the university of alabama at birmingham (uab). dr. houser works on many research studies at uab, mostly large national studies of epidemiology, health behavior, health information technology, data management, and program evaluation. she brings her expertise in health information management, the health information portability and accountability act privacy rule, and electronic health record implementation and evaluation. she has published widely in professional journals. dr. houser has been appointed as an adviser to project hope and provides technical advice on program monitoring and evaluation for most ongoing hopesponsored projects in china. dr. houser serves as a member of the american health information management association™s education strategy committee and research committee and the healthcare information and management systems society™s scholarship committee and electronic health record usability task force. she has served on the editorial review board and is currently a reviewer of the journal perspectives in health information management. dr. houser also develops courses and teaches in the undergraduate and graduate health information management programs for both traditional classroom courses and online or distance learning courses. jennifer kates, ph.d., m.a., m.p.a., is vice president and director of global health & hiv policy at the henry j. kaiser family foundation (kff), where she oversees the foundation™s policy analysis and research focused on the u.s. government™s role in global health and on the global and domestic hiv epidemics. widely regarded as an expert in the eld, she regularly publishes and presents on global health issues and is particularly known for her work on analyzing donor government investments in global health; assessing and mapping the u.s. government™s global health architecture, programs, and funding; and tracking key trends in the hiv epidemic, an area in which she has been working for more than 20 years. prior to joining kff in 1998, dr. kates was a senior associate with the lewin group, a health care consulting rm, where she focused on hiv policy, strategic planning and health systems analysis, and health care for vulnerable populations. before that, she directed the ofce of lesbian, gay, and bisexual concerns at princeton university. dr. kates also serves on numerous federal and private sector advisory committees on global health and hiv/aids issues. currently she is a member of the institute of medicine (iom) committee on planning the evaluation of global hiv/aids programs implemented under the u.s. global leadership against hiv/aids, tuberculosis, and malaria reauthorization act of 2008. she is a former member of the iom committee on hiv screening and access to care. dr. kates received monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix 325her ph.d. in health policy from george washington university, where she is also a lecturer. she holds a bachelor™s degree from dartmouth college, a master™s degree in public affairs from princeton university™s woodrow wilson school of public and international affairs, and a master™s degree in political science from the university of massachusetts.erika g. martin, ph.d., m.p.h., is an assistant professor of public administration and policy at the rockefeller college of public affairs and policy and an institute fellow at the nelson a. rockefeller institute of government, state university of new york at albany. she teaches undergraduate and graduate courses on policy analysis methods and health policy. dr. martin has examined the fairness and ˚exibility of the federal allocation formula for the ryan white hiv/aids program, interstate variation in state aids drug assistance program formularies, and the budget impact of expanded hiv screening on government testing, discretionary, and entitlement programs. current projects include using system dynamics modeling to evaluate the new hivtesting law in new york state, analyzing the effects of the recently repealed ban on federal funding for syringe exchange programs, and assessing how health reform may affect aids drug assistance programs. in addition to her research on hiv and substance abuse policy, dr. martin is actively involved in various projects that examine the public health effects of state vaccination laws and the way media in˚uence public policy and public health practice. dr. martin received her b.a. from brown university, her m.p.h. in epidemiology from the university of michigan, and her ph.d. in health policy and administration from yale university.kenneth h. mayer, m.d., is the director of hiv prevention research at beth israel deaconess medical center and a visiting professor in medicine at harvard medical school. previously, dr. mayer was professor of medicine and community health and director of the aids program at brown university and an attending infectious disease physician at miriam hospital. he is medical research director at fenway community health in boston and codirector of the fenway institute. dr. mayer has conducted studies of hiv™s natural history and interventions to interrupt transmission since the beginning of the epidemic. he was one of the rst clinical researchers in new england to care for patients living with aids. dr. mayer has lectured at many international conferences and symposia on biological and behavioral approaches to hiv prevention research and the development of communitybased clinical research. he coedited the emergence of aids: impact on immunology, microbiology, and public health (apha press); hiv prevention: a comprehensive approach (academic press); and the fenway guide to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender health (acp monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.326 monitoring hiv care in the united statespress). he has served as a member of the data and safety monitoring board of the national institutes of health™s aids clinical trials group and sits on several editorial boards of scientic publications. dr. mayer has coauthored more than 450 articles, chapters, and other publications on aids and related infectious disease topics.vickie m. mays, ph.d., m.s.p.h., is a professor in the department of psychology in the college of letters and sciences as well as a professor in the department of health services at the university of california, los angeles (ucla) school of public health. she is also the director of the ucla center on research, education, training and strategic communication on minority health disparities. she teaches courses on health status and health behaviors of racial and ethnic minority groups; research ethics in biomedical and behavioral research on racial and ethnic minority populations; research methods in minority research; mental health policy and mental health services; and the social determinants of mental disorders and psychopathology. she holds a ph.d. in clinical psychology and an m.s.p.h. in health services, with postdoctoral training in psychiatric epidemiology, survey research as it applies to ethnic minorities (university of michigan), and health policy (rand). professor mays™s research focuses on the mental and physical health disparities affecting racial and ethnic minority populations. she has a long history of research and policy development in the area of contextual factors surrounding hiv/aids in racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities. this work ranges from looking at barriers to education and services to understanding racially based immunological differences that may contribute to disparities in health outcomes. other areas of research include looking at the role of perceived and actual discrimination in mental and physical health outcomes, particularly as these factors impact downstream disease outcomes. her mental health research examines the availability, access, and quality of mental health services for racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities and effective and efcient methods for integrating behavioral health of these populations into primary care systems. she is the coœprincipal investigator of the california quality of life survey, a populationbased study of more than 5,000 californians on the prevalence of mental health disorders and the contextual factors associated with those disorders. her recent work in mental health includes the provision of mental health disaster response, recovery, and preparedness as the director of a kelloggsponsored project in new orleans, ﬁhelping hands, healing hearts,ﬂ which designed training for mental health providers and religious leaders. dr. mays has provided testimony to a number of congressional committees on her hiv, mental health, and health disparities research ndings. she was chair of the subcommittee on populations of the national committee on vital and health statistics. there, she helped develop a report on the role of the collection of monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix 327data on race, ethnicity, and primary language to reduce health disparities. she has received a number of awards, including one for her lifetime research on women and hiv from the american foundation for aids research, a women and leadership award from the american psychological association, and several distinguished contributions for research awards.david p. pryor, m.d., m.p.h., is west coast medical director for nbc universal, where he oversees medical services provided to company employees, promotes the corporatewellness agenda, and serves as a subject matter expert on legal and productionrelated health and safety issues. previously, dr. pryor was medical director for aetna, one of the largest health benets companies in the united states, where he was responsible for a number of medical management activities that resulted in the coordination of quality, costeffective care on behalf of aetna members. he also proactively used data analysis to identify new opportunities to increase the effectiveness and efciency of care. prior to joining aetna, dr. pryor was an associate medical director at wellpoint, where he was fortunate to have been actively involved with almost all aspects of medical management, including utilization management, medical policy, disease management, and program development. dr. pryor maintains a strong commitment to impacting health disparities and serves as the president and founder of blackwomenshealth.com, one of the leading internet sites dedicated to improving the health and wellness of african american women. additionally, he serves on the institute of medicine roundtable on the promotion of health equity and the elimination of health disparities and was a featured speaker on the congressional black caucus foundation™s black health empowerment tour. a native of california, dr. pryor received a b.s. in biology from stanford university and completed his medical degree at the university of california, san diego. he is boardcertied in internal medicine and also has a master™s in public health from the university of california, berkeley. sten h. vermund, m.d., ph.d., is amos christie chair in global health and professor of pediatrics at vanderbilt university and director of the vanderbilt institute for global health. with interests in adolescence, cervical cancer prevention, and prevention of mothertochild transmission of hiv, he has focused on issues of special relevance to women and hiv. dr. vermund served as chief of the vaccine trials & epidemiology branch in the national institute of health (nih) division of aids at the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases from 1988 to 1994 and was awarded the superior service award of the u.s. public health service in 1994 for his work in hiv vaccine clinical trial development. dr. vermund founded the centre for infectious disease research in zambia in 2000, now a major research venue and president™s emergency plan for aids monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.328 monitoring hiv care in the united statesrelief implementer. in 2007, he founded friends in global health, llc, to spearhead hiv prevention, care, and treatment in rural mozambique and nigeria. he serves as principal investigator for the hiv prevention trials network, with sites in the united states, africa, asia, and south america. his collaboration with the chinese center for disease control and prevention seeks to implement a ﬁtest and linkage to careﬂ initiative for hivinfected men who have sex with men; the dual goal is to reduce community transmission and, at the same time, improve the quality of life for hivinfected persons. his training initiatives include the gorgas course in clinical tropical medicine in lima, peru; an aids international training and research program in zambia, mozambique, india, pakistan, bangladesh, and china; and the fogarty international clinical research scholars and fellows support center, with 472 trainees and alumni over 5 years in 45 developingcountry sites doing 1year mentored overseas research training. dr. vermund is coprincipal investigator of the medical education partnership initiative award to the university of zambia to build manpower capacity in hiv control. dr. vermund sits on advisory committees for u.s. and european universities, the world health organization, u.s. agency for international development, and nih.adam b. wilcox, ph.d., is an associate professor in the department of biomedical informatics at columbia university and the director of clinical databases for new york presbyterian hospital. his primary interest is the application of health information technology in transforming the research, discovery, and delivery of health care. he currently leads a project to create a research infrastructure that incorporates data from multiple institutions and includes patientreported data, with the goal of supporting comparativeeffectiveness studies of multiple diseases. he has worked in supporting the use of data from existing clinical systems for research, and manages an electronic health record at columbia university medical center. he also directed the development of a communitycentered health information exchange in washington heights, new york city, with the goal of improving care in a medically underserved immigrant population. previously at intermountain healthcare and as faculty at the university of utah, dr. wilcox led the design and implementation of electronic health records in the primary care and emergency department settings and was the principal investigator of a project studying the comparative effectiveness of care management in ambulatory care. he received his ph.d. in medical informatics from columbia university.douglas wirth, m.s.w., is president and chief executive ofcer of amidacare, a nonprot medicaid hiv special needs plan specically designed for persons living with hiv/aids that works with its members and providers monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix 329to improve access to and retention in care. he is the former executive director of the people with aids coalition of new york, a past chairperson of the new york aids coalition, and former health policy adviser to new york city mayors dinkins and giuliani where he served as chair of strategic planning and evaluation for the nyc hiv planning council. as a senior faculty member of the american psychological association ofce of aids™ hope project, he provided continuing education, health, and mental health training from coast to coast. mr. wirth completed his master™s degree in social work at hunter college, city university of new york. he is presently a board member of the association for communityafliated plans.monitoring hiv care in the united states: indicators and data systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.