detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/13424digital data improvement priorities for continuous learningin health and health care: workshop summary78 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309259415 | doi 10.17226/13424claudia grossmann, brian powers, and julia sanders, rapporteurs; roundtable onvalue and sciencedriven health care; institute of medicinedigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.claudia grossmann, brian powers, and julia sanders, rapporteurs roundtable on value & sciencedriven health caredigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health careworkshop summaryroundtable on value & sciencedriven health carethe learning health system seriesdigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract/grant no. hhsp23320110009ec between the national academy of sciences and the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology. the views presented in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309259415international standard book number10: 030925941xadditional copies of this report are available for sale from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu. copyright 2013 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. the serpent adopted as a logotype by the institute of medicine is a relief carving from ancient greece, now held by the staatliche museen in berlin.suggested citation: iom (institute of medicine). 2013. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summary. washington, dc: the national academies press.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ﬁknowing is not enough; we must apply. willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ šgoetheadvising the nation. improving health.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgdigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vplanning committee on digital data priorities for continuous learing1james walker (chair), chief health information ofcer, geisinger health systemjustine carr, chief medical ofcer, steward health carewilliam dumouchel, chief statistical scientist, oracle health sciencesjamie heywood, chairman, patientslikemerebecca kush, president and ceo, clinical data standards interchange consortiumlisa lee, chief science ofcer, ofce of surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory sciences, centers for disease control and prevention theresa mullin, director, ofce of planning and informatics, center for drug evaluation and research, food and drug administrationlucila ohnomachado, founding chief, biomedical informatics, university of california, san diegorichard platt, chair, population medicine, harvard universityjim scanlon, deputy assistant secretary for planning and evaluation (science and policy), u.s. department of health and human servicespaul stang, senior director of epidemeology, johnson & johnsonwalter suarez, director, health it strategy and policy, kaiser permanenteiom staffclaudia grossmann, senior program ofcerbrian powers, senior program assistant (through july 2012)valerie rohrbach, senior program assistantjulia sanders, senior program assistantrobert saunders, study directorleigh stuckhardt, program associateisabelle von kohorn, program ofcerbarret zimmermann, program assistantj. michael mcginnis, senior scholar, executive director, roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care1 institute of medicine planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the workshop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. the responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiroundtable on value & sciencedriven health care1mark b. mcclellan (chair), director, engelberg center, the brookings institutiondavid blumenthal, president, the commonwealth fundbruce g. bodaken, chairman, president, and ceo, blue shield of californiapaul chew, chief science ofcer and chief medical ofcer, sano u.s.carolyn m. clancy, director, agency for healthcare research and quality (ex ofcio)francis collins, director, national institutes of health (ex ofcio) (designee: susan shurin) helen darling, president, national business group on healthsusan d. devore, chief executive ofcer, premier, inc.richard fante, regional vp, americans, astrazenecajudith faulkner, founder and ceo, epic health systemsthomas r. frieden, director, centers for disease control and prevention (ex ofcio) (designee: gail r. janes)patricia a. gabow, ceo, denver healthatul gawande, general and endocrine surgeon, brigham and women™s hospitalgary l. gottlieb, president and ceo, partners healthcare systemjames a. guest, president, consumers uniongeorge c. halvorson, chairman and ceo, kaiser permanentemargaret a. hamburg, commissioner, food and drug administration (ex ofcio) (designee: peter lurie) james heywood, cofounder and chairman, patientslikemeralph i. horwitz, senior vp, clinical evaluation sciences, glaxosmithklinebrent c. james, chief quality ofcer and executive director, institute for health care delivery research, intermountain healthcaremichael m. e. johns, chancellor, emory universitycraig jones, director, vermont blueprint for healthgary kaplan, chairman and ceo, virgina mason health systemrichard c. larson, mitsui professor, massachusetts institute of technologyjames l. madara, ceo, american medical association1 institute of medicine forums and roundtables do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. the responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiifarzad mostashari, national coordinator, ofce of the national coordinator for health it (ex ofcio)mary d. naylor, professor and director, center for transitions in health, university of pennsylvania william d. novelli, former ceo, aarp; professor, georgetown universitysam nussbaum, executive vp, clinical health policy and chief medical ofcer, wellpoint, inc.jonathan b. perlin, chief medical ofcer and president, clinical & physician services, hospital corporation of america, inc.robert a. petzel, under secretary for health, department of veterans affairs (ex ofcio)richard platt, professor and chair, population medicine, harvard medical school john w. rowe, professor, mailman school of public health, columbia universityjoe selby, executive director, pcorimark d. smith, president and ceo, california healthcare foundationglenn d. steele, president and ceo, geisinger health systemmarilyn tavenner, administrator, centers for medicare & medicaid services (ex ofcio) (designee: patrick conway) reed d. tuckson, executive vp and chief of medical affairs, unitedhealth groupmary wakefield, administrator, health resources and services administration (ex ofcio)debra b. whitman, executive vice president, policy and international, aarpjonathan woodson, assistant secretary for health, department of defense (ex ofcio)digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institute of medicine  roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care charter and vision statementthe institute of medicine™s roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care has been convened to help transform the way evidence on clinical effectiveness is generated and used to improve health and health care. participants have set a goal that, by the year 2020, 90 percent of clinical decisions will be supported by accurate, timely, and uptodate clinical information, and will reect the best available evidence. roundtable members will work with their colleagues to identify the issues not being adequately addressed, the nature of the barriers and possible solutions, and the priorities for action, and will marshal the resources of the sectors represented on the roundtable to work for sustained publicœprivate cooperation for change.****************************************** vision: our vision is for the development of a continuously learning health system in which science, informatics, incentives, and culture are aligned for continuous improvement and innovationšwith best practices seamlessly embedded in the care process and new knowledge captured as an integral byproduct of the care experience. goal: by the year 2020, 90 percent of clinical decisions will be supported by accurate, timely, and uptodate clinical information, and will re˚ect the best available evidence. we feel that this presents a tangible focus for progress toward our vision, that americans ought to expect at least this level of performance, that it should be feasible with existing resources and emerging tools, and that measures can be developed to track and stimulate progress.  context: as unprecedented developments in the diagnosis, treatment, and longterm management of disease bring americans closer than ever to the promise of personalized health care, we are faced with similarly unprecedented challenges to identify and deliver the care most appropriate for individual needs and conditions. care that is important is often not delivered. care that is delivered is often not important. in part, this is due to our failure to apply the evidence we have about the medical care that is most effectiveša failure related to shortfalls in provider knowledge and accountability, inadequate care coordination and support, lack of insurance, poorly aligned payment incentives, and misplaced patient expectations. increasingly, it is also a result of our limited capacity for timely generation of evidence on the relative effectiveness, efciency, and safety of available and emerging interventions. improving the value of the return on our healthcare investment is a vital imperative that will require much digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.greater capacity to evaluate high priority clinical interventions, stronger links between clinical research and practice, and reorientation of the incentives to apply new insights. we must quicken our efforts to position evidence development and application as natural outgrowths of clinical carešto foster health care that learns. approach: the iom roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care serves as a forum to facilitate the collaborative assessment and action around issues central to achieving the vision and goal stated. the challenges are myriad and include issues that must be addressed to improve evidence development, evidence application, and the capacity to advance progress on both dimensions. to address these challenges, as leaders in their elds, roundtable members work with their colleagues to identify the issues not being adequately addressed, the nature of the barriers and possible solutions, and the priorities for action, and marshal the resources of the sectors represented on the roundtable to work for sustained publicprivate cooperation for change. activities include collaborative exploration of new and expedited approaches to assessing the effectiveness of diagnostic and treatment interventions, better use of the patient care experience to generate evidence on effectiveness and efciency of care, identication of assessment priorities, and communication strategies to enhance provider and patient understanding and support for interventions proven to work best and deliver value in health care. core concepts and principles: for the purpose of the roundtable activities, we dene sciencedriven health care broadly to mean that, to the greatest extent possible, the decisions that shape the health and health care of americansšby patients, providers, payers and policymakers alikešwill be grounded on a reliable evidence base, will account appropriately for individual variation in patient needs, and will support the generation of new insights on clinical effectiveness. evidence is generally considered to be information from clinical experience that has met some established test of validity, and the appropriate standard is determined according to the requirements of the intervention and clinical circumstance. processes that involve the development and use of evidence should be accessible and transparent to all stakeholders.  a common commitment to certain principles and priorities guides the activities of the roundtable and its members, including the commitment to: the right health care for each person; putting the best evidence into practice; establishing the effectiveness, efciency and safety of medical care delivered; building constant measurement into our healthcare investments; the establishment of healthcare data as a public good; shared responsibility distributed equitably across stakeholders, both public and private; collaborative stakeholder involvement in priority setting; transparency in the execution of activities and reporting of results; and subjugation of individual political or stakeholder perspectives in favor of the common good.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xireviewersthis workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published workshop summary as sound as possible and to ensure that the workshop summary meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this workshop summary:alfred demaria, massachusetts department of public health shaun grannis, regenstrief institute, inc.erin holve, academyhealth jonathan silverstein, northshore university health systemalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they did not see the nal draft of the workshop summary before its release. the review of this workshop summary was overseen by joy keeler tobin, mitre. appointed by the institute of medicine, she was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this workshop summary was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this workshop summary rests entirely with the authors and the institution.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiiprefacein light of the challenges and opportunities associated with the increasing amount of digital health and healthrelated information being generated and collected in modern society, the institute of medicine™s roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care, with the support of the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology, convened a workshop on digital data priorities for continuous learning in health and health care, which is summarized in this publication. experts from a wide range of disciplinesšincluding medicine, public health, informatics, health information technology, health care services research, health care quality reporting, biomedical research, clinical research, statistics, medical product manufacturing, health care payment and nancing, and patient advocacyšmet to explore the data quality issues and strategies central to the increasing capture and use of digital health data for knowledge development. this publication summarizes discussions to clarify understanding of, and accelerate progress around, data improvement priorities for the digital health data utility.the vision of the roundtable is for a health system in which learning is continuous, with medical evidence generated by capturing the care experience and applied to ensure and improve best care practices. since its inception in 2006, the roundtable has set out to help realize this vision through the involvement and support of senior leadership from key health care stakeholders. in engaging the nation™s leaders in workshops and other digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv prefaceactivities, roundtable members and colleagues provide guidance on issues important to advancing the development and use of a digital health data utility for knowledge generation and continuous improvement. building on this groundwork, the objectives of this workshop were to identify and characterize the current deciencies in the reliability, availability, and usability of digital health data and consider strategies, priorities, and responsibilities to address such deciencies. content was structured to explore the data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health system associated with population and care process management, clinical research, translational informatics, and public health support at the national and state level. workshop discussion also explored the potential for learning from largescale health datasets, focusing on innovative approaches to overcoming the challenges of distributed data, data harmonization, and identity resolution.multiple individuals donated valuable time toward the development of this publication. we would like to acknowledge and offer strong appreciation for the contributors to this volume for their presence at the workshop and their efforts to further develop their presentations into the summaries contained in this publication. we are especially indebted to those who provided counsel by serving on the planning committee for this workshop, including justine carr (steward health care), william dumouchel (oracle health sciences), jamie heywood (patientslikeme), rebecca kush (clinical data standards interchange consortium), lisa lee (cdc, ofce of surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory services), theresa mullin (fda, center for drug evaluation and research), lucila ohnomachado (university of california, san diego), richard platt (harvard university), jim scanlon (department of health and human services), paul stang (johnson & johnson), and walter suarez (kaiser permanente).under the leadership of senior program ofcer claudia grossmann, a number of roundtable staff played instrumental roles in coordinating the workshop and translating the workshop proceedings into this summary, including brian powers, valerie rohrbach, julia sanders, robert saunders, leigh stuckhardt, and isabelle von kohorn. we would also like to thank daniel bethea, laura harbold destefano, christine stencel, and sarah ziegenhorn for helping to coordinate various aspects of review, production, and publication. reliable digital health data represent the foundational elements of a continuously learning health system. the discussions summarized in this workshop explore the potential and challenges for utilizing these data for learning and outline potential strategies and actions to catalyze progress. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface xvwe believe digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care will be a valuable resource as efforts to build and leverage the digital health data utility continue to move forward.james walker, chairplanning committee on  digital data priorities for continuous learning chief health information of˚cergeisinger health systemj. michael mcginnis senior scholarexecutive director  roundtable on value & sciencedriven health careinstitute of medicine digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviicontents1 introduction 1 data sources in the digital health utility, 3 moving to a continuously learning health system, 4 workshop scope and objectives, 5 organization of the summary, 62 data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health system 9 introduction, 10 challenges for data collection and aggregation, 10 patientreported data and maximizing patient value in the  learning health system, 123 digital health data uses: leveraging data for better health 15 introduction, 17 practice management, 17 clinical research, 19 translational informatics, 21 supporting public health and surveillance at the national level, 23 supporting public health and surveillance at the local level, 24 digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviii contents4 issues and opportunities in the emergence of large  healthrelated datasets 27  introduction, 28 the challenge of bias in large healthrelated datasets, 28 moving from analytics to insights, 30 5 innovations emerging in the clinical data utility 33 introduction, 34 distributed queries, 34 data harmonization and normalization, 36 data linkage, 38 6 strategies going forward 41 current data sources: better awareness and assessment, 41 data input: improve patient orientation, quality, and utility, 42 data analysis: improve access, tools, and capacity, 42 public and patient engagement: ramp up involvement, 43 building a clinical data learning utility, 44 clarity on governance, 45appendixes a speaker biographies 47b workshop agenda 57digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11introductiondigital health data are the lifeblood of a continuous learning health system. a steady ˚ow of reliable data is necessary to coordinate and monitor patient care, analyze and improve systems of care, conduct research to develop new products and approaches, assess the effectiveness of medical interventions, and advance population health. the totality of available health data is a crucial resource that should be considered an invaluable public asset in the pursuit of better care, improved health, and lower health care costs (iom, 2012). this publication summarizes discussions at the march 2012 institute of medicine (iom) workshop to identify and characterize the current deciencies in the reliability, availability, and usability of digital health data and consider strategies, priorities, and responsibilities to address such deciencies.1 the ability to collect, share, and use digital health data is rapidly evolving. increasing adoption of electronic health records (ehrs) is being driven by the implementation of the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, which pays hospitals and individuals incentives if they can demonstrate that they use ehrs in a meaningful way. however, although more than half of ofcebased physicians were using basic ehrs in 2011, only a third had access to the basic features necessary 1 the planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop summary has been prepared by the workshop rapporteurs as a factual summary of what occurred at the workshop. statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those of individual presenters and participants, and are not necessarily endorsed or veried by the institute of medicine, and they should not be construed as re˚ecting any group consensus.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 digital data improvement prioritiesto leverage this information for improvement, such as the ability to view laboratory results, maintain problem lists, or manage prescription ordering, (decker et al., 2012).in addition to increased data collection, more organizations are sharing digital health data. data collected to meet federal reporting requirements or for administrative purposes are becoming more accessible. efforts such as health.data.gov provide access to government datasets for the development of insights and software applications with the goal of improving health. within the private sector, at least one pharmaceutical company is actively exploring release of some of its clinical trial data for research by others.2 data sharing partnerships are also opening up across organizations. the care connectivity consortium, a group of ve health systems at the leading edge of using ehrs (kaiser permanente, geisinger health system, mayo clinic, intermoutain healthcare, and group health cooperative), have agreed to securely exchange clinical data for care coordination. sharing is also happening across industries. in the case of astrazeneca and wellpoint, a payer and a product manufacturer have initiated a study on the clinical and cost effectiveness of treatments for some chronic and common diseases. finally, efforts to increase patient access to their own data, such as the blue button initiative which allows patients to download their health information with the click of a button, have been adopted by organizations such as the veterans health administration and unitedhealthcare, and included in the criteria for meaningful use.the increased collection and sharing of health data is quickly moving health care into the era of ﬁbig data.ﬂ this term refers to the huge volume and diversity of data collected in increasingly connected digital technologies. the scale of ﬁbig dataﬂ has implications for analysis and learning in a way that has been leveraged by other industries, such as intelligence, but is only beginning in health care.increasing collection, sharing, and aggregation of data are being matched by advances in methods for learning from these data. clinical and administrative data can be used for studies to assess the effectiveness of health care interventions; identify product safety issues; detect emerging epidemics; and measure health care utilization and value. observational methods that use data collected in the course of providing patient care are increasingly appreciated as valuable contributors to generating and testing hypotheses. the rapidly rising costs and extended duration of traditional randomized control trials (rcts) have contributed to the interests of investigators and funders, among whom there is a growing appreciation of the need to harness big data for innovative streamlined approaches to testing new interventions.2 personal communication, joel beetsch, sano.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 3crucial to all of these efforts is the appropriate alignment of data sources with their intended use. different uses have different requirements of data, and therefore different priorities in terms of the evolving clinical data utility. this challenge is magnied by the lack of lessons and best practices for how to approach data quality assurances needed to support the multiple facets of a learning health system. to address these issues and gain a better understanding of the types, sources, applications, limitations, appropriate uses, and quality improvement needs for digital health data, the iom™s roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care convened a meeting on march 23, 2012, titled digital data priorities for continuous learning in health and health care. this meeting followed a series of related discussions summarized in the iom publication titled digital infrastructure for the learning health system (2011), and built on a body of work done by the roundtable on the centrality of a clinical data utility to support continuous learning and improvement in health and health care (iom, 2010, 2011a,b,c).data sources in the digital health utilitydigital health data are produced in a variety of different environments, which impact greatly the characteristics of the data. who collects the data, how it is collected, why it is collected, and what is collected are some of the ways that digital health data differ depending on their source and have implications for the use of that data. understanding these characteristics is necessary to match data users with appropriate sources, and to understand limitations and barriers in data analysis.the increased adoption of ehrs has given data from routine care increasing prominence as a potential component of the data utility. data collected in the course of delivering patient care come from a variety of sources such as clinician ofces, ambulatory procedure centers, hospitals, and nursing and extended care facilities. the types of data vary by care setting, but generally include both clinical and administrative elements. clinical elements include structured elds and free text notes, laboratory results, images, and diagnostic test results. administrative information includes process performance metrics, and details needed for billing, such as international classication of diseases (icd) codes.also growing in importance is data originating directly from patients. these data can be captured through the use of personal health records or patient portals, in clinical records as recorded by healthcare personnel, or in records external to the health system. they can include personal reports of current health status and wellness, family history, and remote site laboratory readings, as well as healthrelated data such as socioeconomic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. there is increasing interest in including digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 digital data improvement prioritiespatientgenerated data in data sources such as the use of patientreported outcomes in research studies.ongoing and completed clinical trial data offer yet another major source of new data insightsševen beyond the immediate study focus. trials funded by public or private sponsors are largely carried out either at academic institutions or in community settings. clinical trial data are typically collected in addition to those already collected in routine care, usually follow a standardized protocol, and are recorded in a case report form. when the trial is performed for the approval or assessment of a regulated medical product such as a new drug or device, the food and drug administration (fda) closely regulates how and what data are collected. in addition to traditional clinical trials, registries for quality activities, research, or postmarketing surveillance are a parallel source of enriched clinical data.employers, as the purchasers of health insurance for much of the population, often possess data on employees™ health care utilization, basic health status, and associated expenses which can be used for knowledge development. in addition, these data can have greater longitudinal richness than records from clinical care providers.a nal source of health data is population health data routinely collected through the public health system and its surveys and surveillance activities. these data provide information on overall health trends, such as births and deaths, disease prevalence, community health, environmental health, and access to care, as well as disease incidence and threat data. the collection and reporting of this information is increasingly digital, either through freestanding systems and portals or as integrated parts of ehr systems. given the many levels at which public health worksšlocal, county, state, and federalšdifferent data collection approaches and requirements exist at the different levels. other healthrelated community level data are routinely collected by various organizations, departments, and agencies. this includes community socioeconomic status prole data; community physical prole data, such as density, design, and use; civic engagement proles; and community employer prole. additionally, organizations collect data on individuals through their commercial and social activities, such as through supermarket rewards programs and websurng patterns. these data are used not only on their own, for insights into the community, but in concert with other health data to yield a more complete understanding of population health.moving to a continuously learning health system although the collection of large amounts of health and healthrelated data holds promise for both the scale and types of learning possible, data alone are not sufcient for learning. sharing, aggregation, analysis, and the digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 5continuous management and improvement of these data are necessary to enable the transition to a continuously learning health system.the applications of digital health data in a learning system are multiple, including care coordination; management of patient populations; associated care and business processes; outcome, quality, and value assessments; generation of clinical evidence, including clinical trials, clinical effectiveness, and genomic studies; surveillance and trend detection, including medical products safety, syndromic and actionable surveillance, and hypothesis generation; and public health program management. these differing uses vary in their requirements for data quality and characteristics, but all share common challenges related to data access, liquidity, interoperability, and the development of innovative methods for analysis. these issues formed the foundation for the presentations and discussions at the iom public workshop on digital data priorities for continuous learning in health and health care.workshop scope and objectivesworkshop participants included experts from across medicine, public health, informatics, health information technology, health care services research, health care quality reporting, biomedical research, clinical research, statistics, medical product manufacturing, health care payment and nancing, and patient advocacy. content was structured to explore the data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health system, highlighting the opportunities and priorities beyond care coordination such as population and care process management, clinical research, translational informatics, and public health support at the national and state level. the workshop also explored the potential for learning from largescale health datasets, focusing on innovative approaches to overcoming the challenges of distributed data, data harmonization, and identity resolution.the workshop statement of task can be found in box 11, and the elements are re˚ected in the stated meeting objectives:1. discuss the current quality status of digital health data.2. explore challenges, and identify key questions related to data quality in the use of ehrs, patient registries, administrative data, and public health sources for learningšcontinuous and episodicšand for system operational and improvement purposes.3. engage individuals and organizations leading the way in improving the reliability, availability, and usability of digital health data for realtime knowledge generation and health improvement in a continuously learning health system. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 digital data improvement priorities4. identify and characterize the current deciencies and consider strategies, priorities, and responsibilities to address the deciencies. 5. initiate the development of a strategic framework for integrated and networked stewardship of efforts to continuously increase digital data utility. through a series of expert presentations and discussions, workshop participants addressed issues of matching data quality to use, how these needs align with current data sources, and what the potential and challenges are for leveraging digital health data for learningšboth the short and long term. the nal workshop session included a moderated discussion geared toward describing ways forward on the issues highlighted earlier in the workshop.organization of the summarythis publication summarizes the proceedings of the workshop on digital data priorities for continuous learning in health and health care, the 12th in the learning health system series of publications by the roundtable box 11 statement of taskan ad hoc committee will plan and conduct a public workshop to explore the data quality issues and strategies central to the increasing capture and use of digital clinical and patientreported data for knowledge development. the workshop will engage leading experts in reviewing the challenges, dening key questions, and exploring a strategic framework for progress on the issue of health data quality in a learning health system. questions/topics of consideration could include what are the data quality requirements to support the various knowledge generation processes required by the learning health system (quality monitoring, sentinel event detection, disease surveillance, clinical research)? what is known about the current state of digital health data quality? what implications does this have for short term uses? what analytical methods are available to assess data quality? what novel analytical methods will need to be developed in order to meet learning health system datause needs? what are the essential components of a strategy to achieve the necessary data quality levels? what lessons have been learned by those organizations already undertaking learning health systemœtype efforts? what foundational work has been done that can be built on/leveraged to better meet learning health system data quality needs?digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 7on value & sciencedriven health care. chapters 2 through 5 summarize the expert presentations at the workshop, and are organized by thematic focus on the presentations, while chapter 6 covers the concluding discussion. chapter 2 addresses data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health system, including explorations of data heterogeneity and the importance of focusing on data of value to the patient. chapter 3 focuses on the many uses of the digital health data utility, covering the management of patient populations, clinical research, translational informatics, and both national and local public health efforts. chapter 4 looks at emerging issues and opportunities in the use of large datasets, including a discussion of the challenge of data bias, and recent advances in mathematics that promise to move research toward generating real time insights. chapter 5 explores emerging innovations in the use of digital health data including distributed queries, data normalization, and data linkages. chapter 6 summarizes the concluding discussion in which many workshop participants suggested potential strategies and actions to catalyze progress.referencesdecker, s. l., e. w. jamoom, and j. e. sisk. 2012. physicians in nonprimary care and small practices and those age 55 and older lag in adopting electronic health record systems. health affairs 31(5):17.iom (institute of medicine). 2010. redesigning the clinical effectiveness research paradigm: innovation and practicebased approaches. washington, dc: the national academies press.. 2011a. clinical data as the basic staple for health learning: creating and protecting a public good. washington, dc: the national academies press.. 2011b. digital infrastructure for the learning health system: the road to continuous improvement in health and health care. washington, dc: the national academies press.. 2011c. learning what works: infrastructure required for comparative effectiveness research. washington, dc: the national academies press.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health systemkey speaker themesoverhageacross datasets. its intended purpose.burden of collection with its usefulness. heywoodconsider valuable.portant to patients.search and clinical care on a common platform constantly oriented around patient value.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 digital data improvement prioritiesintroduction a learning health system relies on collecting and aggregating a variety of clinical data sources at the patient, practice, and population level. realizing this goal requires addressing concerns over data quality and harnessing new opportunities and sources of clinically relevant data. marc overhage, chief medical informatics ofcer at siemens healthcare, focused his presentation on the challenges for data collections and the limitations inherent in aggregating data across sources. jamie heywood, cofounder and chairman of patientslikeme, examined the issue of data quality as it relates to patientreported data, and how patient value must be a central strategy in building a learning health system.challenges for data collection and aggregationmarc overhage focused on several of the challenges posed by collecting and aggregating data to help derive meaningful conclusions and improve care. at each possible source of data collection, he noted, there are limitations to the quality of data obtained. with patient reported data, the way a patient understands or reports an event may not be understood in the same way by clinicians or researchers. clinicianrecorded data is limited in scope and quality by the time it takes to input structured data into an ehr. finally, while external sources of datašlabs, imaging, pharmacy, etc.šare not subject to the same human biases, they still carry other biases and limitations such as lack of standardization across products.overhage focused on structured data collection from the clinician perspective, which he posed as a balance between the burden and cost associated with its collection (impact on usability) and its value (usefulness of data) (see figure 21). more structured data is generally more useful. however, the level of structure dramatically impacts the burden of collection, and therefore the usability of the collection system; rigidly structured data is usually time and resourceintensive to collect. there should be a focus on maximizing both usability and usefulnessšthat is, nding optimum value. structured data collection is only part of the challenge. according to overhage, although more and more efforts are being made to bring data together in a ﬁqueryable well,ﬂ most digital health data remains siloed within different institutions and organizations. data aggregation is crucial for a learning health system, but brings about new challenges. one challenge noted by overhage is the ability to identify patients across sources. when health information exchanges combine data from various sources, duplication of data or different views of the same clinical event can occur. he brought up the example of identifying which patients are on statins. patients can be identied either based on medication order digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data quality challenges and opportunities 11data from an ehr or by claims data. both are ﬁright,ﬂ as both are facts about the patient, but they can yield different results. some patients have both an ordering event and a dispensing event, some have one or the other, and some have neither. successful data aggregation, according to overhage, will need to account for the fact that there are going to be repeated observations and con˚icting evidence, and combine evidence in a meaningful way. fortunately, there are computational advances that can improve this process. overhage pointed to work being done at siemens on computer algorithms that can parse through con˚icting evidence, assess its provenance, and begin to draw conclusions that clinicians can use.another challenge cited by overhage was the ability to conduct populationlevel research on interventions and outcomes. he expressed caution with using large claims or health system ehr databases to draw conclusions. in particular, he focused on the importance of understanding the characteristics of datasets, such as the underrepresentation of females in the department of veterans affairs (va), especially when making comparisons across datasets. he presented data from the observational medical outcomes partnership (omop) showing the correlation of cox2 inhibitor use to an increased incidence of myocardial infarction in a health system 100%free text100%structured and codedusefulnessof dataimpact onusabilityoptimum mixfigure 21 the usabilityusefulness tradeoff for data collection.source: from ambulatory practice clinical information management: problems and prospects, by b. middleton, k. renner, and m. leavitt. journal of healthcare information management 11(4):97112. copyright 2012 by the healthcare information and management systems society. adapted with permission.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 digital data improvement prioritiesdataset. when this correlation was explored in other health system and claims datasets, however, no relationship was found. this type of heterogeneity impacts efforts to combine datasets for observational research. differences in context and demographics limit comparability between datasets. for example, medicare has a vastly different age distribution than most commercial payers. similarly, the gender distribution for the va dataset is disproportionately skewed toward males. heterogeneity is not limited to demographics, he stressed, but also includes the context in which the data was collectedše.g., changes in drug utilization patterns within a given health system over time.overhage concluded his remarks by stressing the need to appreciate that data quality lies in the eye of the beholder. the true quality of digital health data is an assessment of whether they are t for their intended purpose. for example, he noted, data quality for population health measurement may be able to tolerate more error since researchers are looking for trends and changes at the population level. the same may be true for qualitymeasure adherence as well. however, at the individual patient encounter, decision support needs to be exactly right, and clinicians must have the correct information on the correct patient. depending on the use, criteria for what is ﬁgoodenoughﬂ data will vary tremendously.patientreported data and maximizing patient value in the learning health systemheywood began his presentation with a series of quotes from management expert peter drucker: (1) who is your customer? (2) what does your customer consider value? and (3) what are your results with customers? he proposed that the fact that health care costs have been increasing while the value of care has been decreasing can be traced to an inability to understand and answer these questions in the health care system. in health care, heywood stressed, the patient is the customer. this relationship, however, can be obscured in the research setting. according to heywood, the clinician or researcher asking the question, rather than the patients, can often become the customer. this has profound implications on the utility of research. if the patient is the customer, he noted, research should be delivering results that they consider valuable. currently, this is often not the case. most clinical research focuses on physiologic, molecular, and other markers rather than aspects that matter most to patients: wellbeing and productivity. in order to serve their customers most effectively, heywood proposed that all of research should be helping to answer this question that patients value most: given my status, what is the best outcome i could hope to achieve and how do i get there? digital health digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data quality challenges and opportunities 13data that help to answer this question needs to be captured, recorded, and analyzed. according to heywood, patientreported data can help improve the relevance of medical research to patients. he provided a brief overview of the patientslikeme (plm) online platform, and how it enables patients to share their data and learn from others. patients create proles on plm which detail personal information, medical history, treatment history, and track functional status over time (using accepted patient reported outcome measures). this allows other patients on the site to nd individuals similar to them, and learn from their experiences.despite some concerns over the perceived quality of patient reported data, heywood provided an example of how patientreported data can answer some of the same questions that traditional clinical outcomes research methods are used for. since patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) comprise one of the largest groups on plm, he detailed the use of patientreported data to assess the efcacy of lithium in slowing the progression of als. in 2008, the results of a clinical trial were published showing that lithium signicantly slowed the progression of als symptoms. using the plm platform, researchers were able to test this same treatment in the plm population. they used an algorithm to match als patients being treated with lithium to similar patients who were not undergoing lithium treatment. the variety of demographic and physiologic variables recorded on plm proles allowed for each patient to be matched to an individual control, rather than pairing groups. no change in the progression of als symptoms was observed in the population being treated with lithium. the same results were later found in four clinical trials stopped early for futility.the benet of routinely collecting patientreported data through a platform like plm is that it greatly speeds up the assessment process for interventions. since data are already in place, conducting clinical research does not require building new infrastructure nor collecting new data. according to heywood, this allowed the researchers at plm to conduct their study of lithium efcacy in als patients in a fraction of the time, and at a fraction of the cost, of the followup clinical trials to the 2008 study.after focusing on the als case study, heywood broadened his discussion to consider the transformation necessary to use datašregardless of sourcešto improve the health system. he returned to the center question patients value most: given my status, what is the best outcome i could hope to achieve and how do i get there? the path to answering this question, he suggested, is building learning mechanisms, such as predictive models, into the system to speed discovery, assessment, and implementation. if done effectively, this would converge clinical research and clinical care into one model on a common platform. heywood proposed that if this is done within the context of what the patient perceives as valuable, and keeps digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 digital data improvement prioritiespatients part of the process the whole time, the result will be a learning health system. heywood concluded his remarks with a series of paradigm shifts necessary to move toward a learning health system (figure 22). these include moving toward a system characterized by sharing rather than privatization, patients as partners rather than subjects in research, accessibility rather than security, learning rather than validation, personalization rather than aggregation, and openness rather than closedness. figure 22 paradigm shifts required for the realization of a learning health system. status quo is presented on the left and requirements of a learning health system on the right.source: reprinted with permission from james heywood. privatesharedsubjectpartnersecureaccessiblevalidatedlearningaggregatedpersonalizedopencloseddigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.153digital health data uses:  leveraging data for better healthkey speaker themesleenayall stakeholders as active constituents in the health care conversation.accurate, timely, and standardized to support actionable decisions.of higherquality data, with greater completeness and accuracy, and the increased liquidity of this data. kushgrade,ﬂ data, which can be obtained from ehrs if certain processes are applied and requirements met.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 digital data improvement prioritieslevyresponse should be aggregated and transformed to computable, standardized data for improved and more effective clinical decision support.tion of multiple sources.learning cancer systems. buehlerdata.advantage of the data in˚ux resulting from implementation of meaningful use.through data will serve to strengthen the populationlevel approach to surveillance.laventureprogram needs. will increase the prevalence of betterquality data to improve care and public health. cations, and certication criteria create obstacles for the use of that data for surveillance.encouraged as a standard of practice. requires a shared responsibility for achieving high levels of data quality. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital health data uses 17introductiondifferent data uses have different requirements and priorities. this chapter includes presentations and discussions focused on data uses and quality requirements from the perspectives of various stakeholders in the eld. mark leenay, chief medical ofcer and senior vice president at optumhealth care solutions, discussed challenges and opportunities specic to practice management and the clinical care digital data utility. rebecca kush, founder and the current president and ceo of clinical data interchange standards consortium (cdisc), built on this topic in her discussion of data quality requirements, challenges, priorities and enabling standards/processes for the clinical research enterprise. later, mia levy, director of cancer clinical informatics for the vanderbiltingram cancer center, detailed the case example of vanderbilt™s experience and successes in implementing a translational informatics data management system for cancer diagnosis, treatment, and care. james buehler, director of the public health surveillance & informatics program ofce at the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), focused on data quality for public health surveillance at the national level, while marty laventure, director of the ofce of health information technology and ehealth at the minnesota department of health, spoke to the local and state levels.practice managementin his discussion of the digital data utility and its role in clinical practice management, mark leenay emphasized the requirements necessary to enable sustainable private health information exchanges while ensuring data are connected, intelligent, and aligned. actionable data at the point of care, increased data liquidity, and integration of data across the care continuum, as well as across different types of data, are all integral to incorporating digital health data into practice management. while the quality of health data is important to their use, leenay said, ˚ow of data also plays a major role in supporting population management. currently, data platforms are not integrated into routine care, rendering the ˚ow of digital health information incomplete, and leaving the many different stakeholders managing care with only a partial view of the situation. without a central repository of digital health information, from which each stakeholder is able to extract information to make decisions, this ineffective communication stream is difcult to rectify. the current lack of information ˚uidity, leenay concluded, warrants continued efforts designed to bring data to the point of care for individuals.in conjunction with the challenge of ˚uidity, identity resolution continues to be a barrier to providing integrated, longitudinal data. without nadigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 digital data improvement prioritiestional member ids, for both patients and providers, effective use of digital health data for practice management will continue to be a struggle. as an example of this challenge, leenay cited that out of people using health care exchanges, it is predicted that 50 percent will be eligible for medicaid at some point during the year. as these individuals presumably will alternate between a private exchange and medicaid, integrating their data presents a challenge. further complicating the issue, national provider ids (npis) are used inconsistently, which causes difculties for data aggregation across provider and hospital groups.  content within data systems, both administrative and clinical, presents additional challenges. leenay suggested that 85 percent of the information in ehrs is administrative rather than clinical data. administrative claims data typically are designed for feeforservice billing as opposed to payforperformance. historically, incentives have been designed to reward complexity of service; the more complex the service, the more the provider will be paid. however, as the system shifts to payforperformance, incentives will need to be structured so that physicians are incentivized to enter more clinical data in order to be reimbursed appropriately. additionally, the limited link between claims data and clinical data, and provider resistance to efforts to forge that link, presents a challenge to supporting the sorts of analyses that require insight into both cost or utilization and clinical outcomes. citing an area for potential shortterm progress, lennay mentioned that from a clinical data perspective, there is minimal use of national registries. such registries could provide a way to look at clinical outcomes that are not necessarily as complex as ehrs. as a cautionary note, lennay pointed out that from an administrative dataset perspective, migration from icd9 to icd10 will involve a transition from fewer data points to more, a complicated extrapolation that will be an ongoing challenge.lastly, leenay emphasized, the data actually included in ehrs are often inconsistent and incomplete. however, in light of the changing health care environment, primarily the development of accountable care organizations (acos), data quality requirements are changing. he pointed out that acos represent an alignment of incentives for the collection of higher quality data, with greater completeness and accuracy, and the increased liquidity of this data.in summary, leenay underscored several priorities to improve integration of the digital data utility into clinical care moving forward: identity resolution, information exchange standards, registries, and attention to disparities. identity resolution will be critical to increase the accuracy of digital record use for patient care; strategies to develop and improve current dataset systems must include a focus on standards and normalization to facilitate coordinated information exchange. organizations and clinicians should make greater use of national registries. and given the current digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital health data uses 19socioeconomic disparities in health care, it is important for stakeholders in the digital movement to guard against worsening such disparities through the digital divide. clinical researchin her discussion of clinical research, rebecca kush emphasized that different types of analyses require different grades of data quality, likening the data quality requirements for clinical decisions and regulated research to ﬁsushigradeﬂ data, or the highest quality available. as depicted in figure 31, kush laid out these requirements on a sliding scale, dependent figure 31 spectrum of data quality requirements based on intended use. source: reprinted with permission from rebecca kush.ﬁsushigradeﬂclinical decisionsregulated researchsignal validation; active safety surveillancebasic researchsignal or trend detectionnonmedical sales and marketingﬁallyoucaneatbuffet gradeﬂquality requirementstype of projectdigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 digital data improvement prioritieson the type of activities supported. pointing to the extremes, she suggested that those projects investigating nonmedical sales and marketing have far different data quality requirements than those involving regulated research and clinical decisions. currently, kush said, clinical research (especially regulated clinical research) presents a plethora of logistical challenges to clinical investigators. the average active study site has 3 or more disparate data entry systems; 5060 percent of trials involve paper data collection on 3 or 4part forms, while the remaining 4050 percent of trials involve electronic data capture tools. data are entered 47 times total on average, including 23 times by the clinicians or study coordinators. thus, there is plenty of opportunity to introduce transcription errors. in addition, reporting an unexpected or serious adverse event does not t into normal clinical care work˚ow and takes excessive time, so that researchers often refrain from doing so. given these inefciencies and laborintensive procedures, kush emphasized, most clinicians do one regulated clinical research study and no more. further exacerbating the data quality issue, efforts to ensure that study data are clean can involve signicant resources and nancial consequences; depending on the point of the research process in which the error is identied, correction of a single error in the database can cost upward of $8,000. however, promise lies in the growing industry appreciation of the power of standardization. kush described cdisc™s progress in this eld through development of integration proles with the capability to enable the extraction of a standardized, clinical research dataset (cdash, clinical data acquisition standards harmonization) from ehrs. the resulting interoperability specication (a set of standards) meets global regulations for collection of electronic research data and produces the minimum dataset needed on any clinical trial for regulated purposes. this combination of work˚ow enablers and standards has been used in safety reporting, regulatory reporting, and phase 4 trials; and presents an opportunity to support research with ehrs and contribute to the process of research informing clinical decisions faster with higher quality information.kush then pointed to the coalition against major diseases (camd), an effort initiated by the critical path institute (cpath) to pool alzheimer™srelated trial data from multiple sources with the goal of generating better information from a larger, aggregated database. by standardizing this data into the cdisc format and then pooling it across sources, cpath was able to create a database of more than 6,000 patients and has now made this database available to researchers around the world. a standard guide has been developed for researchers moving forward, so that they can collect alzheimer™s data in the cdisc format from the start and it can be easily compared with the current database. as such, this standardization effort has allowed researchers the capability to easily break out different cohorts digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital health data uses 21and better identify trends in their patient populations in order to identify personalized treatments or to populations most likely to respond. with camd as an exemplar of the opportunities available, kush delineated priorities for clinical research to bring such successes to scale across the eld. data quality should be built into the clinical research system from the beginning, and those individuals involved in the research process (including site personnel, the project team, reviewers, and auditors) should be trained and educated to incorporate data quality measures, including standards for data collection, into their work. data collection should be simplied with welldened requirements for the necessary data set and standardized formats. data should be handled only the minimum amount throughout the process, thereby reducing potential errors due to transcription or reentry. additionally, kush noted, data quality measures should be considered and incorporated throughout the postmarketing process. in her nal comments, kush emphasized that greater standardization offers considerable promise for clinical research moving forward, particularly in leveraging ehrs for research. as exemplied by camd and similar efforts, standardization facilitates both data sharing and data aggregation, presenting the opportunity for groundbreaking research efforts to identify new treatments and therapies with larger, standardized datasets. translational informaticsin her discussion of translational informatics, mia levy focused on her experience at the vanderbiltingram cancer center, where genomedirected cancer treatment is the focus of the center™s work. currently, levy noted, genomics is playing an ever more important role in the care of patients across the cancer continuum; cancer diagnosis, treatment selection, and care are all experiencing an era of genomics. traditionally, cancers have been categorized and treated according to the site of their origin and their histology. now, the molecular subtypes of cancers are determining the course of care, and the molecular variance being discovered in these subtypes is vast. levy noted that for those patients with characterized molecular subtypes, their mutations are considered actionable. either an fdaapproved, standardofcare therapy is available to treat the subtype of their cancer or a medication for their specic mutation is in the clinical research pipeline. however, in this genomic era, even patients for whom a mutation has not been identied are also considered to be actionable, in that they are spared from receiving ineffective, costly, and potentially harmful treatments. these developments hold great promise for the eld of cancer treatment, but the process of implementing a system capable of processing and managing this information poses an entirely new range of challenges to those involved in translational informatics.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 digital data improvement prioritiesreporting molecular diagnostic results in an ehr is typically unstructured and unwieldy she stated. text is entered into a reporting template, and that form is then scanned and uploaded into the ehr as an image le, rendering it noncomputable. another challenge associated with this type of reporting is the sheer amount of data to be reported. in her example, levy highlighted that variance on 40 different mutations had to be reported at the same time. not only does that require an increase in data points, but the complexity associated with this variance information must also be re˚ected in the system. information must be reported in a way that is clinically useful for physicians, in order to help inform them of the ndings™ clinical signicance. levy emphasized that much of this information is actionable only through its ability to link a patient™s results to clinical trial eligibility, and traditional reporting mechanisms do not possess this ability. levy noted that approaches to addressing these challenges are varied. visualization of test results, complete with color coordination and coding, has proved very helpful at vanderbilt, allowing researchers and clinicians to quickly scan information and identify positive ndings. findings are reported in a structured way, so that there is an entity, an attribute, and a value behind each piece of data. moreover, information and results recorded in the ehr are linked directly to a database that provides information on the clinical signicance of a patient™s particular mutation variant, thereby identifying potential targeted therapies. further guidance is provided through inclusion of relevant, summarized clinical trial literature, which links clinicians to full, pubmed sources should they need to see additional information on the signicance of the trial to their patient™s care. the data management system also links the ehr to a clinical trials database, providing clinicians with the means to identify relevant trial eligibility criteria. all of these strategies, levy emphasized, offer promise for the effective and efcient incorporation of complex and varied digital data into the process of cancer care. levy nished her discussion by looking to the future, contemplating how to make systems like vanderbilt™s sustainable and scalable with respect to content generation as well as content dissemination. aggregation of institutional data, she suggested, is critical for rendering the data clinically useful. information from patient diagnosis, treatment, and treatment response should be aggregated and transformed to computable, standardized data for improved and more effective clinical decision support. moreover, the records incorporated into this type of database should be combined with other data, including patientreported outcomes as well as cost information, both of which would be benecial to understanding treatment comparative effectiveness. given the complexity of genomedirected cancer treatment and translational informatics on the whole, levy underscored her experiences with the importance of triangulation of data from multiple sources digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital health data uses 23to better approximate the probability of an event and use this as a basis for learning processes. ehr data can be useful for learning systems, but it must be of high quality and mitigated through triangulation of multiple resources.supporting public health and surveillance at the national levelin the context of public health surveillance, data quality has varying denitions. as james buehler of the cdc explained in his comments, quality requirements depend on the public health purpose the data are serving. for those working to prevent and contain specic diseases or adverse health events, the required data includes information about disease characteristics and severity, where and when it is occurring, its antecedents, its evolution over time, and its consequences. moreover, public health professionals need data on those who are affected, individuals™ risk factors and whether certain groups of people are affected more than others, outcomes, and disease susceptibility to treatment. all of this information, often generated by individuals™ utilization of health care services, provides insight into what can be done to craft, target, and direct and redirect public health interventions. as such, public health surveillance is not simply about collecting information; it is about analyzing and using that data for a purpose, and that purpose can vary from disease surveillance, to situational awareness of a community™s status, to local, sometimes individual, interventions. while the dataquality requirements vary for each of these different purposes, buehler continued, some apply to the broad range of public health surveillance uses. the data should be complete, reliable, timely, and inexpensive, and they should provide accurate insights into the local surveillance context. in practice, it is often not possible for a surveillance system to achieve all of these desirable attributes, requiring balance of desirable and sometimes competing attributes to maximize utility and value.in order to meet these requirements, current public health surveillance data sources and systems are becoming progressively more automated. attention is increasingly directed toward integrating ehrs into both the reporting and feedback arms of surveillance, so that individuals™ direct interactions with the health care system can serve as an additional source of electronic public health data. however, the process of moving this automation and integration forward faces a number of challenges buehler noted, outlining several priorities for addressing those challenges. it is critical that public health surveillance systems are prepared to take full advantage of the data in˚ux resulting from implementation of meaningful use, he said. the public health workforce likewise must be equipped to make the best use of this information, as it presents a great opportunity for more effective and digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 digital data improvement prioritiesefcient public health surveillance. finally, he noted, linking public health and direct health care services research in this way will serve to strengthen the populationlevel approach to surveillance.supporting public health and surveillance at the local levelin line with buehler™s discussion of public health surveillance at the national level, martin laventure shifted the focus to public health at the state and local (city and county) level. laventure reinforced the earlier assertion that necessary data quality attributes vary and depend on the context of the local public health activity. for example, timeliness is of particular importance for newborn screening, acute disease surveillance, and outbreaks, while completeness is especially critical for maintenance of immunization records. accuracy is crucial for monitoring cancer clusters, while currency, comprehensiveness, and access to the primary data source all are relevant for public health surveillance and clinical decision support. these quality characteristics all contribute to the usability of public health surveillance data today. currently, surveillance data is collected from many sources, and health facilities increasingly are adopting ehrs for patient information management and decision support. however, frequent miscoding and mismapping of this information can result in loss of trust in both the data and the providers using those data; in which case the value of those data suffers. moreover, the limited ehr standards and specications and certication criteria lead to incomplete and invalid records, which create obstacles to efcient use of that data for clinical and disease surveillance purposes. this can lead to additional work by providers and public health ofcials and delay important public health intervention, prevention, and policy decisions. in the face of these challenges, laventure said, the public health digital environment is changing. greater ehr use with standards and quality checks built in will increase the prevalence of better quality data, thereby creating the opportunity for quality information exchange for care and public health and improved pointofcare decision support. to facilitate this progress, laventure proposed a number of priorities. health information systems need to move beyond information management to rapid, accurate knowledge creation with support from public health information systems such as an immunization information system. the ehr certication process, he suggested, should include more comprehensive, structured content requirements for data quality, including thresholds at the point of capture, review, and exchange thus helping ensure higherquality outputs for broader use. standards for quality checks and improvement are needed to ensure updates and corrections can be completed quickly and propagadigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital health data uses 25tion of errors to other settings can be minimized. laventure went on to suggest that health care professionals should be educated on the value of quality data to encourage further focus on and enthusiasm for highquality data, and incentives should encourage use of this data to increase value and quality. public health agencies need similar incentives and support to modernize state and local systems in order to enable bidirectional ˚ow of this information. additionally, laventure noted that better use of existing standards and adopting new standards for the content and quality of data will reduce variability and increase usability for multiple purposes, and continuous improvement of data sources will ensure that their output is of the highest quality possible. it is also critical that information generated from these sources, and the knowledge from its analysis, is brought back to the source, to foster continuous improvement at the source level. finally, laventure concluded by emphasizing that continued innovation with the public health case in mind will lead to betterquality data and better surveillance through improved adoption, use, and exchange of health information. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274issues and opportunities in the emergence of large healthrelated datasetskey speaker themesmadigancians and current ﬁevidencebasedﬂ models. dictive models.but there are strategies to mitigate its impact.mccallunderstanding of cause and effect.ets, have the potential to allow researchers to discover causeeffect relationships rather than correlations.to come up with causal structure rather than static answers.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 digital data improvement prioritiesintroduction the emergence of large healthrelated datasetsšfrom sources such as large health systems, payers, pharmacy benet managers, etc.šhave the potential to transform the clinical effectiveness research enterprise. realizing the potential requires mathematical methods that handle the scale of data, as well as an appreciation of the biases and limitations inherent to each data source. david madigan, professor and chair of the department of statistics at columbia university, discussed the challenge of bias in large datasets, and strategies and methods to more appropriately address bias in observational clinical outcomes research. carol mccall, chief strategy ofcer at gns healthcare, focused on new mathematical approaches that allow nuanced insights to be derived from large datasets.the challenge of bias in large healthrelated datasetsdavid madigan began his presentation by focusing on the current clinical decision framework, which revolves around evidencebased medicine and clinical judgment. he told the story of a cardiologist deciding whether or not a patient should receive angioplasty. using a risk assessment algorithm from the framingham study, the doctor assigned a 10year risk of developing coronary heart disease using the following variables: age, total cholesterol, smoking, highdensity lipoprotein (hdl), and blood pressure. according to madigan, this is evidencebased medicine in 2012. a multitude of other health related datašother lab results, family history, medication, other health issuesšis ignored in this analysis. this is where, ideally, clinical judgment comes in. the cardiologist should use the evidencebased recommendation, coupled with the other variables, to make an appropriate decision. madigan argued that in the face of this much information it is infeasible for a human being to do optimal decision making.with the right statistical techniques, however, large healthrelated datasets can begin to answer these questions. madigan cited the work of the observational medical outcomes partnership (omop), which has medical records for roughly 200 million individuals. within this database, he speculated, there might be 30,000 individuals like the patient described above. this information can be used to make inferences about the course of care more precisely than those made by physicians. at its heart, madigan stated, these are issues of predictive modeling. the way that ﬁbig dataﬂ can help improve care is by aiding the development of good predictive models. according to madigan, the data for these types of analyses exist. there are several databases with large quantities of patientlevel data. the limitation is that, currently, there are no satisfactory methodologies to build digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emergence of large healthrelated datasets 29reliable predictive models. one challenge is the inherent bias of the data being used. madigan laid out the various stages in the data collection and research process at which bias can be introduced into a data set (figure 41). bias alone is not the problem. in fact, it is unavoidable. the larger problem is that current observational research with large datasets does not acknowledge the limitations that bias places on results. madigan noted that, generally, the issues of bias and measurement error are only paid lip service in the peerreviewed literature for observational clinical outcomes research. articles will often state potential limitations, but fail to discuss the implications. there are profound data quality issues when using large observational datasets and, according to madigan, the current practice for observational research does little about it. to demonstrate the consequence of bias he presented some data from the omop database. omop researchers ran selfcontrolled case series analysis for a variety of drugs across each of the 10 component omop databases. the results demonstrated extreme heterogeneity. for 20 of the 50 drugevent pairs studies, the drugevent relationship went from being statistically signicant in the positive direction to statistically signicant in the negative direction depending on which database was used. this heterogeneity has profound implications for the generalizability of published outcomes research.madigan concluded his presentation by focusing on strategies that confront these challenges of bias and data quality. one critical strategy is sensitivity analysis. he acknowledged that sound statistical methods and software for sensitivity analysis currently exist. these methods look at sources of biases and run various ﬁwhatifﬂ scenarios to give a sense of how robust ndings are. he suggested that sensitivity analysis ought to be an absolute requirement for the publication of observational studies.true causal relationshiptrue values for actual populationobserved sampleobserved datameasurement errorrandom sampling error and selection bias confoundingfigure 41 sources of bias in clinical datasets.source: reprinted with permission from phillips, 2003.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 digital data improvement prioritiesthe other strategy to improve the quality and utility of retrospective outcomes research is to establish operating characteristics of observational studies. madigan argued that currently there is no good understanding of the quality and reliability of this type of research. for example, if a study arrives at a certain relative risk, how close is that relevant risk to the truth if it were to be reproduced with different data? similarly, when studies report 95 percent condence intervals, how close are those to the truth? madigan noted that omop researchers have found that across databases, reported 95 percent condence intervals often have only roughly 50 percent coverage. there is a need, he stressed, to study this science empirically in order to get a handle on how well it actually works and how likely the results are to be the truth.moving from analytics to insightscarol mccall posed that the principal challenge in health care today is the ability to create a deep and dynamic understanding of what works best for whom. she noted that while there are currently many areas of redesign and improvement in health carešaligning business models, transforming care models, building infrastructurešall of these changes implicitly assume that there is access to evidence and an understanding of what works for whom. the sustainability of all of these efforts demands something new: a nuanced understanding of cause and effect in health care.according to mccall, three developments have made it possible to analyze vast amounts of data to generate actionable medical evidence. the rst is moore™s law, the doubling of computing capacity approximately every 2 years, which gave rise to big data and bigdata technologies. the second is that health care data is becoming much more liquid. the third, which she noted as the lynchpin, is a revolution in mathematics, led by judea pearl, which has mathematized causality, opening a paradigm shift in analytics. previously, the problem with big data was that the bigger it got, the more correlations were found. mccall stressed that correlation is a truism. data is correlated, always higher or lower, but it always exists, and it is not the same as causation. this new calculus of causality, however, allows researchers to discover causeeffect relationships and generate evidence from big data (pearl, 2009). the fundamental difference of this type of approach is that it focuses on insights rather than analytics. through these types of mathematical methods, she notes, researchers are left with causal structure rather than a static answer. this structure can be interrogated to answer a variety of important questions such as what data is needed to resolve existing uncertainty, an insight that can guide next data investments and be used to tailor research strategies. furthermore, this type of structure allows researchers to digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emergence of large healthrelated datasets 31run counterfactuals, interrogate and investigate much more quickly, and go beyond situations where they already know the answer. this ability to make predictions and quickly assess results is at the core of a learning health system. clinicians and researchers can predict an outcome, observe what happens, compare it against experience, and adjust future care protocols in response. and this can all happen rapidly.with the mathematical methods in place, mccall noted, the priorities for big data analytics and evidence generation are shifting. since mathematics can be scaled to any level and performed on any data set, the challenge now is nding data sources that are comprehensive and up to date. she underscored the need to link and share data from a variety of sources, such as pharmaceutical companies, hospitals, pharmaceutical benet managers and payers. with data coming from several sources, there is also the need to understand context, and metadata take on an added importance.referencespearl, j. 2009. causality: models, reasoning and inference. new york: cambridge university press. phillips, c. v. 2003. quantifying and reporting uncertainty from systematic errors. epidemiology 14(4):459466.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.335innovations emerging in the clinical data utilitykey speaker themeselmore and platting health system. timeliness, ˚exibility, and sustainability.in ways that are hipaacompliant and maintain local context.chuteeffective and accurate secondary use.hybrid approach of new systems standardizing from inception and legacy systems transforming over time is most feasible.portunity for normalization in a way that maintains the context and provenance of the data.and terminology service; a national repository of value sets is one suggested approach to handling this challenge.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 digital data improvement prioritieskheterpalcomprehensive, longitudinal information to support team care.advantages to better link data between sources while maintaining privacy.introductionin order to make optimal use of the digital health data utility, novel and innovative approaches will have to be developed. these innovations include learning from large sets of data while dealing with the risk associated with physical aggregation, coping with incomplete standardization of data, and linking data from diverse sources without the use of universal identiers. richard elmore, coordinator of query health at the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology, and richard platt, chair of population medicine at harvard medical school and harvard pilgrim health care institute, discussed the specic case of distributed data queries. christopher chute, professor of medical informatics at the mayo clinic, elaborated on challenges and opportunities associated with data harmonization and normalization. vik kheterpal, principal at careevolution, focused on data linkage between sources.distributed queriesin their discussion of distributed queries, richard elmore and richard platt covered the broad denition and qualities of such queries, and provided specic examples of these queries in action. distributed queries allow querying of data from multiple partners without having to physically aggregate data in one central repository; a query is sent to all partners, and each participant runs this query internally and returns summary results individually. some example use cases for distributed population queries include population measures related to disease outbreaks, postmarket surveillance, prevention, quality, and performance. the advantages of this model, elmore emphasized, are myriad. a distributed query approach allows data partners to maintain hipaamandated, contractual control of their protected health information (phi), and it facilitates data validity by ensuring that results are returned by local content experts, those most familiar with and understanding of the data and their interpretation. the digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovations emerging in the clinical data utility 35distributed data environment also supports data accuracy, timeliness, ˚exibility, and sustainability. despite their many advantages, distributed queries also face a number of data quality challenges. complications in integrating results from several data sources due to a lack of standards were cited as an example. but, elmore said, pathbreaking work is under way to address this problem. difculty in striking a balance between clinical intuitiveness and computability when expressing a query is another challenge. moreover, once a query is formulated, the lack of semantic equivalency and standards to express clinical concepts among data systems must be addressed. additionally, there is no cultivated standard value set, clinicians in the same practice often code differently, and each organization has its own established value sets. furthermore, within those value sets, data are often missing, so completeness also presents a challenge to distributed queries.despite the obstacles inherent to such queries, several examples, across many domains, are ongoing and have achieved great success. platt described minisentinel, an fdasponsored pilot initiative that has created a distributed dataset that includes data on 126 million people at 17 data partners to support active safety surveillance of medical products. the fda now routinely uses the system. platt cited an example of a query dealing with drugs for smoking cessation, addressing concern that a certain drug increased risk of negative cardiac outcomes. within 3 days of receiving fda™s intent to query the network, minisentinel returned its rst report on the results, including information on 300 million person years of experience. while the speed and scope of the query result were impressive, platt noted that it had several associated limitations. these included that it was intended to be a quick look, not a nal answer; that the result did not exclude excess risk; and that recorded exposures may have been missing or included a misclassied indication. moreover, the cohort may have been unrepresentative, outcomes may have been misclassied, and there was a potential for residual confounding due to disparate smoking intensities or comorbidities. nonetheless, with the right clarication on the query itself, specications on the cohort of interest, and selection of diagnosis codes, the network was able to rapidly query hundreds of millions of people™s worth of data without transferring any institution™s phi. another query focused on a comparison of individuals who had experienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack (tia) and previously received one of two different types of platelet antagonists. treatment with one of the platelet antagonists was counterindicated for individuals who had previously had a stroke or tia; minisentinel determined that half as many individuals received the counterindicated drug following stroke or tia compared to those individuals receiving the comparison drug. the limitadigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 digital data improvement prioritiestions inherent to this query included that the icd9 codes used for tia and stroke were not validated in minisentinel, and that the longest look back for stroke or tia events was 1 year, so that patients who experienced an event earlier than 1 year prior were missed. in both of these examples, it was possible to get very quick information that provided guidance that fda found to be useful in determining how much urgency should be attached to a specic question, while also helping to develop next steps. along these lines, query health, an oncsponsored initiative, is working with many partners to develop standards for distributed data queries. as elmore emphasized, the idea is to send questions to voluntary, collaborative networks, whose varied data sources may range from ehrs, to health information exchanges (hies), to other clinical records. these queries have the potential to dramatically cut cycle time on population questions, from years to days, and thereby, elmore said, are critical to onc™s strategy to bend the curve toward transformed health, and will play a foundational role in the digital infrastructure for a learning health system, focusing on the patient and patient populations, while ensuring privacy and trust.data harmonization and normalizationin his comments on data harmonization and normalization, christopher chute stressed that data from patient encounters must be comparable and consistent in order to provide knowledge and insights to inform future care decisions. this normalization is also necessary for bigdata approaches to queries. however, most clinical data in the united states, even within institutions, are heterogeneous, which presents a major challenge for harmonization efforts. onc™s initiation of meaningful use is mitigating this challenge, but more work is needed. data normalization, chute said, comes in two varieties: clinical data normalization of structured information, and processing of unstructured natural language. moreover, three potential approaches to instituting this normalization exist. the rst approach is for all generators of data, including lab systems, departmental systems, physician entry systems, to normalize their data at the source. given the institutional effort necessary to realize this approach, it is not realistic in the short term. the second approach places all hopes for normalization in transformation and mapping on the back end of data systems; this approach sometimes works, but often is associated with ambiguous meanings and other transformation difculties. lastly, the third and most promising method is a hybrid approach, in which new systems begin by normalizing their data at the source, while established systems implement standard normalization protocols like meaningful use and data from legacy systems are transformed. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovations emerging in the clinical data utility 37in discussing these approaches, chute emphasized, it is important to comprehend fully the denition of normalization, as it has both syntactic and semantic meanings. syntactic normalization is highly mechanical and involves correction of malformed messages. an example of such work is the health open source software pipeline created by regenstrief institute, which is capable of this type of syntactic normalization. on the other hand, semantic normalization typically involves vocabulary and concept mapping.both types of normalization assume that there is a normal form to target, yet extant national and international standards do not fully specify that target. many standards exist, but, chute said, they do not specify what is needed. the current standards and specications of hie and messaging are narrow, and do not look at the full representational problems of clinical data, so that efforts to meet the standards fall short on those fronts. additionally, while there is tension on this point, machine readable, rather than human readable, standard representation is necessary for largescale inferencing and secondary use. having elaborated on the denition and current characteristics of normalization, chute turned to describing current efforts undertaken by onc™s strategic health it advanced research projects (sharp) program, specically sharpn, whose major focus is on normalizing and standardizing data. sharpn is approaching data normalization through clinical element model (cem) structures, which are a basis for retaining consistent meaning for data when they are exchanged between heterogeneous computer systems or when clinical data are referenced in decision support logic or other modalities of secondary use. cems include the context and provenance of data, for example a patient™s position and body location will be recorded alongside his or her blood pressure reading. this promising model has generated an international consortium, the clinical information model initiative (cimi), which brings together a variety of efforts focused on cems. when comparing the resulting cems between different participating partners, it becomes clear that different secondary uses require different metadata, which raises the question of what structured information should be incorporated into these models. by binding value sets to cems, chute suggested, it is possible to effectively institute semantic normalization. ideally, all collaborating groups would implement the same value sets and they would be drawn from ﬁstandard vocabulariesﬂ like loinc and snomed. however, it is likely that many value sets would have to be bound to these cems in order to truly have interoperability and a comparable and consistent representation of clinical data. valueset management, therefore, is a major component of normalization, and terminology services and a national repository of value sets managed by the national library of medicine is one suggested approach to handling this challenge. local codes would have to map to the major value sets, and digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 digital data improvement prioritiesthe process of semantic mapping from local codes to ﬁstandardﬂ codes, chute emphasized, surely would be labor intensive. this underscores the critical importance of tagging data at the local level, so that those who best understand the data™s signicance are the individuals determining its codes.data linkagevik kheterpal began by emphasizing chronic disease as the dominant problem in health care as a way to highlight the challenges associated with data linkage. chronic diseases are the principal cause of disability and health services utilization, and account for 78 percent of health care expenditures. care for these conditions necessitates teamwork and coordination between multiple caregivers, and this teambased care requires data exchange, interoperability, and management over a patient™s extended care timeline. the data must be longitudinal and its management must be coordinated in order to ensure that clinicians are able to view the patient™s condition across time before making clinical decisions. this level of coordination, kheterpal suggested, offers the opportunity to reduce costs, improve outcomes, and reduce care fragmentation.in working toward this more interoperable vision of data exchange, it is important that the current focus on ehrs be broadened, kheterpal suggested. he emphasized the need to focus not on the technology, but what can be done with it. for example, ehrs are necessary to facilitate exchange, but they are not sufcient to accrue transformational systemic value. rather than simply digitizing the data contained in paper records, emphasis should be placed on improving data visualization, and leveraging the power of large datasets for extrapolation. the strategy also must address health care specic challenges, including false positives, lack of uniform identiers, privacy regulations, dirty data, and the multitude of data sources.kheterpal highlighted that data linkage is a major challenge to integrating data from different sources and to providing longitudinal data on patients in order to assess downstream outcomes and get a complete picture. to confront these challenges, kheterpal said, blindfolded record linkage holds much promise. this method of linking data allows for secure, oneway hash transformations so that records can be linked without any party having to reveal identifying information about any of the subjects. its advantages are numerous in that it maintains patient privacy, is already viable and in production, and can process large population sets. moreover, kheterpal said, current health data efforts can easily be adapted to include it. employing this strategy for linking data can decrease duplicity and provide a longitudinal view of the patient™s care history, two of the major challenges to optimizing learning from large datasets.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovations emerging in the clinical data utility 39to close, kheterpal offered several recommendations to move the eld forward. increased utilization of distributed blindfolded linkage pilots will provide greater evidence on their tness to address the challenges at hand. research into the scale of overlap and missed signal problems associated with systems that do not link records stratied across disease states will help to make the case for improved record linkage. lastly, kheterpal suggested development of a stratication model that matches a proposed research question with necessary data types could improve the accuracy and relevance of data linkage efforts.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6strategies going forwardduring the nal session of the workshop individual participants re˚ected on the day™s presentations and discussions and discussed actions they felt were important to progress in the areas discussed. the suggestions made by individual participants covered six broad thematic areas: improving awareness and gap assessment of existing data sources; improving the quality, patient orientation, and utility of data input; improving the access, tools, and capacity for data analysis; ramping up the involvement and engagement of the patients and the public for improved clinical data; building a clinical data learning utility; and developing clarity on the governance needed.current data sources: better awareness and assessmenta number of speakers raised the issue of the need for a better understanding of what data sources exist, their characteristics, their relationships to each other, and the implications of these details on the uses of the data (see chapters 25). resource mapping. discussion during the nal session yielded several suggestions from individual attendees on how to work toward getting a better understanding of digital health data sources. assembling a taxonomy of digital health data sources with descriptors to better understand what sources are out there and their specic characteristics was suggested by a few participants as a potential rst step toward this goal. utility mapping. it was suggested that the mapping process should also 41digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 digital data improvement prioritiesinclude not just taxonomy and inventory of data sources, but assessment of how highpriority questions and issues map to existing sources and methods, including annotation of sources used in research studies. data input: improve patient orientation, quality, and utilityas emphasized in crossing the quality chasm in 2001, patientcentered care has been highlighted as a central component of quality health care (iom, 2001). extending this notion to digital health information was a frequent theme in workshop discussions.information patients care about. several participants and speakers emphasized collecting information that patients care about, and including information on wellness and productivity, as a rst step toward this goal. similarly, increasing the inclusion of patientreported information in the digital health data utility was highlighted as a priority. development, validation, and encouragement of the use of patientreported preferences, symptoms, careprocess measures, and outcomes were called out as potential important components of this strategy.usability. improving the usability of health and biomedical information technology and prioritizing information collection were strategies suggested to minimize the burden imposed on data collectors. identifying and eliminating the collection of lowvalue data, as well as automating data collection, whenever appropriate, were suggested as potential approaches.contextual tagging. maintenance of the provenance and context of the data was also highlighted as an important issue, particularly when data is used for a purpose other than that for which it was collected. the use of metadata tagging and strategies to enable access to full original context (e.g., on place, time, person/ses) were called out as potential approaches.core elements. in order to make progress on the goal of improving data quality, the development of more standardized digital health data denitions and representations was highlighted for attention. in particular, several participants emphasized the need for development of a set of core minimum standardized data elements to provide timely essential information on cost, quality, and health status and trends, available across institutions and geographic areas and designed to harmonize funder data set requirements. some participants felt that inclusion of these core elements as part of the certication process was an effective way to further progress.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies going forward 43data analysis: improve access, tools, and capacityonly through analysis and use of digital health data will its full potential be realized (iom, 2012). improving the analytic tools and capacity necessary for learning were common themes in workshop discussions.toolsets. specically, the creation of toolsets that would expand access to tools and applications beyond the traditional research community and open opportunities for analysis and learning was cited as a potential approach with some precedence in other areas of science.curation. strategies and methods to curate data sources in an ongoing way were also suggested. the need for better metrics to measure data quality and utility, in contextappropriate ways, was also discussed. some participants suggested that these metrics could focus on the impact of information collection and input processes on the data; for example, data collection in the course of routine care through an ehr versus as part of a clinical trial.data integration. several participants asserted that putting patients at the center of digital health data also included facilitating the integration of their data across the several facets of health, including with public health information and other sources, some of which may be external to health care. strategies for data integration, in particular, including public health data, were suggested as a necessary rst step toward this goal. a related concept of triangulating several data sources to improve predictive accuracy was also mentioned by several speakers as an important advantage to having large amounts of diverse data. public and patient engagement: ramp up involvement many participants stressed that successfully engaging stakeholders is crucial for fully realizing the learning and improvement potential of digital health data. whether a data donor, collector, or user, a patient, clinician, public health ofcial, or researcher, all stakeholders have unique, and changing, roles to play.patient voice. drawing further from the notion of collecting and including information patients care about, many participants cited the need for a strong strategy for building the capacity for direct patient engagement. specic approaches included the development and renement of portals, and the inclusion of patient preferences and other patientsourced data.trust. building trust among stakeholders was a common denominator in issues identied to take advantage of expanding capacity for continuously learning health care. several discussants noted that in order to create and nurture this trust, stakeholders must feel that their participation in data digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 digital data improvement prioritiescollection and use processes are respectful of their efforts, their privacy, and responsive to their needs. regulatory reform. development of mutual understandings of expectations for condentiality, privacy, and security were highlighted as key to building and maintaining strong stakeholder support in the rapidly evolving environment of social media, increased availability of information online, and the growing integration of genomics into clinical care and diagnostics.presentation. increasing the usefulness of data to patients, and other stakeholders, through the use of userappropriate data presentation techniques, including visualization, was suggested by several workshop participants.health literacy. a few participants cautioned that efforts to improve understanding through raising awareness and targeted strategies at different health literacy levels will be necessary to facilitate these discussions. culture of participation. given this changing environment, the suggestion was made to empower potential data donors (notably patients) with the option and ability to donate their information for use. along similar lines, the idea of studying the benets and risks of patientrequested portable identiers was suggested as a way to make progress on the issue of identity resolution and data linkage, and a rst step toward developing a strategy for their development and application.building a clinical data learning utilitythroughout workshop presentations and discussions, some speakers and participants stressed the need to harness the potential for learning from the digital health data utility. the challenges and opportunities afforded by the increasing scale of data available for learning informed many of these discussions.innovative methods. the development of methods using ehrs as a data source and performing observational studies on big data were highlighted as specic needs. in particular, the development, validation, and use of predictive models to inform healthdata uses, including risk interpretation by individuals, was singled out as holding great promise. noting that most digital health data is in unstructured formats, the potential for learning from this data through natural language processing (e.g., ibm™s watson) was highlighted by several workshop participants. an emphasis on the need for the development and application of reasoning and inference tools was highlighted as a potential priority going forward.distributed approaches. given the importance of privacy and security in the collection and use of patient health data, presentations and discussions frequently touched on the advantages of distributed data approaches digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies going forward 45and the need to further develop and pilot the policies, analytic methods, and technologies associated with their use.engaging bias. several challenges and barriers to learning from the digital health data utility were cited, including uncertainty about the completeness and reliability of many data sources, as well as the presence of multiple forms of bias. the need for detailed expert assessments of the implications of bias on analyses, as well as in the new context of the very large datasets now emerging, was suggested by several workshop participants.core elements. the identication and application of a set of minimum data elements to provide information on cost, quality, health status, and health trends was suggested, by several discussants, as a critical component to accelerating progress on learning from the health data utility. reform of regulatory frameworks to encourage structured collection, assessment, and use of routinely collected data, in order to facilitate and support this learning, was highlighted by some participants as an important rst step. clarity on governancegreater clarity on governance, both in terms of what it would look like and the issues for engagement, specically in terms of access and sustainability, was a theme echoed in many workshop discussions.domains. some participants pointed to a need to identify key domains for which governance structures are necessary to accelerate the evolution of the digital data utility, and begin to catalyze their engagement. access and ownership. suggested approaches to ensuring participation included enabling broader access to data sources and ensuring that the ˚ow of information is multidirectional. this democratization of roles could facilitate the engagement of the issue of data ownership, broaden sources of input, exhibit the potential of information use to meet stakeholder needs, and demonstrate the value of the collection and use of the data.business model. there is a need for a better understanding of both the costs and benets associated with the uses of digital health data for learning and continuous improvement. quantitative and qualitative approaches to insights on how information might be leveraged to increase health benets and minimize associated costs from the perspectives of the many diverse stakeholders were highlighted by some participants as an important rst step on this count. additionally, the application of analytics for patient panel management and to support pay for performance payment initiatives such as acos were cited by individual participants as examples of areas of promise for establishing sustainable efforts. digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 digital data improvement prioritiesreferencesiom (institute of medicine). 2001. crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. washington, dc: national academy press.iom. 2012. best care at lower cost: the path to continuously learning health care in america. washington, dc: the national academies press.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix aspeaker biographiesjames w. buehler, md, is the director of the public health surveillance & informatics program ofce (proposed) at the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc). dr. buehler has more than 30 years of experience in the eld of medical epidemiology, serving from 1981 to 2002 as a commissioned ofcer in the u.s. public health service at cdc, where he worked in the areas of general eld epidemiology, maternal and child health, hiv/aids, and, for a brief period in 2001, anthrax. in 2002, dr. buehler joined the epidemiology department of the rollins school of public health at emory university, where he held the position of research professor. in 2009, he returned to cdc to contribute to the surveillance of pandemic in˚uenza, and in 2010, he became the founding director of cdc™s public health surveillance program ofce. dr. buehler has devoted much of his career to the eld of public health surveillance. as a member of the emory faculty, dr. buehler™s research interests centered on improving public health surveillance and emergency preparedness capacities and on advancing the relatively new eld of public health systems research. while at emory, he served as a consultant to epidemiology and emergency preparedness programs at the division of public health of the georgia department of human resources. in 20062008, he served as the public health representative on the georgia health information technology and transparency advisory board, where he focused on strengthening linkages between public health and health care through advances in health information technologies. dr. buehler obtained his bachelor™s degree in biochemistry from the university of california, berkeley, and his doctor of medicine degree from the university of california, san francisco. he 47digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 digital data improvement prioritiescompleted residency training in pediatrics at the university of oregon health sciences center in portland and in preventive medicine at cdc. he is a fellow of the american academy of pediatrics and is boardcertied in pediatrics and preventive medicine. christopher g. chute, md, drph, received his undergraduate and medical training at brown university, completed his internal medicine residency at dartmouth, and completed doctoral training in epidemiology at harvard. he is boardcertied in internal medicine, and is a fellow of the american college of physicians, the american college of epidemiology, and the american college of medical informatics. he became founding chair of biomedical informatics at mayo in 1988, stepping down after 20 years in that role. he is now professor of medical informatics, and is principal investigator (pi) on a large portfolio of research, including the department of health and human services (hhs)/ofce of the national coordinator (onc) sharp (strategic health it advanced research projects) on secondary ehr data use; the onc beacon community (copi); the lexgrid projects; mayo™s ctsa informatics; mayo™s cancer center informatics, including cabig; and several national institutes of health (nih) grants, including one of the emerge centers from the national human genome research institute. dr. chute serves as vice chair of the mayo clinic data governance for health information technology standards, and on mayo™s enterprise it oversight committee. he is presently chair, iso health informatics technical committee (iso tc215), and chairs the world health organization icd11 revision. he also serves on the health information technology standards committee for the ofce of the national coordinator in hhs, and the hl7 advisory board. his recently held positions include chair of the biomedical computing and health informatics study section at nih; chair of the board of the hl7/fda/nci/cdisc bridg project; member of the board of the clinical data interchange standards consortium; american national standards institute health information standards technology panel (histp) board member; chair of the u.s. delegation to iso tc215 for health informatics; convener of healthcare concept representation wg3 within the (tc215); cochair of the hl7 vocabulary committee; chair of the international medical informatics association wg6 on medical concept representation; american medical informatics association board member, and multiple other nih biomedical informatics study sections as chair or member.rich elmore is the ofce of the national coordinator™s (onc™s) leader for query health, an oncsponsored initiative to establish standards and services for distributed population queries of electronic health records. he is on a leave of absence from health care technology provider allscripts, digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 49where as vice president, strategic initiatives, he managed exploration and execution of acquisitions and strategic partnerships, and prior to that ran the allscripts provider analytics business. he had a long career at idx where he ran the flowcast hospital business and prior to that was vice president of product development for idx flowcast. mr. elmore was the communications workgroup leader for the onc™s direct project. he was a charter member of the interoperability workgroup for the certication commission for healthcare information technology. mr. elmore has degrees from dartmouth college (ba) and new school university (ma, economics). he is on the board of directors for patient engagement systems, a chronic disease technology company, and serves as vice chair on the board of directors for the king street center, serving kids in need and their families in burlington, vermont.doug fridsma, md, phd, is the director of the ofce of standards and interoperability and the acting chief scientist in the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology (onc). prior to arriving at onc, dr. fridsma was on the teaching staff in the department of biomedical informatics at arizona state university and had a clinical practice at mayo clinic, scottsdale. dr. fridsma completed his medical training at the university of michigan in 1990, and his phd in biomedical informatics from stanford university in 2003. in his role at onc, dr. fridsma is responsible for the nationwide health information network, the federal health architecture, the ehr certication programs, and other initiatives focused on promoting interoperable health information exchange. he served on the clinical data interchange standards consortium board of directors from 2005 to 2008, and was appointed to the health it standards committee in 2009. he resigned from the hit standards committee after he joined onc, and recently became a board member of hl7.james allen heywood is the cofounder and chairman of patientslikeme. a massachusetts institute of technology engineer, mr. heywood entered the eld of translational research and medicine when his brother stephen was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) in 1998 at the age of 29. with experience in design, information technology, systems modeling, neuroscience, and industrial engineering, mr. heywood brings a unique perspective to drug discovery and medicine. the scientic and business innovations he developed at the als therapy development institute (tdi) and patientslikeme have been transforming the intersection of biotechnology and pharmaceutical development, personalized medicine, and patient care. heywood is the chairman of patientslikeme, where he provides the scientic vision and architecture for its patientcentered medical platform. he cofounded the company in 2005 with his youngest brother, benjamin, digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 digital data improvement prioritiesand his friend jeff cole. named one of ﬁ15 companies that will change the worldﬂ by cnnmoney, patientslikeme is a personalized research and peer care platform that allows patients to share indepth information on treatments, symptoms, and outcomes. this novel open model allows clinicians, providers, and the pharmaceutical industry to better understand diseases and the patient experience. patients improve their care and actively partner with industry to accelerate and in˚uence the development of new treatments and biomarkers. in 1999, shortly after stephen was diagnosed, mr. heywood founded the als tdi, the world™s rst nonprot biotechnology company, where he served as ceo until 2007. pioneering an open research model and an industrialized therapeutic validation process, mr. heywood led als tdi to become the world™s largest and most comprehensive als research program. the comprehensive in vivo validation program mr. heywood developed was unable to replicate any of the published preclinical studies of the eld that led to human trials, calling into question the standards that allowed many drugs to be tested on patients. in 2009, mr. heywood and a small group of thought leaders founded healthdatarights.org, an organization that asserts a new patient™s right to access a copy of all of his or her medical data in a computable form. mr. heywood is a published author, frequent speaker, media pundit, and active investment advisor. he speaks at business, government, and academic conferences around the world, including tedmed, the milken global conference, health 2.0, gov 2.0, personal democracy forum, institute of medicine workshops, and the national institutes of health. mr. heywood is a member of the centers for disease control and prevention™s national biosurveillance advisory subcommittee, and has testied on privacy and social policy before the department of health and human services and the food and drug administration. mr. heywood™s work has been proled in the new yorker, new york times magazine, businessweek, 60 minutes, cbs evening news, npr, science, and nature. in 2009, he was chosen for wired magazine™s ﬁsmart listﬂ and fast company™s ﬁ10 most creative people in healthcare.ﬂ mr. heywood and his brother stephen were the subjects of pulitzer prizeœwinner jonathan wiener™s biography his brother™s keeper and the sundance awardœwinning documentary so much so fast.vik kheterpal, md, is a principal at careevolution, inc., a leading provider of secure interoperability solutions. the company markets hiebusž, a health care interoperability platform to enable edge applications to share clinical information in a secure, reliable, and incremental manner. offering core capabilities like a communitywide master patient index, terminology standardization, episode grouping, and advanced analytics, hiebus powers statewide and regional exchanges, regional care coordination networks, providercentric clinical integration initiatives, and multicenter observadigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 51tional data studies. dr. kheterpal is very active in the interoperability and health information technology landscape and serves as technical director of the south carolina health information exchange. previously, dr. kheterpal served as the global general manager and vice president for clinical information systems for ge healthcare, where he led ge™s clinical it initiatives. dr. kheterpal received his doctorate in medicine from the university of michigan at ann arbor, where he also earned a bachelor™s degree in biomedical sciences. rebecca daniels kush, phd, is a founder and the current president and ceo of the clinical data interchange standards consortium. dr. kush has more than 25 years of experience in the area of clinical research. she has worked for the national institutes of health, academia, a global contract research organization, and pharmaceutical companies in the united states and japan. among numerous publications, dr. kush is lead author of the book eclinical trials: planning and implementation. dr. kush has given invited presentations (including keynotes) and tutorials at industry conferences, the food and drug administration, and other venues in the united states, europe, and japan for more than 20 years. she earned a phd in physiology and pharmacology from the university of california, san diego, school of medicine in la jolla, california, and has a bs in chemistry and biology from the university of new mexico.marty laventure, phd, mdh, is director of the ofce of health information technology and ehealth at the minnesota department of health. dr. laventure is currently leading the statewide minnesota ehealth initiative and directs the department™s center for health informatics. current projects include models for ehealth proles, assessment of ehr adoption, and work as lead author for the revised chapter on public health informatics in upcoming fourth edition of shortliffe and cimino™s textbook of biomedical informatics. dr. laventure has a master™s degree in epidemiology and a phd in health informatics from the university of minnesota. previously, he served as the assistant state epidemiologist for wisconsin division of health, and he has also worked for a national private medical software corporation. dr. laventure is currently an adjunct member of the health informatics faculty at the university of minnesota. in 2008, he was named as one of the top 100 in˚uential health leaders in minnesota. nationally, dr. laventure serves on the editorial board for the journal of biomedical informatics. he is a member of the association of state and territorial health ofcials ehealth policy committee. dr. laventure has authored or coauthored many articles and scientic publications, delivered numerous presentations to state and national audiences, and received multiple awards digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 digital data improvement prioritiesfor his work and accomplishments. he is an elected fellow of the american college of medical informatics.mark leenay, ms, md, is one of our nation™s experts on geriatrics and hospice and palliative care and is the chief medical ofcer and senior vice president at optumhealth care solutions. as chief medical ofcer, he oversees all clinical programs, ranging from wellness to the most complex medical conditions. he leads the clinical performance team, which is accountable for clinical care and quality in the company™s wellness, case management, and disease management programs, as well as the clinical performance of external provider partners. dr. leenay™s focus is providing members the best care from experienced and knowledgeable providers, leading to shorter hospital stays and improved health. he achieves these goals by championing exceptional performance within optumhealth™s centers of excellence and other clinical networks. previously, dr. leenay was chief medical ofcer for the medicare and retirement business for united healthcare, with accountability for clinical programs, medical payment policy, and network relationships. prior to joining unitedhealth group in 2006, mark directed the palliative care division at the university of minnesota, fairview. mark received his md from thomas jefferson university and completed his residency at overlook hospital, an afliate of columbia university. he earned his bachelor™s degree from lemoyne college and his master™s degree in psychology from the university of pennsylvania. mark is boardcertied in family medicine, geriatrics, and hospice and palliative care. he is a board member of the long term quality alliance and sits on the quality and research committees of the national hospice and palliative care association. he is a former director of the board of the american academy of hospice and palliative medicine. mia a. levy, md, phd, is the director of cancer clinical informatics for the vanderbiltingram cancer center and an assistant professor of biomedical informatics and medicine. dr. levy received her undergraduate degree in bioengineering from the university of pennsylvania in 1997 and her medical doctorate from rush university in 2003. she then spent 6 years at stanford university completing postgraduate training in internal medicine and medical oncology while completing her phd in biomedical informatics. she joined the faculty at vanderbilt as an assistant professor in biomedical informatics and medicine in august 2009. she is a practicing medical oncologist specializing in the treatment of breast cancer. dr. levy™s research interests include biomedical informatics methods to support the continuum of cancer care and cancer research. her current research projects include informatics methods for (1) imagebased cancer treatment response assessment using quantitative imaging, (2) clinical decision support for treatment digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 53prioritization of molecular subtypes of cancer, (3) protocolbased plan management, and (4) learning cancer systems.david madigan, phd, is professor and chair of statistics at columbia university in new york city. he received a bachelor™s degree in mathematical sciences and a phd in statistics, both from trinity college, dublin. he has previously worked for at&t inc., soliloquy inc., the university of washington, rutgers university, and skillsoft, inc. he has more than 100 publications in areas such as bayesian statistics, text mining, monte carlo methods, pharmacovigilance, and probabilistic graphical models. he is an elected fellow of the american statistical association and of the institute of mathematical statistics. he has just nished a term as editorinchief of statistical science.carol j. mccall, fsa, maaa, is the chief strategy ofcer for gns healthcare, a bigdata analytics company whose industrialized knowledge discovery platform extracts causeeffect relationships directly and at scale from observational data. her personal goal is to leverage these capabilities to redesign the entire notion of ﬁevidenceﬂ and ignite a true learning system in the health care system. prior to joining gns healthcare, ms. mccall was chief innovation ofcer for tenzing health, a subsidiary of vanguard health systems, where she merged creative analytic approaches with humancentered design. building teambased care models whose approach extended into the community, these approaches were shown to materially improve health, dramatically reduce costs, and open new opportunities in a community™s economic sustainability. at humana, ms. mccall led r&d efforts in the innovation center, where she pioneered sophisticated analytics to build a diverse portfolio of prediction, knowledge discovery, and simulation models. she also launched humana™s innovations in personalized medicine, led humana™s health services research center (hsrc), and helped launch green ribbon health, llc, a floridabased company with innovations in health support services for seniors, later serving on its board of directors. in other roles at humana, ms. mccall served as chief information ofcer and as vice president, pharmacy management. outside of humana, she served as executive vice president of managed care business development for allscripts healthcare solutions and as an actuarial consultant for milliman, where she helped fashion novel risksharing arrangements and implement riskadjustment methodologies. in policy and advisory roles, ms. mccall served a 4year term as member of the nation™s national committee on vital and health statistics, served as an advisor to the hrp scientic program board, and was a member of the hsrc™s governing board. she currently sits on the advisory board of keas, a consumer digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 digital data improvement prioritieshealth company. ms. mccall is a fellow of the society of actuaries and a member of the american academy of actuaries.farzad mostashari, md, scm, serves as national coordinator for health information technology within the ofce of the national coordinator for health information technology (onc) at the department of health and human services. dr. farzad joined onc in july 2009. previously, he served at the new york city department of health and mental hygiene as assistant commissioner for the primary care information project, where he facilitated the adoption of preventionoriented health information technology by more than 1,500 providers in underserved communities. dr. mostashari also led the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc)funded nyc center of excellence in public health informatics and an agency for healthcare research and qualityœfunded project focused on quality measurement at the point of care. prior to this, he established the bureau of epidemiology services at the nyc department of health, charged with providing epidemiologic and statistical expertise and data for decision making to the health department. dr. mostashari completed his graduate training at the harvard school of public health and yale medical school and his internal medicine residency at massachusetts general hospital, and completed the cdc™s epidemic intelligence service. he was one of the lead investigators in the outbreaks of west nile virus and anthrax in new york city, and among the rst developers of realtime electronic disease surveillance systems nationwide.j. marc overhage, md, phd, is the chief medical informatics ofcer for siemens healthcare. prior to joining siemens, he was the founding chief executive ofcer of the indiana health information exchange, director of medical informatics at the regenstrief institute, inc., and a sam regenstrief professor of medical informatics at the indiana university school of medicine. he has spent more than 25 years developing and implementing scientic and clinical systems and evaluating their value. with his colleagues from the regenstrief institute, he created a communitywide electronic medical record (called the indiana network for patient care) containing data from many sources, including laboratories, pharmacies, and hospitals in central indiana. the system currently connects a majority of acute care hospitals in indiana and includes inpatient and outpatient encounter data, laboratory results, immunization data, and other selected data for 12 million patients. in order to create a sustainable nancial model, he helped create the indiana health information exchange, a notforprot corporation. in addition, dr. overhage has developed and evaluated clinical decision support, including inpatient and outpatient computerized physician order entry and the underlying knowledge bases to support them. he practiced general internal digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 55medicine for more than 20 years, including the ambulatory, inpatient, and emergency care settings. during the past decade, dr. overhage has played a signicant regional and national leadership role in advancing the policy, standards, nancing, and implementation of health information exchange. he serves on the health information technology standards committee as well as the board of directors of the national quality forum, and is engaged in a number of national health care initiatives.richard platt, md, msc, is professor and chair of the department of population medicine at harvard medical school and the harvard pilgrim health care institute. he is principal investigator of the food and drug administration™s (fda™s) minisentinel program, of contracts with fda™s center for drugs evaluation and research and center for biologics evaluation and research to conduct postmarketing studies of drugs and biologics™ safety and effectiveness. he chaired the fda™s drug safety and risk management advisory committee and is a member of the association of american medical colleges™ advisory panel on research and the institute of medicine™s roundtable on value & sciencedriven health care. dr. platt was cochair of the board of scientic counselors of the centers for disease control and prevention™s (cdc™s) center for infectious diseases. additionally, he has chaired the national institutes of health epidemiology study section and disease control 2, and the cdc ofce of health care partnerships steering committee. dr. platt is also principal investigator of a cdc center of excellence in public health informatics, the agency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq) hmo research network center for education and research in therapeutics, the ahrq hmo research network decide center, and the cdc eastern massachusetts prevention epicenter.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bworkshop agendadigital data priorities for continuous learning in health and health carean institute of medicine workshop  sponsored by the of˚ce of the national coordinator for health information technologymarch 23, 2012keck center500 fifth street nw, washington dc 20001a learning health system activityiom roundtable on value & sciencedriven health caremeeting objectives 1. discuss the current quality status of digital health data.2. explore challenges, and identify key questions related to data quality in the use of ehrs, patient registries, administrative data, and public health sources for learningšcontinuous and episodicšand for system operational and improvement purposes.3. engage individuals and organizations leading the way in improving the reliability, availability, and usability of digital health data for realtime knowledge generation and health improvement in a continuously learning health system. 4. identify and characterize the current deciencies and consider strategies, priorities, and responsibilities to address the deciencies. 5. initiate the development of a strategic framework for integrated and networked stewardship of efforts to continuously increase digital data utility.57digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 digital data improvement prioritiesagenda7:30 am coffee and light breakfast available8:00 am welcome, introductions, and overview welcome, framing of the meeting and agenda overview o j. michael mcginnis (institute of medicine) o farzad mostashari (ofce of the national coordinator) o james walker (planning committee chair)8:15 am characteristics, challenges, and determinants of data quality session description: this session includes brief comments on the data quality challenges that lie ahead and a longer discussion of the characteristics and determinants of digital health data quality.key topics: o challenges on the horizon  doug fridsma (onc) o characteristics and determinants of data quality  marc overhage (siemens) open discussion 9:00 am performance assessmentsession description: this session focuses on the quality of digital health data needed to evaluate clinical care delivery, population management and the business and operating processes that make up a learning health system.key topics: o assessing value carol mccall (gns)  o managing populations and processes mark leenay (optumhealth) open discussion 10:00 am breakdigital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 5910:15 am enabling researchsession description: this session focuses on the quality of digital health data needed to enable research.key topics: o clinical research  rebecca kush (clinical data interchange standards consortium) o translational informatics  mia levy (vanderbilt)  open discussion11:15 am supporting public health and surveillancesession description: this session focuses on the quality of digital health data needed to support of public health functions, including surveillance.key topics: o public health surveillance and management  james buehler (cdc)  o statelevel perspective martin laventure (minnesota department of health)  open discussion12:15 pm lunch keynote who is your customer? james heywood, patientslikeme 1:00 pm approaches to continuous improvement using largescale datasetssession description: session presentations will focus on the implications of digital health data quality on the potential for learning from large amounts of health data.digital data improvement priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 digital data improvement prioritieskey topics: o using distributed data/query health rich platt (harvard) and rich elmore (onc) o data analysis and discovery of signicant patterns david madigan (omop/columbia) open discussion2:00 pm innovative approaches to addressing data challengessession description: this session will focus on innovative approaches to overcoming some prominent challenges associated with using health data.topics: o data harmonization chris chute (mayo) o linking data across time and sources vik kheterpal (careevolution inc.) open discussion3:00 pm strategies going forwardsession description: this session will include a rapidre, moderated discussion to identify the top 10 actions necessary for progress discussed during the course of the meeting.  1. identication of potential action stepsš20 min. (45 seconds each) 2. rapid identication of pros and consš15 min. 3. identication of top ten leading action stepsš25 min.  open discussion4:00 pm next stepssession description: this session will build off of the 10 action steps identied in the previous session and outline options to move forward.5:00 pm adjourn