detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/13427continuing innovation in information technology42 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309259620 | doi 10.17226/13427committee on depicting innovation in information technology; computer scienceand telecommunications board; division on engineering and physical sciences;national research councilcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuinginnovationin information technologycommittee on depicting innovation in information technologycomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencescontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation under sponsor award number iis0840364. any opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the agencies and organizations that provided support for the project.figure 1 designed by dmitry krasny, deka design. text layout by estelle miller, the national academies press.international standard book number13: 9780309259620international standard book number10: 0309259622copies of this report are available fromthe national academies press500 fifth street, nw, keck 360washington, dc 20001800/6246242202/3343313http://www.nap.educopyright 2012 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americacontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and  dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee on depicting innovation in information technologypeter lee, microsoft research, chairmark e. dean, ibm corporationdeborah l. estrin, university of california, los angelesjames t. kajiya, microsoft corporationprabhakar raghavan, google, inc.andrew j. viterbi, viterbi group, llcstaffjon k. eisenberg, cstb directoremily ann meyer, study directorshenae bradley, senior program assistantcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications boardrobert f. sproull, oracle (retired), chairprithviraj banerjee, hewlett packard companysteven m. bellovin, columbia universityjack l. goldsmith iii, harvard law schoolseymour e. goodman, georgia institute of technologyjon m. kleinberg, cornell universityrobert kraut, carnegie mellon universitysusan landau, harvard universitypeter lee, microsoft researchdavid liddle, u.s. venture partnersdavid e. shaw, d.e. shaw researchalfred z. spector, google, inc.john stankovic, university of virginiajohn swainson, dell, inc.peter szolovits, massachusetts institute of technologypeter j. weinberger, google, inc.ernest j. wilson, university of southern californiakatherine yelick, university of california, berkeleystaffjon k. eisenberg, directorrenee hawkins, financial and administrative managerherbert s. lin, chief scientistlynette i. millett, senior program officeremily ann meyer, program officervirginia bacon talati, associate program officerenita a. williams, associate program officershenae bradley, senior program assistanteric whitaker, senior program assistantcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viprefacein 1995, the national research council™s (nrc™s) computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) produced the report evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.1 a graphic in that report, often called the ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram because of its appearance, produced an extraordinary response by clearly linking investments in academic and industry research to the ultimate creation of new information technology (it) industries with more than $1 billion in annual revenue.2 used in presentations to congress and executive branch decision makers and discussed broadly in the research and innovation policy communities, the tire tracks figure dispelled the assumption that the commercially successful it industry is selfsufficient, underscoring how much industry instead builds on governmentfunded university research, sometimes through long incubation periods of years and even decades. it also compellingly illustrates the complex nature of research in the field and the interdependencies between various subfields of computing and communications research. the figure was updated in the 2002 cstb report information technology research, innovation, and egovernment and again in the 2003 cstb report innovation in information technology, largely through the addition of tracks in important new areas such as entertainment and data mining. the 2003 report also distilled key lessons from eight prior cstb studies about the nature of research in information technologyšincluding the unpredictability of and synergy among research results; the roles of government, industry, and academia; and the social returns from research. a 2009 report, assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem: retaining leadership in an increasingly global environment, reproduced the 2003 update to the diagram and explored many of the related themes.computing research and its impacts have continued to evolve and blossom in the years since the 2003 version of the tire tracks figure was published. with the support of the national science 1 all nrc/cstb reports referred to in this preface were published by the national academy press/the national academies press, washington, d.c., in the year indicated.2 it advances have of course also had profound impacts on nearly every major industry sector, not just it industries; these indirect effects were not the focus of the present project.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viifoundation, cstb undertook a project to prepare an update. the task of the committee on depicting innovation in information technology was threefold (see box): (1) to reconsider important research areas and significant billiondollarplus it industries that had emerged since the 2003 report, (2) to reconsider how best to characterize and depict these investments and impacts, and (3) to recap and update the material in the 2003 report that accompanied the tire tracks figure and that presents related lessons on the impact of research on innovation in information technology. in updating the content of the figure, the committee drew on the earlier cstb work as well as the committee™s own knowledge of key research contributions and results, and also obtained input on these from a number of computing researchers whose contributions are acknowledged below. the committee conducted meetings by teleconference and collaborated extensively by email to develop the present report. in reconsidering the design of the figure, the committee explored several design approaches, some quite different from that in the original 1995 figure, and worked with a designer to explore alternatives. ultimately, the committee decided to retain many features of the original tire tracks while somewhat changing the overall structure and adding some elements as outlined in the first section of this report. the new figure is accompanied by a brief text based in large part on prior cstb reports. unless otherwise indicated in the notes, the primary source is the 2003 report innovation in information technology. where appropriate, the committee has updated the text to provide more current information and recent examples. for readability, direct extracts from earlier cstb work are not set in quotation marks.the committee thanks the following researchers who provided input on specific technical and research questions: yossi azar, victor bahl, suman banerjee, doug burger, surajit chaudhuri, carlos guestrin, hauges hoppe, andrew hopper, eric horvitz, butler lampson, james landay, paul larson, ed lazowska, james lee, david lomet, beth mynatt, david patterson, yuval peres, and mani srivastava. we also are sincerely appreciative of the services and leadership of eugene spafford, chair of the committee from september 2009 to january 2011. finally, the committee thanks dmitry krasny, deka design, for his expert design assistance in realizing the committee™s vision for figure 1.peter lee, chaircommittee on depicting innovation in information technology˚˛˚˝˙˝ˆ˚ˇ˚˛˝˙ˆˆ˚˙˚˙˛˚˚continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:peter freeman, georgia institute of technologysusan graham, university of california, berkeleylaura haas, ibm almaden research centerdavid patterson, university of california, berkeleyjennifer rexford, princeton universityrobert f. sproull, oracle (retired) john stankovic, university of virginiapatrick winston, massachusetts institute of technologykatherine yelick, university of california, berkeley, and lawrence berkeley national laboratoryalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by joseph traub, columbia university. appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixcontentsthe impact of information technology 1universities, industry, and government: a complex partnership yielding  2 innovation and leadershipkey lessons about the nature of research in information technology 9looking ahead 16notes 18appendix a short biographies of committee members 24appendix b transfers of ideas and people and other impacts since 2003  27 added to figure 1 appendix c examples of impacts from algorithms research 32continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1the impact of information technologyinformation technology (it) is widely understood to be the enabling technology of the 21st century.1 it has transformed, and continues to transform, all aspects of our lives: commerce and finance, education, employment, energy, health care, manufacturing, government, national security, transportation, communications, entertainment, science, and engineering. it and its impact on the u.s. economyšboth directly (the it sector itself) and indirectly (other sectors that are powered by advances in it)2šcontinue to grow in size and importance. in total, according to estimates for 2010 by the bureau of economic analysis, the itintensive ﬁinformationcommunicationstechnologyproducingﬂ industries3 grew by 16.3 percent and contributed nearly 5 percent to the overall u.s. gross domestic product (gdp).4 a 2011 study by the mckinsey global institute found that in 2009 internetrelated activities alone contributed an average of 3.8 percent to the u.s. gdp.5 (by contrast, the total federal funding in fiscal year 2010 for the networking and it research and development (r&d) program, which includes most federal support for it r&d, was approximately $4.3 billion,6 just under 0.03 percent of gdp.7) these substantial contributions to the economy reflect only the direct economic benefits of the it sector and do not capture the full benefits realized from the application of it throughout the economy.to appreciate the magnitude and breadth of its achievements, imagine spending a day without it. this would be a day without the internet and all that it enables. a day without diagnostic medical imaging. a day during which automobiles lacked electronic ignition, antilock brakes, and electronic stability control. a day without digital mediašwithout wireless telephones, highdefinition televisions, mp3 audio, cable or internetdelivered video, computer animation, and video games. a day during which aircraft could not fly, travelers had to navigate without benefit of the global positioning system (gps), weather forecasters had no models, banks and merchants could not transfer funds electronically, and factory automation ceased to function. it would be a day in which the u.s. military lacked precision munitions, did not have the capabilities for networkcentric warfare, and did not enjoy technological supremacy. it would be, for most people in the united states and the rest of the developed world, a ﬁday the earth stood still.ﬂcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2universities, industry, and government:  a complex partnership yielding innovation and leadershipone measure of the impact of investment in information technology research and development is its contribution to the creation of numerous u.s. firms with annual revenues exceeding $1 billion and of entire new sectors that contribute billions of dollars to the u.s. economy.8 many of these firms are household names, and their products and services underpin the digital economyšand indeed the economy more broadly. the combined estimated annual revenue of only the companies listed on figure 1 is nearly $500 billion (table 1).figure 1, an update of the 1995 ﬁtire tracksﬂ figure9 and the intermediate 2003 version,10 illustrates, through examples, how fundamental research in it, conducted in industry and universities, has led to the introduction of entirely new product categories that ultimately became billiondollar industries. it reflects a complex research environment in which concurrent advances in multiple subfieldsšin particular within computer science and engineering but extending into other fields, too, from electrical engineering to psychologyšhave been mutually reinforcing, stimulating and enabling one another and leading to vibrant, innovative industries exemplified by topperforming u.s. firms.11 figure 1 is of necessity incomplete and symbolic in nature; it would be impossible to chart all of the important cumulative contributions of research and their links to today™s products, firms, and industries. for example, google could be thought of as having benefited from at least three research areasšnetworking, parallel and distributed systems, and databases.listed in the bottom row of figure 1 are areas where major investments in basic research in subfields of computing and communications have had the impacts shown in the upper portions of the figure. not depicted but equally important is research on the theoretical and algorithmic foundations of computing more broadly (box 1). the vertical red tracks represent universitybased (and largely federally funded) research, and the blue tracks represent industry r&d (some of which is also government funded). the dashed black lines indicate periods following the introduction of significant commercial products resulting from this research, the green lines represent billiondollarplus industries (by annual revenue) stemming from this research, and the thick green lines represent achievement of multibilliondollar markets by some of the industries. the top rows list the presentday it market segments and representative u.s. firms and products whose creation was stimulated by the decadeslong research represented by the red and blue vertical tracks. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320102005200019951990198519801975197019652010200520001995199019851980197519701965universityindustry r&dproducts$1 billion market$10 billion marketareas of fundamental research in itit sectors with large economic impactcomputer architecturesoftware technologiesnetworkingparallel & distributed systemsdatabasescomputer graphicsai & roboticsdigital communicationsinternet & webcloudcomputingentertainment& designenterprisesystemsrobotics & assistivetechnologiespersonalcomputingmicroprocessorsbroadband& mobilemotorolaqualcommiphonenvidiaamd inteltexas instrumentshpappledellsymantecebay akamaihpjuniperciscoyahoo!ibmelectronic artsfacebook twittergooglemicrosoftvmwareamazonoracleadobe autodeskipodnvidia pixarxboxnuanceintuitive surgicalirobotfigure 1 examples of the contributions of federally supported fundamental research to the creation of it sectors, firms, and products with large economic impact. tracks added since the 2003 update of the figure are described in appendix b. see also box 1 and appendix c.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 continuing innovation in information technologytable 1 annual revenue associated with the it industry sector for key u.s. it firms listed in figure 1industrycompany and estimated revenue ($ billion)abroadband and mobilequalcomm*11motorola 8.2microprocessorsnvidia 3.5intel54amd5.0texas instruments2.1personal computingdell34hp41apple89symantec6.2internet and webjuniper 4.4cisco 43akamai 1.2twitter (estimated)0.1facebook3.7ebay12amazon25google*22yahoo!5.0cloud computinggoogle (nonadvertising)*1.1vmware* 2.9amazon (nonecommerce)1.4enterprise systemsoracle*31ibm 44microsoft 39entertainment and designelectronic arts* 3.6pixar 0.51.0adobe 4.2robotics and assistive technologiesirobot*nuanceintuitive surgical*0.41.31.8note: revenues are for fy 2011 except as indicated by an asterisk for firms whose listed revenues are 2010based. asources for estimated revenue listed are given in the section ﬁnotesﬂ following the main text of this report.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.universities, industry, and government 5although the tracks in figure 1 were chosen to illustrate through prominent examples how each selected research area is connected with a closely linked industry area, in reality each research area is linked in many ways to one or more industry areas. research outcomes in one area have continued to affect and enable research in other areas. furthermore, synergies among research areas often lead to surprising results and have impacts on industry that were not originally intended or envisioned (table 2). this characteristic of technological innovation is most evident in the broadbased impact of research on basic questions in computing. such research often starts as a search for fundamental knowledge but time and again produces practical technologies that enable significant economic impact, in areas as diverse as optimal resource allocation and scheduling, compact encodings of signals, efficient search algorithms, fair auction and voting mechanisms, and ultralargescale statistical analyses. (box 1 provides further discussion.) the arrows between the vertical tracks represent some salient examples of the rich interplay between academic research, industry research, and products and indicate the crossfertilization resulting from multidirectional flows of ideas, technologies, and people (examples are given in appendix b). also illustrated in figure 1 is how products arising from industry can shape academic research. (for example, microsoft™s kinect sensor is now being used in many research applications, and google™s practical application of mapreduce introduced new ideas about webscale distributed computing to the research community.) arrows spanning research areas provide a few indications of the interdependence of research advances in various areas. ˇ˙˚˛˘…˚can˚˙˚˙ˆˆ˚˛˚›˛˚˙˛˚˙˚ˆˆ˚˙˛˚›ˆˆ˚˛˚continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 continuing innovation in information technologytable 2 original goals, unanticipated results, current results, and possible future directions for  research topics in figure 1research topicoriginal goalunanticipated resultstodayaadvances expected with continued commitment to it researcha digital communicationsuntethered communicationwireless local area networking for computers, cell phoneswireless and broadband industry. nearly 6 billion cell phone subscribers worldwide, including more than 320 million subscribers in the united states; 54% of the u.s. population as active mobilebroadband subscribers, and more than 87 million fixed broadband subscriptions  pervasive/ubiquitous communications and access to data and computing resources; mobile sensors for monitoring environment and health in real timecomputer architecturetools to manage increasing complexity of microprocessor designs; new architectures to dramatically increase processing powerpowerful computation in things such as cars, televisions, kitchen appliances, and mobile devices microprocessor industry. 8.3 billion microprocessors produced annually and used pervasively; $40 billion in annual revenueincreased interplay between hardware and software to achieve performance while managing power and providing easy programmability  software technologiesmore effective use of computing power for specific tasks, and the creation of common systems on which to run themopensource movement that inspired many to gain powerful technical skills and become entrepreneurs; the ability to create software systems of extraordinary scale and complexitypersonal computing industry. 1.4 billion pcs in use worldwide as of 2010; u.s. smartphone sales expected to be nearly 100 million in 2011parallel software to better use parallel hardware; improved tools for processing very large data setsnetworkingsharing computational resources and data among computersnetwork email; widespread sharing of software and data; the interconnection of billions of computers and other devicesinternet and web industries. onethird of the world™s population is online, and 45% of those are under the age of 25; more than 18 billion searches were conducted in october 2011 in the united states (across five major search sites); u.s. retail ecommerce sales for the third quarter of 2011 were $48.2 billion and accounted for 4.6% of total sales; worldwide, annual ecommerce sales were almost $8 trillion; banking, trading, and other financial transactions done by means of the internet ﬂinternet of thingsﬂ (virtually every device/object networked); sensors embedded everywhere, enabling dramatic improvements in automation, efficiency, and safetyparallel and distributed systemsusing multiple computers and/or processors to solve a complex problememergence of businesses such as google and amazon that use multiple very large data centers to deliver services at large scalecloud computing industry, an emerging and rapidly growing industry sector. health it alone expected to spend more than $1 billion on cloud services by 2013; enterprise spending on public cloud computing services expected to expand 139% from 2010 to 2011renewal of efforts in parallelism to sustain growth in computing performance; improvements in scalability with reductions in operating costs for very large data centersdatabasestools for managing, discovering, and locating informationsearch engines, digital libraries, and data mining and analytics on massive data sets; advances in databases that have led to the development of enormous data repositoriesšimproving knowledge and supporting new forms of scientific discovery enterprise systems industry. widespread use of enterprise resource planning software; world™s largest civilian database, walmart™s data warehouse, stores more than 583 terabytes of sales and inventory data built on a massively parallel systemnatural language searches, data management to promote energyefficient computing, cloudbased data analyses in heterogeneous environments, and other largescale data management systemscomputer graphicsdisplay of realtime graphics and text on an external screengraphical user interfaces; techniques for realistic modeling and simulation applied for nearrealistic video games and movies; support by these technologies for applications in training and scientific explorationentertainment industry. cgi movie ﬁtoy story 3ﬂ the highestgrossing film of 2010; 12 featurelength computergeneratedimagery animated films released in 2011; modeling and simulation commonplace in manufacturing and engineering; video games using advanced computer simulation techniques tying visualization of large data sets to the simulation code, increased use of augmented reality, search based on images; photography becoming computationalartificial intelligence  and roboticssimulation of humanlevel intelligence, including language understanding, vision, learning, and planningroboticenabled prosthetics and artificial organs; flybywire avionics and antilock brakes; cars capable of parallel parking themselves;intelligent ranking of web search resultsrobotics and sensing industries. automation commonplace in manufacturing and in specialties such as robotassisted surgery; use of aerial drones for surveillance becoming commonplace; some household robotsartificial intelligence agents capable of abstraction and generalization beyond their initial programming; ﬁhouseholdﬂ robots for more than vacuuming asources for details listed are given in the section ﬁnotesﬂ following the main text of this report.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.universities, industry, and government 7table 2 original goals, unanticipated results, current results, and possible future directions for  research topics in figure 1research topicoriginal goalunanticipated resultstodayaadvances expected with continued commitment to it researcha digital communicationsuntethered communicationwireless local area networking for computers, cell phoneswireless and broadband industry. nearly 6 billion cell phone subscribers worldwide, including more than 320 million subscribers in the united states; 54% of the u.s. population as active mobilebroadband subscribers, and more than 87 million fixed broadband subscriptions  pervasive/ubiquitous communications and access to data and computing resources; mobile sensors for monitoring environment and health in real timecomputer architecturetools to manage increasing complexity of microprocessor designs; new architectures to dramatically increase processing powerpowerful computation in things such as cars, televisions, kitchen appliances, and mobile devices microprocessor industry. 8.3 billion microprocessors produced annually and used pervasively; $40 billion in annual revenueincreased interplay between hardware and software to achieve performance while managing power and providing easy programmability  software technologiesmore effective use of computing power for specific tasks, and the creation of common systems on which to run themopensource movement that inspired many to gain powerful technical skills and become entrepreneurs; the ability to create software systems of extraordinary scale and complexitypersonal computing industry. 1.4 billion pcs in use worldwide as of 2010; u.s. smartphone sales expected to be nearly 100 million in 2011parallel software to better use parallel hardware; improved tools for processing very large data setsnetworkingsharing computational resources and data among computersnetwork email; widespread sharing of software and data; the interconnection of billions of computers and other devicesinternet and web industries. onethird of the world™s population is online, and 45% of those are under the age of 25; more than 18 billion searches were conducted in october 2011 in the united states (across five major search sites); u.s. retail ecommerce sales for the third quarter of 2011 were $48.2 billion and accounted for 4.6% of total sales; worldwide, annual ecommerce sales were almost $8 trillion; banking, trading, and other financial transactions done by means of the internet ﬂinternet of thingsﬂ (virtually every device/object networked); sensors embedded everywhere, enabling dramatic improvements in automation, efficiency, and safetyparallel and distributed systemsusing multiple computers and/or processors to solve a complex problememergence of businesses such as google and amazon that use multiple very large data centers to deliver services at large scalecloud computing industry, an emerging and rapidly growing industry sector. health it alone expected to spend more than $1 billion on cloud services by 2013; enterprise spending on public cloud computing services expected to expand 139% from 2010 to 2011renewal of efforts in parallelism to sustain growth in computing performance; improvements in scalability with reductions in operating costs for very large data centersdatabasestools for managing, discovering, and locating informationsearch engines, digital libraries, and data mining and analytics on massive data sets; advances in databases that have led to the development of enormous data repositoriesšimproving knowledge and supporting new forms of scientific discovery enterprise systems industry. widespread use of enterprise resource planning software; world™s largest civilian database, walmart™s data warehouse, stores more than 583 terabytes of sales and inventory data built on a massively parallel systemnatural language searches, data management to promote energyefficient computing, cloudbased data analyses in heterogeneous environments, and other largescale data management systemscomputer graphicsdisplay of realtime graphics and text on an external screengraphical user interfaces; techniques for realistic modeling and simulation applied for nearrealistic video games and movies; support by these technologies for applications in training and scientific explorationentertainment industry. cgi movie ﬁtoy story 3ﬂ the highestgrossing film of 2010; 12 featurelength computergeneratedimagery animated films released in 2011; modeling and simulation commonplace in manufacturing and engineering; video games using advanced computer simulation techniques tying visualization of large data sets to the simulation code, increased use of augmented reality, search based on images; photography becoming computationalartificial intelligence  and roboticssimulation of humanlevel intelligence, including language understanding, vision, learning, and planningroboticenabled prosthetics and artificial organs; flybywire avionics and antilock brakes; cars capable of parallel parking themselves;intelligent ranking of web search resultsrobotics and sensing industries. automation commonplace in manufacturing and in specialties such as robotassisted surgery; use of aerial drones for surveillance becoming commonplace; some household robotsartificial intelligence agents capable of abstraction and generalization beyond their initial programming; ﬁhouseholdﬂ robots for more than vacuuming asources for details listed are given in the section ﬁnotesﬂ following the main text of this report.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 continuing innovation in information technologyconsider how research in the leftmost area in figure 1šdigital communicationsšhas propelled the communications revolution that continues to unfold today:and later was used in military communications satellites, was developed and commercialized as a new standard for cellular telephony in the 1990s by qualcomm, a company founded by darpafunded university researchers. it uses unique mathematical codes to modulate transmissions, thus allowing multiple users to efficiently share a radio channel and providing relative immunity to interference.closely related university research and followed by research at bell laboratories, has been a fundamental enabler of today™s wireless communications technologies.to use complementary metal oxide semiconductor technology for radiofrequency signals, a development that made it possible to include wifi, gps, and bluetooth at low cost in small, mobile devices. local area networks that connect computers within homes and businesses as well as for the internet that links the globe. subscriber line (dsl) technology, which made it possible to provide highspeed data networking over public telephone network lines. a similar list could be constructed for each of the research areas represented in figure 1. as figure 1 and table 2 illustrate, investments started more than four decades ago have been critical enablers of the products and services in use today. they also illustrate how research can yield important results not originally contemplated when a first investment was made. finally, they describe some of the open questions that researchers pursue today and suggest some of the potential applications that lie ahead provided there is a continued commitment to it research.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9key lessons about the nature of research in information technologya number of important lessons about the nature of research in information technologyšincluding the unpredictability of and synergy among research results; the roles of government, industry, and academia; and the economic and social returns from researchšcan be gleaned from figure 1 and can also be distilled from past cstb reports (for a summary, see box 2).the essential role of the federal governmentinnovation in it is made possible by a complex ecosystem encompassing university and industrial research enterprises, emerging startup and more mature technology companies, those that finance innovative firms, and the regulatory environment and legal frameworks in which innovation takes place.12 it was within this ecosystem that the enabling technologies for each of the it industries illustrated in figure 1 were created. the government role has coevolved with the development of it industries: its programs and investments have focused on capabilities not ready for commercialization and on the new needs that emerged as commercial capabilities grew, both of which are moving targets.13 a 2009 cstb report, which examined the health of this ecosystem and noted the challenges posed to the u.s. position in it leadership, underscored the critical importance of this federal investment (box 3).14most often, the federal investment that contributed to the development of the industries shown at the top of figure 1 took the form of grants or contracts awarded to university and industry researchers by the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) and other defense research agencies15 and/or the national science foundation (nsf), with the latter having come to play an increasingly important role in supporting academic it research. a shifting mix of other funding agencies has also been involved, reflecting changes in the missions of these agencies and their needs for it.16 for example, the department of energy (doe), the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), and the military services have supported highperformance computing, networking, humancomputer interaction, software engineering, embedded and realtime systems, and other kinds of research; the national institutes of health invests in research in continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 continuing innovation in information technologyˇˇ‰˚the results of research„ƒ˛˚˚˚˛˚ˆ˚˚˚˘˝˚˙˚˚˙˛˚˙˛˚”‚™ﬁ˛˚‰˚research as a partnership˙˚˙ˆ˛˘˚‰˚the economic payoff of research˙˛˚˙˛˚˛˚assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem› innovation in information technology›biomedical computing; and the intelligence advanced research projects activity invests in such areas as data analysis and speech translation.17 today, a wide array of agencies participate in the federal networking and information technology research and development (nitrd) program,18 reflecting their interest in supporting advances in various aspects of computing and communications to fulfill their missions. why has federal support been so effective in stimulating innovation in computing? as is discussed below, many factors have been important.  1. federally funded programs have supported longterm research into fundamental aspects of computing, whose widespread practical benefits typically take years to realize.19continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.key lessons about the nature of research in information technology 11one of the most important messages of figure 1 is the long, unpredictable incubation periodšrequiring steady work and fundingšbetween initial exploration and commercial deployment.20 the time from first concept to successful market is often measured in decadesša contrast to the more incremental innovations that tend to be publicized as evidence of the rapid pace of it innovation. starting a new project requires considerable time and often may be risky, but the payoffs can be enormous. it is often not clear which aspect of an earlystage research project will ultimately be the most important. fundamental research produces a range of ideas, and those bringing technologies to market will draw on innovative ideas as needs emerge. indeed, the utility of ideas may be evident only well after they have been generated. for example, early work in coding theory ultimately made possible the modern cell phone and streaming video over the internet, and today™s cloud computing owes much to decades of research in distributed computing.because of unanticipated results and synergies, the exact course of fundamental research cannot be planned in advance, and its progress cannot be measured precisely in the short term. even projects that appear to have failed or whose results do not seem to have immediate utility often make significant contributions to later technology development or achieve other objectives not originally envisioned. the field of number theory provides a striking example. for hundreds of years a branch of pure mathematics without applications, it became a foundation for the publickey cryptography that underlies the security of electronic commerce.21šˇ˙˚˙˚˙˚˛˝˙ˆˆ˚˙ˆ˛˘˚˛˚˙˚˙˚˛˚˙˚ assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem›continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 continuing innovation in information technology2. the interplay of governmentfunded academic research and industry r&d has been an important factor in it commercialization.22the examples in figure 1 show the interplay between governmentfunded academic research and industry research and development. in some cases, such as reducedinstructionset computing (risc) processors that are widely used today in mobile phones and other lowpower applications, the initial ideas came from industry, but the research that was essential to advancing these ideas came from government funding to universities. risc was conceived at ibm (international business machines), but it was not commercialized until darpa funded additional research at the university of california, berkeley, and at stanford university as part of its very large scale integrated circuit (vlsi) program in the late 1970s and early 1980s.23 risc has since become commercially significant in a wide range of successful products from supercomputers to mobile phones. of the 8.3 billion microprocessors produced in 2010, 6.1 billion implemented the advanced risc machine (arm) architecture.24 the vlsi design program also supported university research that gave rise to such companies as cadence design systems, synopsys, and mentor graphics, which acquired dozens of smaller companies that started as spinoffs of darpafunded25 university research and today are part of a multibilliondollar electronic design automation industry that is an essential enabler of other it industries.similarly, although ibm pioneered the concept of relational databases (the system r project), it was nsfsponsored research at the university of california, berkeley, that brought this technology to a point at which it was commercialized by several startup companies and then by more established database companies (including ibm).26 indeed, in none of the examples of products and industries shown in figure 1 did industry alone provide the research necessary for success.moreover, these researchenabled commercial developments have expanded the possibilities for research, given that commercialization has led to substantial decreases in cost. lower costs have allowed for much wider penetration of technology and have in turn greatly reduced the barrier for who gets to innovate, opening the door to a much wider range of both research and researchers, and to operation at a much larger scale, than was possible even 15 years ago.3. there is a complex interweaving of fundamental research and focused development.27the purpose of publicly funded research is to advance knowledge and to solve hard problems. the exploitation of that knowledge and those solutions in products is fundamentally important, but the form it takes is often unpredictable, as is the impact on future research (see the discussion of the technological underpinnings of ecommerce in box 4). in the case of integrated circuit (vlsi) design tools, research innovation (at places like stanford university, the university of california, berkeley, and the university of north carolina) led to products and then to major industrial markets. in the case of relational databases, research at the university of california, berkeley, built on earlier work at ibm and led to the first commercialization of the technology. later, the introduction of products stimulated new fundamental research questions, leading to a new generation of products with capabilities vastly greater than those of their predecessors. another example is the theoretical research at the massachusetts institute of technology that yielded the algorithms behind the technology for webcontent distribution networks, which provide the foundation for successful companies such as akamai technologies. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.key lessons about the nature of research in information technology 134. federal support for research has tended to complement, rather than preempt, industry investments in research. the it sector invests an enormous amount each year in r&d. it is critical to understand, however, that the vast majority of corporate r&d has always been focused on product and process development.28 this is what shareholders (or other investors) demand. it is harder for corporations to justify funding longterm, fundamental research. economists have articulated the concept of appropriability to express the extent to which the results of an investment can be captured by the investor, as opposed to being available to all players in the market. the results of longterm, fundamental research are hard to appropriate for several reasons: they tend to be published openly and thus to become generally known; they tend to have broad value; it is difficult to predict in advance which will be important; and they become known well ahead of the moment of realization —ˇ›››”‚‚ﬁ˛˚˙˚›˙˚‰˚˚‰˚˚˙ˆ‰˚˚‰˚˚˙˚‰˚˚˚‰˚˚›˙˚‰˚˚›‰˚˚‰˚˚˘˛˚˘˝˙ˇ˛˚˚˝˚˚ˆ˚‰˚˚‰˚˚˚ information technology research, innovation, and egovernment›continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 continuing innovation in information technologyas a product, and many parties thus have the opportunity to incorporate the results into their thinking. such innovations effectively ﬁraise everyone™s boatﬂ in the same way as do government investments in bioscience, health care, and other strategically important scientific disciplines.29 in contrast, incremental research and product development can be performed in a way that is more appropriable. it can be done under wraps, and it can be moved into the marketplace more quickly and predictably. although individual industry players may find it hard to justify research that is weakly appropriable, it is the proper role of the federal government to support this sort of endeavor.30 when companies create successful new products using the ideas and workforce that result from federally sponsored research, they repay the nation handsomely in jobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership.31 longterm research often has great benefits for the it sector as a whole, although no particular company can be sure of reaping most of these benefits. appropriability also helps to explain why the companies that have tended to provide the greatest support for fundamental research are large companies that enjoy dominant positions in their market.32 startups represent the other end of the spectrum. a hallmark of u.s. entrepreneurship, startups and startup financing have facilitated the development of highrisk products as well as an iconoclastic, risktaking attitude among more traditional companies and managers in the it business. but they do not engage in research.33 thus, startups are notable for two reasons: first, although startups at least temporarily attract some researchers away from universitybased research, they place them in a position to spearhead innovation, often based on their university work, and second, notwithstanding the popular labeling of startups as ﬁhightech,ﬂ they apply the fruits of past research rather than generating more. in both respects, government funding plays a critical role in building the foundations for these innovative commercial investments. university research and broader economic impactsmuch of the governmentfunded research in it has been carried out at universities.34 between 1976 and 2009 federal support constituted roughly twothirds of total university research funding in computer science and electrical engineering.35 among the important characteristics of universities that contribute to their success as engines of innovation are the following: universities can focus on longterm research, a special role of universities that it companies cannot be expected to fill to the same extent.36 (universities™ ability to carry out such research depends, of course, on federal and other sources of funding for research with a long time horizon.)universities provide a neutral ground for collaboration, encouraging movement and interaction among faculty through leave and sabbatical policies that allow professors to visit industry, government, and other university departments or laboratories. universities also provide sites at which researchers from competing companies can come together to explore technical issues.37 universities integrate research and education, a conjunction that creates very powerful synergies, ensuring that students are involved in projects where knowledge is being discovered, not only studied, and providing an educational foundation for the continuous learning that is so important in a fastmoving field like it.38 universities are inherently multidisciplinary, and university researchers are well situated to draw on experts from a variety of fields.39 despite cultural barriers to crossdisciplinary continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.key lessons about the nature of research in information technology 15collaboration, physical proximity and collegial values go a long way in enabling collaboration. the multidisciplinary nature of universities is of historic and growing importance to computer science, which interfaces with so many other fields.universities are ﬁopenﬂ both literally and figuratively, a characteristic that can pay enormous unanticipated dividends. chance interactions in an open environment can change the world; for example, when microsoft founders paul allen and bill gates were students at seattle™s lakeside school in the early 1970s, they were exposed to computing and computer science at the university of washington and to a university spinoff company, computer center corporation.these characteristics of university research share a common elementšpeople. u.s. research universities are unique in the degree to which they integrate research with educationšin both undergraduate and graduate education. universities educate the skilled it workers of the future.40 their graduates are also by far the most effective vehicle for technology transfer, not only from universities to industry but also between university laboratories and departments, through the hiring of postdoctoral researchers and assistant professors.41 faculty and student researchers often move into productdevelopment roles as consultants, employees, and entrepreneurs.42 federal support for university research drives this process. in ph.d.granting computer science programs, more than half of all graduate students receive financial support from the federal government, mostly in the form of research assistantships.43 another benefit of federally funded academic research that doesn™t show up in figure 1 is research™s contribution to the development of open standards and opensource codes that support further innovation. the standards that define the internet had their origins in academic work, and federal support allowed many university researchers to participate in their development and evolution. the hyper text transfer protocol (http) daemon web server developed with nsf support at the university of illinois by the national center for supercomputing applications powered much of the early web, and its code base was used to develop the opensource apache web server that is widely used today. similarly, many of the team members who developed the original mosaic web browser went on to commercialize the product in the form of netscape navigator. moreover, the opensource mozilla browser code became a foundation for the firefox browser.in addition to educating students and creating ideas and companies, universities often bring forefront technologies to their regions (e.g., the nationwide expansion of arpanet in the 1970s and of nsfnet in the 1980s, and the continuation of those efforts through the private internet activities in the 1990s and early 2000s), and universities serve as powerful magnets for companies seeking to relocate. indeed, strong research institutions are recognized as being among the most critical success factors in hightech economic development.44,45 continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16looking aheadtoday™s research investments are essential to tomorrow™s world leadership in information technology (it). properly managed, publicly funded research in it will continue to create important new technologies and industries, some of them unimagined today. indeed, the field is young, and there is every reason to believe that the best is yet to come. box 5 provides a few examples of the impacts that can be anticipated from advances in it in the coming decades. surely, however, some of the most important impacts will not have been listed, becausešas history shows usšmany of the technological surprises and major economic disruptions just waiting to happen cannot be predicted today.the process of innovation will continue to take many years from the inception of a new idea to the creation of a billiondollar industry. every step of this process benefits fromšand often requiresšfederal support. without ongoing federal investment in fundamental research there would still be innovation, but the quantity and the range of new ideas for u.s. industry to draw from would be greatly diminishedšas would the flow of people educated at the technological forefront, the most important product of the nation™s research universities.46the lessons of history are clear. a complex partnership among government, industry, and universities made the united states the world leader in it, and information technology has become essential to our national security and economic and social wellbeing. the federal government™s sponsorship of fundamental research in itšlargely universitybasedšhas been and will continue to be essential. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.looking ahead 17ƒˇˇ˚˘ˇ‰˚ safer, roboticsenhanced automobiles.ˇ˙˚˙ˆ˛˘˚˙˚‰˚ a more scalable, manageable, secure, and robust internet.ˇžﬁ˚˛˚˙˛˚‰˚ personalized and collaborative educational tools for tutoring and justintime learning.ˇ˙˚˙ˆˆ˚‰˚ personalized health monitoring.˚˙˛˚˙˚˚‰˚ augmented cognition to help people cope with information overload˙ˆ˛˘˚‰˚ itdriven advances in all fields of science and engineering.˚˚assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem›continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18notesmain text 1. section based on national research council (nrc)/computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), 2009, assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem: retaining leadership in an increasingly global environment, the national academies press, washington, d.c., with additional data from the bureau of economic analysis and the networking and information technology research and development (nitrd) program. 2. nrc/cstb, 2009, assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem. 3. as defined by the department of commerce, this industry cluster consists of ﬁcomputer and electronic products within durablegoods manufacturing; publishing industries (includes software) and information and data processing services within information; and computer systems design and related services within professional, scientific, and technical services.ﬂ see http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/industry/gdpindustry/2011/txt/gdpind10rev. 4. bureau of economic analysis, 2011, ﬁ2010 recovery widespread across industries,ﬂ april 26, http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/industry/gdpindustry/2011/pdf/gdpind10advfax.pdf. see also ﬁinteractive access to industry economic accounts data,ﬂ http://www.bea.gov/itable/itable.cfm?reqid=5&step=1. 5. matthieu pélissié du rausas, james manyika, eric hazan, jacques bughin, michael chui, and rémi said, 2011, ﬁinternet matters: the net™s sweeping impact on growth, jobs, and prosperity,ﬂ mckinsey global institute, may, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/technologyandinnovation/internetmatters. the authors define ﬁinternetrelated activitiesﬂ as the ﬁtotality of internet activities (e.g., ecommerce) and . . . a portion of the information and communication technologies sector delineated by such activities, technologies, and services linked to the web.ﬂ 6. this number may overestimate the investment in computing research. a 2010 pcast report observes that ﬁ[a] large portion of the ‚high end computing infrastructure and applications™ . . . is attributable to computational infrastructure used to conduct r&d in other fields.ﬂ see president™s council of advisors on science and technology, 2010, report to the president and congress: designing a digital future: federally funded research and development in networking and information technology, executive office of the president, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcastnitrdreport2010.pdf. 7. nitrd, 2009, ﬁfy 2010 networking and information technology research and development supplement to the president™s budget,ﬂ may, http://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/2010supplement/fy10suppfinalformatweb.pdf.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes 19 8. section based on nrc/cstb, 2003, innovation in information technology, the national academies press, washington, d.c., with discussion updated to take into account revisions reflected in figure 1 of the present report. 9. nrc/cstb, 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure, national academy press, washington, d.c.10. nrc/cstb, 2003, innovation in information technology.11.  the idea that research in it not only builds in part on research in physics, mathematics, electrical engineering, psychology, and other fields but also strongly influences them is consistent with what donald stokes has characterized in his fourpart taxonomy as ﬁpasteur™s quadrantﬂ research: use or applicationinspired basic research that pursues fundamental understanding (such as louis pasteur™s research on the biological bases of fermentation and disease). see the discussion on pp. 2629 of nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better, national academy press, washington, d.c.; see also donald e. stokes, 1997, pasteur™s quadrant: basic science and technological innovation, brookings institution press, washington, d.c.12. nrc/cstb, 2009, assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem.13. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution: government support for computing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.14. nrc/cstb, 2009, assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem.15. some of the agencies within the department of defense that made major contributions include the office of naval research, air force office of scientific research, army research office, and the army™s satellite communications agency.16. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure. 17. in addition to provision of research funding, complementary activities have been undertaken by other agencies, such as the national institute of standards and technology, which often brings together people from universities and industry on issues relating to standards setting and measurement.18. member agencies include the agency for healthcare research and quality; defense advanced research projects agency; department of homeland security; department of energyšnational nuclear security administration and doe office of advanced scientific computing research; environmental protection agency; department of health and human servicesšoffice of the national coordinator, national archives and records administration; national aeronautics and space administration; national institutes of health; national institute of standards and technology; national oceanic and atmospheric administration; national security agency; national science foundation; and office of the secretary of defense and department of defense service research organizations (defense research and engineering and deputy under secretary of defense science & technology). see http://www.nitrd.gov/subcommittee/agencywebsites.aspx.19. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution.20. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.21. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution.22. see, for example, previous cstb reports (all published by the national academy/academies press, washington, d.c.), including nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 2000, making it better; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure; 1992, computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering; 2001, building a workforce for the information economy; 1994, academic careers in experimental computer science and engineering; 2001, embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers; and 1997, more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nation™s information infrastructure. 23. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.24. timothy prickett morgan, 2011, ﬁarm holdings eager for pc and server expansion: record 2010, looking for killer 2020,ﬂ the register online, february 1, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/02/01/armholdingsq42010numbers/. 25. in some cases, the semiconductor research corporation provided the funding. for additional information, see http://web.archive.org/web/20080103002836/and http://www.src.org/member/about/history.asp. 26. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 continuing innovation in information technology27. see, for example, the following previous cstb reports: nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 2000, making it better; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.28. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better.29. nrc/cstb, 2010, critical code: software producibility for defense, the national academies press, washington, d.c., p. 37.30. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.31. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure.32. nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution.33. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better.34. the concentration of research in universities is particularly true for computer science research; industry played an important role in telecommunications research before the breakup of at&t and the original bell labs. important research has also been conducted at department of energy and other government laboratories.35. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better. 36. see, for example the following previous cstb reports: nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 2000, making it better; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure. 37. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better; 1994, academic careers in experimental computer science and engineering.38. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better; 1992, computing the future.39. nrc/cstb, 2000, making it better.40. nrc/cstb, 2001, building a workforce for the information economy.41. nrc/cstb, 2001, building a workforce for the information economy.42. to the extent that u.s. research produces people who move to u.s. product development, the u.s. economy gains an ﬁappropriableﬂ benefit from funding research.43. computing research association (cra), 2010, taulbee survey report, cra, washington, d.c., table 25, http://www.cra.org/resources/taulbee/.44. nrc/cstb, 2001, building a workforce for the information economy. 45. in computing, electronics, telecommunications, and biotechnology, evidence of the correlation aboundsšin boston (harvard university and the massachusetts institute of technology); research triangle park (duke university, the university of north carolina, and north carolina state university); new jersey (princeton university, rutgers university, and new york cityœbased columbia university); austin (the university of texas); southern california (the university of california, san diego, the university of california, los angeles, the california institute of technology, and the university of southern california); northern california (the university of california, berkeley, the university of california, san francisco, and stanford university); and seattle (the university of washington). 46. see, for example, previous cstb reports, including nrc/cstb, 1999, funding a revolution; 2000, making it better; 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nation™s information infrastructure; 1992, computing the future; 2001, building a workforce for the information economy; 1994, academic careers in experimental computer science and engineering; 2001, embedded, everywhere; and 1997, more than screen deep. table 1 qualcommšequipment and services ($6.98 billion); licensing and royalties ($4.01 billion). qualcomm 2010  annual report, http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/qcom/1510480689x0x451979/c5ba4b26fe1d4756 a735ed1d972402cb/201010k.pdf.motorolašnet sales, products ($6.1 billion); net sales, services ($2.1 billion). motorola 2011 annual report, http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/abea2fo3vv/1751114768x0x552627/1344eb6145ba4ead9ec4a99116be997c/msi2011ar.pdf.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes 21nvidiašfy2011 total revenue. nvidia corporation, 2011 annual review, notice of annual meeting, proxy statement and nvidia form 10k (u.s. securities and exchange commission; sec).intelš2011 revenue based on general accepted accounting principles (gaap); nongaap revenue $54.2 billion. see http://www.intc.com/financials.cfm.amdšcomputing solutions only (excludes ﬁgraphics,ﬂ ﬁfoundries,ﬂ and ﬁotherﬂ). amd 2011 annual report, http://ir.amd.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=74093&p=irolreportsannual.texas instrumentsš2011 revenue from embedded processing segment, http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/txn/1710273597x0x535657/2de80eb42af14e4ebd7ff36811701b17/txnnews2012123financial.pdf.dellšdesktop pcs ($18.97 billion) and mobile and laptop pcs ($14.69 billion) (excludes software, services, and enterprise/server sales). dell 2011 form 10k (sec). hpšrevenue from personal systems group (excludes software, services, and printers). hp 2011 annual report, http://h30261.www3.hp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=71087&p=irolreportsannual.applešincludes desktop and portable device sales ($21.78 billion), iphone ($47.0 billion), and ipad ($20.3 billion). 2011 apple, inc. form 10k (sec).symantecšsymantec fy2011 net revenue, http://phx.corporateir.net/external.file?item=ugfyzw50suq9ndq2mty2fenoawxksuq9ndy5ntewffr5cgu9mq==&t=1.juniperštotal revenue. juniper networks fy2011 form 10k (sec).ciscoštotal revenue. cisco systems 2011 annual report, http://www.cisco.com/assets/cdccontentelements/docs/annualreports/media/2011ar.pdf.akamaištotal revenue. akamai fy2011 form 10k (sec).twitteršestimated total revenue. wall street journal, 2011, ﬁtwitter as tech bubble barometer,ﬂ http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwoway/2011/02/10/133648669/twittersvalueupto10billionwallstreetjournalreports.facebookštotal 2011 revenue. form 424b4 (sec), filed may 18, 2012.ebayštotal revenue. ebay fy2011 form 10k (sec).amazonšsum of u.s.based media sales ($8 billion) and electronics and merchandise sales ($17.3 billion); excludes amazon web services and ﬁother,ﬂ which encompasses such things as amazonbranded credit cards. amazon fy2011 form 10k (sec).googlešrevenue except ﬁother.ﬂ google fy2010 form 10k (sec).yahoo!štotal fy2011 revenue. yahoo! fy2011 form 10k (sec).googlešnonadvertising revenue. google fy2010 form 10k (sec).vmwareštotal revenue. vmware fy2010 form 10k (sec). amazonšnonecommerce revenue from amazon web services. amazon fy2011 form 10k (sec).oraclešrevenue total for new software licenses ($9.2 billion), hardware systems ($4.4 billion), software license updates and product support ($14.8 billion), and hardware systems support ($2.56 billion) and excluding cloud, consulting, and education. oracle fy2010 form 10k (sec).ibmš2011 revenue from software ($24.94 billion) and systems and technology ($18.99 billion) and excluding global business services, global technology services, and global financing. ibm 2011 annual report, http://www.ibm.com/annualreport/2011/.microsoftšrevenue from server and tools product and service offerings (includes windows server, microsoft sql server, windows azure, visual studio, system center products, windows embedded device platforms, and enterprise services) ($17.1 billion); business division offerings (includes the microsoft office system, comprising mainly office, sharepoint, exchange, and lync; and microsoft dynamics business solutions) ($22.2 billion). microsoft fy2011 form 10k (sec).electronic artsšelectronic arts fy2010 form 10k (sec).pixaršpixar became a wholly owned subsidiary of the walt disney company in 2006. worldwide gross revenue from pixar studio releases was $766 million in 2009, $1.06 billion in 2010, and $554 million in 2011. see http://www.thenumbers.com/movies/series/pixar.php.adobeštotal revenue. adobe fy2011 form 10k (sec).irobotštotal revenue. irobot 2010 annual report, april 13, 2011, http://phx.corporateir.net/external.file?item=ugfyzw50suq9ndixnzg2fenoawxksuq9ndm1ntyzffr5cgu9mq==&t=1.nuanceštotal revenue. nuance fy2011 form 10k (sec).intuitive surgicalštotal revenue. intuitive surgical 2010 annual report, http://phx.corporateir.net/external.file?item=ugfyzw50suq9odqxmtj8q2hpbgrjrd0tmxxuexblptm=&t=1.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 continuing innovation in information technologytable 2 column headed ﬁtodayﬂ wireless and broadband industrysubscribers worldwide: international telecommunication union, 2011, ﬁthe world in 2011: ict facts and figures,ﬂ http://www.itu.int/itud/ict/facts/2011/material/ictfactsfigures2010.pdf.subscribers in the united states: ctia, ﬁ50 wireless quick facts,ﬂ http://www.ctia.org/consumerinfo/index.cfm/aid/10323.mobilebroadband subscribers: international telecommunication union, 2011, ﬁmeasuring the information society,ﬂ http://www.itu.int/itud/ict/publications/idi/2011/material/mis2011withoutannex5.pdf.fixed broadband subscriptions: organisation for economic cooperation and development, directorate for science, technology, and industry, ﬁoecd broadband portal,ﬂ http://www.oecd.org/document/54/0,3746,en264934225386901021111,00.html.microprocessor industry8.3 billion: lee eng kean, 2010, ﬁmcu to intel architecture conversion,ﬂ ee times, may 31, http://www.eetimes.com/design/microcontrollermcu/4199788/mcutointelarchitectureconversion.$40 billion: http://www.isuppli.com/homeandconsumerelectronics/news/pages/fourthquarter2010micro processorsharesœfinalmicroprocessorrevenuesharedata.aspx.personal computing industry1.4 billion: etforecasts, ﬁworldwide pc market,ﬂ http://www.etforecasts.com/products/espcww1203.htm. 100 million: ﬁgartner survey shows u.s. consumers more likely to purchase a smartphone than other consumer devices in 2011,ﬂ http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1550814.internet and web industriesone third . . . online, and 45%: international telecommunication union, 2011, ﬁthe world in 2011: ict facts and figures,ﬂ http://www.itu.int/itud/ict/facts/2011/material/ictfactsfigures2010.pdf.18 billion searches: comscore, 2011, ﬁcomscore releases 2011 u.s. search engine rankings,ﬂ press release, november 11, http://www.comscore.com/pressevents/pressreleases/2011/11/comscorereleasesoctober2011 u.s.searchenginerankings.$48.2 billion and . . . 4.6% of total sales: u.s. census bureau, 2011, ﬁquarterly retail ecommerce sales: 3rd quarter 2011,ﬂ november 17, http://www.fortune3.com/blog/2011/01/ecommercesales2011/.$8 trillion: matthieu pélissié du rausas, james manyika, eric hazan, jacques bughin, michael chui, and rémi said, 2011, ﬁinternet matters: the net™s sweeping impact on growth, jobs, and prosperity,ﬂ mckinsey global institute, may, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/technologyandinnovation/internetmatters.cloud computing industry$1 billion . . . by 2013: in stat, 2011, ﬁhealthcare to spend $518 million on infrastructure as a service in 2015,ﬂ august 1, http://www.instat.com/newmk.asp?id=3219&sourceid=00000352000000000000.expand 139% from 2010 to 2011: business technology roundtable, 2011, ﬁincreased spending on public cloud computing services,ﬂ august 9, http://businesstechnologyroundtable.blogspot.com/2011/08/increasedspendingonpubliccloud.html.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes 23enterprise systems industry583 terabytes of sales: information week, 2006, ﬁdata, data everywhere,ﬂ http://www.informationweek.com/news/175801775?pgno=2; regis mckenna, 2002, total access: giving customers what they want in an anytime anywhere world, harvard business press.entertainment industryhighestgrossing film of 2010: box office mojo, ﬁ2010 worldwide grosses,ﬂ http://boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2010&p=.htm.column headed ﬁadvances expected,ﬂ  in research topic notednetworkingembedded everywhere: nrc/cstb, 2001, embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers, national academy press, washington. d.c.databasesenergyefficient computing: stavros harizopoulos, mehul shah, justin mexa, and parthasarathy ranganathan, 2009, ﬁenergy efficiency: the new holy grail of data management systems research,ﬂ 4th biennial conference on innovative data systems research (cidr), january 47, asilomar, california.and other largescale data management systems: daniel j. abadi, 2009, ﬁdata management in the cloud: limitations and opportunities,ﬂ bulletin of the [ieee computer society] technical committee on data engineering 32(1):312; sam madden and maarten van steen, 2012, ﬁinternetscale data management,ﬂ ieee internet computing 16(1):1012.computer graphicsto the simulation code: james ahrens and hanwei shen, 2010, ﬁultrascale visualization,ﬂ ieee computer graphics and applications 30(3):2021.artificial intelligence and roboticsrobots for more than vacuuming: hans moravec, 2009, ﬁrise of the robotsšthe future of artificial intelligence,ﬂ scientific american, march 23, http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=riseoftherobots.continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24appendix ashort biographies of committee memberspeter lee (chair) is a corporate vice president of microsoft research in redmond, washington. prior to taking his position at microsoft, dr. lee worked at the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), where he was the founding director of the transformational convergence technology office. prior to darpa, dr. lee was a professor and the head of the computer science department at carnegie mellon university. peter lee™s research contributions are in areas related to the foundations of software reliability, program analysis, security, and language design. a fellow of the association for computing machinery and former chair of the board of directors of the computing research association, peter lee is called on in diverse venues as a contributor in research, education, and policy making. he conducted his doctoral studies at the university of michigan.mark e. dean is chief technology officer, ibm middle east and africa. he was previously a technical fellow and vice president, worldwide operations at ibm research, and the vice president for systems research at ibm™s watson research center in yorktown heights, new york, where he was responsible for the research and application of systems technologies spanning circuits to operating environments. during his career, dr. dean has held several engineering positions at ibm in the area of computer system hardware architecture and design. he has developed all types of computer systems, from embedded systems to supercomputers, including testing of the first gigahertz cmos microprocessor, and he established the team that developed the blue gene supercomputer. he was also chief engineer for the development of the ibm pc/at, isa systems bus, ps/2 model 70 and 80, and the color graphics adapter in the original ibm pc, and he holds three of the nine patents for the original ibm pc. one inventionšthe industry standard architecture (isa) ﬁbus,ﬂ which permitted addon devices like the keyboard, disk drives, and printers to be connected to the motherboardšearned election to the national inventors hall of fame for dean and colleague dennis moeller. dr. dean™s most recent awards include a national institute of science outstanding scientist award, member of the american academy of arts and sciences and the national academy of engineering, ieee fellow, the ccg black engineer of the year, the nsbe distinguished engineer award, the university of tennessee coe dougherty award, and recipient of the ronald h. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 25brown american innovators award. dr. dean was appointed an ibm fellow in 1995, ibm™s highest technical honor. he is a member of the ibm academy of technology. dr. dean has more than 40 patents or patents pending. he received a bsee degree from the university of tennessee in 1979, an msee degree from florida atlantic university in 1982, and a ph.d. in electrical engineering from stanford university in 1992.deborah l. estrin is a professor of computer science at ucla and is director of the nsffunded center for embedded networked sensing (cens). professor estrin received her ph.d. (1985) in computer science from the massachusetts institute of technology, her m.s. (1982) from mit, and her b.s. (1980) from the university of california, berkeley. before joining ucla she was a member of the university of southern california computer science department from 1986 through the middle of 2000. in 1987, professor estrin received the national science foundation‚s presidential young investigator award for her research in network interconnection and security. during the subsequent 10 years much of her research focused on the design of network and routing protocols for very large, global networks, selfconfiguring protocol mechanisms for scalability and robustness, and tools and methods for designing and studying largescale networks. since the late 1990s professor estrin has been collaborating with her colleagues and students to develop protocols and systems architectures needed to realize rapidly deployable and robustly operating networks of many hundreds of physically embedded devices, e.g., sensor networks. she is particularly interested in the application of spatially and temporally dense embedded sensors to environmental monitoring. dr. estrin has been a coprincipal investigator on many nsf and darpafunded projects. she chaired a 19971998 isat study on sensor networks and the 2001 nrc study on networked embedded computing which produced the report embedded, everywhere. professor estrin serves on the advisory committees for the nsf computer and information science and engineering (cise) and environmental research and education (ere) directorates. she is a fellow of the acm, aaas, and ieee. she has served on numerous panels for the nsf, national academy of sciences/nrc, and darpa. she has also served as an editor for the acm/ieee transactions on networks and as a program committee member for many networkingrelated conferences, including sigcomm and infocom. she was general cochair for the first acm conference on embedded networked sensor systems, sensys 2003. she was also an associate editor for the new acm transactions on sensor networks and was a member of the national research council™s computer science and telecommunications board from 2004 to 2011.james t. kajiya is currently a director of research at microsoft corporation. from 1994 to 1997, dr. kajiya was a senior researcher at microsoft research, where he built and led the graphics group. his recent work has focused on veryhighquality computer graphics. most recently, dr. kajiya has returned to graphics hardware design. he was the principal architect on talisman, a lowcost hardware architecture for veryhighquality realtime threedimensional graphics. dr. kajiya also served as the principal investigator on a joint research project with ibm that produced an implementation of prolog yielding a speed of 0.9 megalips and a new objectoriented systems programming language called fith. in other work, he explored parallel ray tracing on the ibm rp3 and specified software architecture for scientific visualization in the ibm svs, which became the power visualization system. in joint work with trw, he has served as architect for supercomputers oriented toward military signal and imageprocessing tasks. dr. kajiya has served on the external advisory board of the defense mapping agency, on the national neurocircuitry database committee for the national academy of sciences and institute of medicine, and on the continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 continuing innovation in information technologysiggraph executive committee. he received the siggraph technical achievement award in 1991 and served as the technical program chair for siggraph 93. in 1997, dr. kajiya, along with dr. timothy kay, received an academy award (technical certificate) for work on rendering hair and fur. in 2002 he was elected to the national academy of engineering for contributions to formal and practical methods of computer image generation. he received a ph.d. in computer science from the university of utah.prabhakar raghavan is vice president of engineering at google, inc. he is also a consulting professor of computer science at stanford university. his research interests include text and web mining and algorithm design, and he has authored two textbooks on the subjects. dr. raghavan received his ph.d. from the university of california, berkeley, and is a member of the national academy of engineering and a fellow of the acm and the ieee. prior to joining google he was head of yahoo! labs and before that, senior vicepresident and chief technology officer at verity; before that he held a number of technical and managerial positions at ibm research.andrew j. viterbi is a cofounder and retired vice chair and chief technical officer of qualcomm incorporated. he spent equal portions of his career in industry, having previously cofounded linkabit corporation, and in academia as a professor in the schools of engineering and applied science, first at ucla and then at ucsd, at which he is now a professor emeritus. he is currently president of the viterbi group, a technical advisory and investment company. he also serves as presidential chair visiting professor at the university of southern california and as a distinguished visiting professor at the technionisrael institute of technology. dr. viterbi has received numerous honors both in the united states and internationally. among these are seven honorary doctorates, from universities in canada, israel, italy, and the united states; the marconi international fellowship award; the ieee alexander graham bell, the claude shannon, and the james clerk maxwell awards; the nec c&c award; the eduard rhein foundation award; the christopher columbus medal, the franklin medal, and the robert noyes semiconductor industry award; the millennium laureate award; and the ieee™s highest award, the medal of honor. he is a member of the national academy of engineering and the national academy of sciences and is a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences. he has received an honorary title from the president of italy and the national medal of science from the president of the united states. dr. viterbi serves on boards and committees of numerous nonprofit institutions, including the university of southern california, mit (visiting committee for bioengineering), mathematical sciences research institute, burnham institute for medical research, and scripps translational science institute, and he is the past chair of the computer and information sciences section of the national academy of sciences. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.27appendix btransfers of ideas and people and other impacts since 2003 added to figure 1table b.1 gives some examples of the many transfers of ideas and people and other impacts that occurred as the fields of computing and communications progressed, and it provides annotation for events depicted by arrows in figure 1. it is not meant to be a comprehensive description of the history of the research in any of the areas listed. continuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 continuing innovation in information technologytable b.1 transfers and other impacts since 2003 as indicated by the new arrows added to  figure 1research track and eventsoriginsimpactdigital communicationsmultipleinput and multipleoutputclosely related university research pre1996; industry r&d (bell labs blast) in 1998a fundamental enabler in today™s wireless communications, including wifi, wimax, 4g, lte, and othersradiofrequency complementary metaloxide semiconductor integrated circuitsbasic research and some serious engineering efforts in universities throughout the 1990sthe foundational device technology for wifi, gps, bluetooth, and otherswireless locatingindustry r&d in the early 2000s, with subsequent university researchfundamental to some wireless systems, and an energysaving supplement to gps for mobile devices; now a foundation for growing locationbased servicesbluetoothericsson and open sig 1994, with participation by industry and university; based on earlier research in spreadspectrum radionow the industry standard for veryshortrange secure networking; used primarily for local connectivity of devicesmaca channel access protocoluniversity and industry research starting in 1990 and continuing to 2000sthe foundation for collision avoidance on shared physical network links, particularly for wireless networkscomputer architectureadaptive branch predictorstwolevel adaptive branch predictors started in academic research around 1992significant influence on subsequent research, as well as influence on modern processor designsmemorydependence predictorsboth university and industrial research, emerging in practical form around 19961997fundamental to enabling aggressive outoforder execution in practice, affecting research in compilers and architectures, and commercial productsmulticoreearly universitybased developments, such as stanford hydra and mit raw, circa 2002; later, industry r&d such as sun™s niagara, around 2005fundamental to all processor architectures on the market today; furthermore, the problems of parallel computing have become central in researchstreambased imageprocessing architecturesuniversitybased research on streamprocessing for image and signal processing, leading to developments such as imagine, circa 2002the foundation for today™s gpus; today there is considerable research and commercial development on applications that go far beyond graphics processinggraphical processing unit in iphoneindustry 2007present in mobile computers for some time, now considered de rigueur, given the userexperience advantages demonstrated by the ipad/iphoneadvances in parallel computing applied to commercial product developmentcontinued university work on parallel computing in 2000s and earliercollaboration by top computer architecture researchers in academia and movement between the university and industry communitiescontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 29continuedresearch track and eventsoriginsimpactsoftware technologiesmodern virtual machinesa long history of university research, with recent practical developments such as disco in 1997, and companies like vmware in 1998a fundamental building block of cloud technology, allowing more effective provisioning of datacenter services and securitymodern buffer overrun protectionsuniversities and industry throughout the 2000soperating systems starting to incorporate dynamic methods for improving securityweb 2.0industry, 2004a fundamental shift in thinking in the operating system research community, as a new layer of distributed application infrastructure emergesmultitouch appears in iphoneindustry, 2007new research thrusts in gesturebased user interfaces and some rethinking of system architectureskinectindustry, 2010originally designed as a game controller, then adopted by researchers as a new core sensor for many applicationsnetworkingcontent distribution networksearly foundations developed in universities, contributing algorithms, systems concepts, and people to companies such as akamai, 1998a fundamental part of how the internet works, essential to provision of services such as youtube, news sites, and many othersmultiprotocol label switchingearly developments in companies such as ipsilon networks, circa 1996had a fundamental influence on subsequent university research in networkinggigascope and othersindustry and university research, in particular at&t labs around 2003streambased measurement and traffic analysis on large networks (and the internet)ša fundamental tool for today™s researchopenflowstanford university, 2008issued as a standard in 2011parallel and distributed systemsmapreducefundamental ideas date back to the 1960s, but made practical at scale by google in 2004changed the research thinking in distributed computing; a foundation for many cloud systemshadoopopensource development, around 2006had immediate influence on university research, including not only distributed systems but also areas such as machine learning and databases; increasingly the base for commercial offeringsmessage passing interfacea university and industry standards development, around 1994the standard mechanism for programming highperformance computerstable b.1 continuedcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 continuing innovation in information technologyresearch track and eventsoriginsimpactparallel and distributed systems (continued)parallel virtual machineoriginated at oakridge national laboratory and university around 19901991a key foundation for programming a networked collection of computers as a single system, for both research and practical applicationspeertopeeropen community, picking up steam around 2004significant influence on a wide variety of widely used systems, such as skypedatabasesresearchers leave stanford to found googleuniversity to startup, 1998googledata integration technologiesuniversity and industry r&d throughout the 2000sfundamental impact on the ﬁbig dataﬂ movement, as seen in technologies such as google fusion tables (2009)datastream management systemsindustry r&d in the early 2000sa key driver and enabler for both research and commercial developments in ﬁbig dataﬂxmlbroad community process in 1997; earlier sgml late 1980sa key foundation for representation of online content on the web and other itbased systemscomputer graphicspoisson image editingindustry r&d, 2003a major advance in image editing, now a core of imageprocessing tools (like photoshop) and associated algorithmsimage stitchingindustry and university research, circa 2005omnipresent, from its use in mapping services (e.g., google maps) to modern filmmaking and panorama features in camerasspherical harmonic shadinguniversities, around 2002a major advance in (relatively) lowoverhead realistic shading and shadowing in computer graphicslightstage realtime captureuniversities (especially university of southern california), in 2002a foundation for today™s digital image capture, used widely with particular impact in moviemaking and recognized recently with an academy awardstable fluids and related methodsuniversities, around 1999the core of all image and video rendering for realistic smoke, water, and so ondisney/pixar labsindustryuniversity partnership, in 2007similar to the intel ﬁlabletﬂ model, for closer collaboration between industry and university researchtable b.1 continuedcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 31research track and eventsoriginsimpactai and robotics incremental heuristic searchuniversities, around 2004a building block for a wide array of data mining and search technologies, as well as a foundation for basic researchhidden markov models for biology, speech, and the likeuniversity and industry r&d throughout the 1990sa major step in the general reduction of problems outside of core computing (genomics, speech processing, and so on) to algorithmic problemsrecommender systemsuniversity and industry r&d, circa 1994a core element of today™s ecommerce systemsbayesian methods applieduniversity and industry r&d throughout the 1990sfundamental to the major shift toward more statistical approaches to machine intelligencekinect audio and visionmicrosoft, 2010the most rapidly adopted consumer electronics device of all timetable b.1 continuedcontinuing innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32table c.1 algorithms researchšsome examples of impactsresearch topicoriginsimpactalgorithms for network congestionuniversities in the mid1990sa key building block for today™s networking technologies, such as contentdistribution networkscplexuniversities pre1985, later work in industry and startups (e.g., ilog, ibm, and others)a foundation for a wide array of practical optimization and resourceallocation problems and for logistics, delivery systems, and so onturbo codesdecades of university and industry research, reduced to practical form at telecombretagne in 1993absolutely essential in digital communications, and in particular in wireless networking technologies todayeigenvalues, pagerank, and so ondecades of university research; pagerank emerged out of stanford in 1998pagerank the core of google search; today, related concepts still fundamentaldistributed hash tablesuniversities and industry, with practical algorithms available by 2001a core element of today™s peertopeer systems; also a strong influence on university and industry r&dvcg auction mechanismuniversity research, emerging in 2000a major impact on online advertising in the major search enginesngram matching for natural language processinguniversity and industry research, emerging as practical around 2004the core of today™s languageprocessing and translation systemsappendix cexamples of impacts from algorithms researchresearch in theory and algorithms (see box 1, ﬁresearch in the theoretical and algorithmic foundations of computingﬂ) has provided an important foundation for the advances depicted in figure 1. shown in table c.1 are some of the many examples of research advances in algorithms that have helped lead to substantial economic impact.