detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/1497keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining theagenda127 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309041768 | doi 10.17226/1497the computer science and technology board, national research councilkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s.computer industrycompetitive:defining the agendaa colloquium report by thecomputer science and technology boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and resourcesnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1990ikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. frank press is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomousin its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineeringalso sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. robert m. white is presidentof the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to thenational academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.samuel o. thier is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services tothe government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. frank press and dr. robert m.white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the following organizations and agencies: air forceoffice of scientific research (grant no. n0001487j1110), apple computer, inc., control datacorporation, cray research, inc., the defense advanced research projects agency (grant no.n0001487j1110), digital equipment corporation, hewlett packard, ibm corporation, thenational aeronautics and space administration (grant no. cda860535), the national sciencefoundation (grant no. cda860535), and the office of naval research (grant no. n0001487j1110).library of congress catalog card no. 8963507international standard book number 0309041767cover:flare, by benoit b. mandelbrot, ibm fellow, ibm t. j. watson research center, and a foreignassociate of the national academy of sciences. image courtesy of acm siggraph with permission of professor mandelbrot.shown is a framed fragment of a generalized mandelbrot setša set of numbers that produce strikingly beautiful images of mathematical complexity that, as they are magnified, reveal yet more detailed, infinitely nonrepeating tendrils, whorls, and curlicues.like the mandelbrot set, the u.s. computer sector when viewed from afar may seem relatively well defined;upon closer examination, however, the industry is revealed to consist of a myriad of complex and evolving interdependencies, driven by technology and subject to the everchanging constraints of the global marketplace.available from: national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, nw washington, dc 20418s064printed in the united states of americaikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and technology boardjoseph f. traub, columbia university, chairmanalfred v. aho, at&t bell laboratoriesjohn seely brown, xerox corporationmichael l. dertouzos, massachusetts institute of technologysamuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationjames freeman gilbert, university of california at san diegowilliam a. goddard iii, california institute of technologyjohn l. hennessy, stanford universityjohn e. hopcroft, cornell universityrobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiativessidney karin, san diego supercomputer centerleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesrobert langridge, university of california at san franciscoabraham peled, ibm t.j. watson research centerraj reddy, carnegie mellon universitymary shaw, carnegie mellon universitywilliam j. spencer, xerox corporationivan e. sutherland, sutherland, sproull & associatesvictor vyssotsky, digital equipment corporationirving wladawskyberger, ibm corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, executive directordamian m. saccocio, staff officermargaret a. knemeyer, staff associatemark bello, cstb consultantpamela r. rodgers, cstb consultantdonna f. allen, administrative secretarycatherine a. sparks, secretaryiiikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and resourcesnorman hackerman, robert a. welch foundation, chairmanrobert c. beardsley, woods hole oceanographic institutionb. clark burchfiel, massachusetts institute of technologygeorge f. carrier, harvard universityralph j. cicerone, university of california at irvineherbert d. doan, the dow chemical company (retired)peter s. eagleson, massachusetts institute of technologydean e. eastman, ibm t. j. watson research centermarye anne fox, university of texasgerhart friedlander, brookhaven national laboratorylawrence w. funkhouser, chevron corporation (retired)phillip a. griffiths, duke universityneal f. lane, rice universitychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofsciencejack e. oliver, cornell universityjeremiah p. ostriker, princeton university observatoryphilip a. palmer, e.i. du pont de nemours & companyfrank l. parker, vanderbilt universitydenis j. prager, macarthur foundationdavid m. raup, university of coloradoroy f. schwitters, superconducting super collider laboratorylarry l. smarr, university of illinois at urbanachampaignkarl k. turekian, yale universitymyron f. uman, acting executive directorivkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceon may 23, 1989, the computer science and technology board sponsored acolloquium in washington, d.c., on the competitiveness of computerrelatedindustries. the colloquium attracted a standingroomonly group of invitedexecutives, government officials, academic analysts, and journalists. participantsdiscussed the structure of computerrelated industries, evolving patterns ofcompetition in global markets, and the roles of industry and government inmaking the most of u.s. strengths in computerrelated technologies and markets.the colloquium was organized by a steering committee chaired by samuelh. fuller, vice president of research at digital equipment corporation. othermembers of the steering committee included robert w. lucky, executive directorfor research in the communications sciences division of at&t belllaboratories, william j. spencer, vice president of the corporate research groupat xerox corporation, and irving wladawskyberger, vice president of the datasystems division and general manager of the kingston facility at ibmcorporation.this report is a distillation of the farranging colloquium discussions. it hastwo goals. first, it strives to open a window into the richness of the u.s.computer sector, a collection of interrelated industries that is by and large poorlyunderstood by those outside the computer field. second, it seeks to illuminate therange and depth of the challenges facing the computer sector. the report isaimed, in particular, at policymakers, but it is also intended to be of interest toleaders in and students of the computer sector.joseph f. traub, chairmancomputer science and technology boardprefacevkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacevikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 overview 52 hardware 183 software 304 services and systems integration 405 business and marketing 506 turning point 64 appendixes a colloquium program 73b colloquium participants 75contentsviikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsviiikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summaryin may 1989, top executives from the u.s. computer sector, joined byuniversity and industry researchers, met with governmental policymakers for aoneday colloquium in washington, d.c., to define an agenda for keeping theu.s. computer industry competitive. conducted under the auspices of thecomputer science and technology board of the national research council, thecolloquium encompassed the full range of computer industriesšhardware,software, and services and systems integrationšthat collectively constitute thecomputer sector.from this broad representation emerged a strong consensus on one centraltheme: ensuring that the united states remains preeminent in computing at thebeginning of the next century requires strategic commitment, leadership, andcollective will that cannot be attained with a "business as usual" approach byindustry or government. this conclusion was based on discussion in five majorareas.maintaining u.s. competitivenessstrategic intentwhat is good for one firmševen the leaderšin computerrelated industriesmay not be good for the industry in question or for the computer sector as awhole. the exodus of u.s. merchant semiconductor manufacturers from dynamicrandom access memory (dram) markets is a prime example of this problem,but others exist. advances by foreign firms that have licensed newexecutive summary1keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microprocessor technology developed by innovative, cashstrapped u.s.companies raise the question, how can the nation secure a greater share of thereturns from technologies that originate within its borders? colloquiumparticipants frequently made appeals for strategic commitment on the part ofindividual firms. some suggested, however, that lower costs for borrowingcapital and other incentives will be needed to counter the financial resources offoreign investors shopping for u.s. technology and to encourage firms to evaluatethe longterm impacts of shortterm business decisions. indecision can be costly;cooperative projects under way in other nations and the successes of foreignfirms that have not been deterred by occasional setbacks clearly illustrate thevalue of strategic commitment.cooperationcompeting in global technology markets requires cooperation within andamong firms and between industry, universities, and government.  joint researchefforts (such as sematech and the microelectronics and computer technologycorporation) are only a part of what is needed, although they represent a goodstart. the magnitude of the investment and risk associated with emergingtechnologies, the need for worldwide technology and business development, andthe importance of timely actions are among the factors behind the growing pushfor cooperation.cooperation has already contributed to u.s. successes in the computerfield, and the nation should build on those successes. governmentuniversityindustry collaboration underlies u.s. leadership in technologies ranging fromnetworked computing to artificial intelligence and parallel computing, and itspotential underscores the value of a continuing dialogue. within the computersector, the success of the systems integration industry with interfirm alliancesmay be a harbinger of the future for other computerrelated industries.manufacturingmore and more computers and components will resemble consumerelectronics goods, taking on a commoditylike character with both quality andprice determining market success; firms that are successful in these largevolumemarkets will be those with superior product design, manufacturing efficiency, andproduct quality. if weaknesses in manufacturing and in the integration ofresearch, development, and manufacturing are not corrected, computer hardwaremanufacturers could find themselves serving only specialty markets.manufacturing strengths are essential for competing in the highvolume marketsthat fuel revenue and technology growth. moreover, product quality isincreasingly key to customer differentiation among types and varieties ofhardware and software.executive summary2keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.erosion of the semiconductormanufacturing segment of the computerhardware industry jeopardizes the health of the entire sector. the flaggingfortunes of u.s. semiconductor producers will not be confined to the electroniccomponents segment of the hardware industry, if present trends persist.manufacturing capabilities and capacity must be developed to assure a majordomestic supply of dram chips and to preserve adequate supplies of other keycomponents. u.s. leadership in computers, software, and related services dependson timely and economical access to such key components. however, thedominance of a few integrated asian firms in important semiconductortechnologies vests these companies with the potential for cartellike control overinputs essential to u.s. computer manufacturing. to maintain adequate accessover the long term, even extreme measures, such as government subsidies, mayhave to be considered.technology development and transfersome standardization is essential, but the optimal level is not clearcutštheissue is one of balance. most colloquium participants called for standards tofacilitate computertocomputer communication and exchange of data. butstandardizing operating systems and other elements was more controversial.according to several participants, standardizing operating systems could stiflecreativity, lock technology at a primitive stage, and open the industry to imitatorfirms that compete on the basis of low manufacturing costs rather thaninnovation. according to the opposing view, it could instead ensure a base levelof conformance onto which innovative firms could add their own specializedhardware and applications, and it could make sophisticated systems cheaper andeasier to use and thereby increase the productivity of the nation as a whole.computer and other technologies are converging. consumer electronics,business computer systems, communications systems, and other businessequipment (e.g., copiers) increasingly rely on a common set of technologies andcomponents. this convergence can convey advantages to manufacturers withrelatively broad product lines or correspondingly broad partnerships.systems technology is a domestic strength. software and systems integrationbusinesses are strong, thanks to u.s. strengths in designing and implementingcomplex systems. concentrating further effort in these areas would build onexisting strengths.technology transfer was the key to many of today's commercial successes,but u.s. computer firms have frequently failed to realize the commercial benefitsof research conducted in the united states. successful technology transfer isdifficult, even chaotic. organizational impediments within firms often result inthe most fruitful transfers occurring to and from the outside. further opportunitiesfor transfers from universities and federal laboratories are too often missed. in anenvironment characterized by rapid change, delay and missed opportunity can becrippling, if not fatal.executive summary3keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.small entrepreneurial firms may dominate the popular view of innovation inthe computer sector, but many important innovations originally emerged fromresearch at large firms. while large firms may not always run with theirinventions, small firms too often fail to acquire the manufacturing, marketing, andother business capabilities necessary to sustain market leadership. the cult of theentrepreneur seems to be an american phenomenon, and its appropriateness forthe future was called into question by colloquium participants. japan's largeintegrated firms are establishing an increasingly impressive record of innovationto go along with their manufacturing prowess, and large firms dominatetechnology and market advances in europe. how to maximize the strengths oflarge and small firms and harness those strengths together will be key toachieving a more cooperative, strategic posture in the computer sector.infrastructure and educationenhancing information infrastructure will benefit producers and users ofcomputer technology. computer networks with limited interconnection andcumbersome or costly access contribute to what many colloquium participantssaw as a failure of the country to achieve much of the promise of computers.several participants proposed building a national advancedtechnologycomputing and communications network that would enable a variety ofcomputerbased activities and resources, while fostering advances in hardwareand software technologies that would benefit the computer sector.acknowledging that this concept raises a number of implementation and policyquestions, participants suggested that federal proposals for a national research andeducation network were a good place to start.ultimately, the growth of the u.s. computer sector depends on highqualityeducation and training programs. colloquium participants returned frequently tothe need for education to make computing a more integral part of many activities,to make the u.s. population more comfortable with and interested in computing,and to ensure that we in the united states have the talent to advance computerrelated technology and its commercialization.setting the agendaeach issue highlighted by this colloquium is complex, and each poses a hostof implementation questions. the task of communicating what the problems areand why they are problems is itself difficult, as illustrated by the discussions thattook place at the colloquium. the computer science and technology boardintends to examine several of these issues in more detail, and it urgesdecisionmakers in the computer industry and in government and academia tocontinue the dialogue needed to resolve key problems of mutual concern.executive summary4keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1overviewalthough the competitiveness of key industriesšmost notably,semiconductor manufacturingšhas seriously declined, the computer sector as awhole retains much vitality. u.s. firms dominate the fastest growing, and perhapsmost lucrative, markets for computerrelated goods and services. for example,more than 60 percent of the world software market, totaling about $65 billion in1989 and growing at an annual rate of about 25 percent, is controlled by u.s.based suppliers.1,2 similarly, domestic enterprises and their overseas subsidiariesreap the majority of the global revenues earned for designing and integratingcomputer systems, a market whose annual value colloquium participantsestimated to be between $25 billion and $40 billion. finally, u.s. computermanufacturers are by far the world's largest producers of computing andperipheral equipment; in 1989 they earned approximately half of the $134 billiongenerated worldwide by the production of computer systems per se and perhaps45 percent of the $300 billion in total global revenues when systems software,service, maintenance, and leasing are included.3,4 this position reflects, amongother things, u.s. strengths in relatively large and advancedtechnologycomputers. whether this nation retains a vigorous presence in computerrelatedtechnologies depends on how it responds to changing terms of competition in aglobal economy.for the u.s. computer sector, the rapid rate of technological change and thedirection of that change have been key determinants of its competitive position.recognizing that technological leadership does not automatically transfer fromone generation of products to the next, the u.s. computer industry hastraditionally invested heavily in research and development. in a recent study of897overview5keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.firms in over 40 industries, computer manufacturers averaged the highestinvestment as a percent of sales (8.2 percent) for all industries except one,software, which as an industry invested an average of 13.3 percent of salesrevenues into r&d activities.5high rates of technological advance, a hallmark of computer manufacturing,''change the structure of the industry in spans of 10 years or so,'' explainedcolloquium participant richard s. rosenbloom, professor at harvard university'sgraduate school of business administration. and the commercial manifestationsof the change often defy prediction. underscoring his point, rosenbloom notedthat a major 1977 study on the future of the computer industry addressed thedevelopment of microprocessors and largescale integration but did not anticipatethe impact of personal computers.rapid rates of technological change in computer hardware have been used asa competitive advantage by u.s. computer makers. u.s. manufacturers ofworkstations, for example, have managed to stave off foreign competitors in the$6 billion market by rapidly incorporating the results of research into theirproducts. according to the u.s. department of commerce, u.s. makers of"lowend" workstations can now develop and introduce new products in only sixmonths, while "highend" manufacturers have reduced this period to two years.6in so doing, u.s. firms have maintained a twogeneration lead over japanesefirms vying in the workstation market.if trends that are already well established in the computermanufacturingbase continue, however, much, if not all, of the u.s. computer sector may falter.even such valueadded activities as software development, system design andintegration, and aftersale maintenance may be in jeopardy. "falling behind incomputer technology . . . ," said lawrence g. tesler, vice president of advancedtechnology at apple computer, inc., "is a very serious issue. the country got verygalvanized about the idea of falling behind in space exploration 30 years ago, andit's just as important today that we do not fall behind in computer technology."yet, according to tesler, "we are losing our lead in software . . . slowly."jeffrey m. heller, senior vice president and head of the technical servicesgroup at electronic data systems, explained that the individual industries areinterdependent, and so their fates are linked. "our business [services and systemsintegration]," heller said, "cannot exist on a longterm basis successfully withouta healthy domestic industry in both the hardware and software business."meanwhile, political and economic developments worldwide are shapingcomputerrelated markets of tomorrow. in particular, with the integration of theeuropean economic community in 1992, western europe, with a population ofabout 320 million, will surpass the united states as the world's largest market.four decades ago, the u.s. market was eight times larger than the next biggest,providing the nation's manufacturers with a large "home audience" for theiroverview6keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.products. numbering more than 240 million, american consumers still are anattractive market but have already shown an increasingly strong willingness tobuy foreignmade goods. as a result, u.s. firms, no longer assured of dominancein domestic markets, must compete for sales at home and abroad.globalization and competitiveness"technology is a fluid," said john doyle, executive vice president forbusiness and development at hewlett packard. "it will go anywhere that it isneeded."most computerrelated markets have been international from the outset, andthis has influenced policymaking in other countries. by the early 1960s, thenation's infant computer industry was already active in foreign markets, earningabout 25 percent of its total revenues from sales abroad.7 the success of worldleader ibm, in particular, was a major catalyst in the decisions of foreigngovernments to shepherd the development of their fledgling computer industries.in 1966, for example, japan's ministry of international trade and industrydesignated the growth of the domestic computer industry as the number onepriority for future economic growth. not coincidentally, u.s. computer makers'share of the japanese market began to fall, a decline abetted by formal andinformal trade barriers. in the 1960s, sales of ibm computer equipment accountedfor about 40 percent of the japanese market; today, ibm's share is less than 15percent.8 starting in the late 1970s, the japanese share of the u.s. marketincreased dramatically, and within a decade, the united states had a $4 billiondeficit in computer trade with japan.computers are perhaps the best and most tangible evidence of a worldeconomy. generally, machines "made in the united states" are made fromcomponents, subassemblies, and assemblies manufactured by many differentdomestic and foreign firms, including offshore subsidiaries of u.s.basedcompanies. in its most extreme form, this internationalization of the computer hasresulted in entirely foreignbuilt machines that are sold under the label of anamerican company.several colloquium participants referred to cost advantages and otherincentives motivating u.s.headquartered firms to establish manufacturing andother operations overseas. "i'm told that, if i want to build a semiconductorfabricator," explained patrick a. toole, senior vice president and generalmanager of technology products at ibm corporation, "i can get practicallyeverything paid for in some countries, like singapore. you can get longterm taxincentives, you can get training assistance, you can get them to pay for all thetools. . . . that is their national policy with regard to growing and engaging in anemerging industry."although embodying different mechanisms, policies associated withintegration of the european economic community will achieve similar results,pointed out gordon e. moore, chairman of the board at intel corporation, a u.s.semioverview7keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conductor manufacturer. in addition to eliminating national trade barriers betweenthe 12 member countries, "europe '92" will establish rules of origin and localcontent requirements that will require today's exporters of integrated circuits tobuild the devices in europe. "intel avoided for 20 years doing any manufacturingin europe, because it [did] not make sense," moore said. now, the company has"two teams running all over the continent, looking for the place we ought to buildour plants. we export over a half a billion dollars [of products] to europe everyyear. we are going to add a half billion dollars to our trade deficit because of'1992.'""what we are looking at is not 'fortress europe,' but 'magnet europe,'" addedhewlett packard's doyle.c. gordon bell, vice president for research and development at stardentcomputer, inc., a u.s.based, japanesefinanced manufacturer of workstations,suggested that superior manufacturing skills available in foreign nations alsomotivate offshore location of plants. "the bottom linešwhy we manufacture injapanšis, we are trying to transfer manufacturing technology to the unitedstates, and we want quality," bell said.benefiting from the resources and support of overseas environments isneither automatic nor enduring. ibm's toole noted, for example, that a companythat subcontracts too much of its manufacturing to offshore plants "will soon losethe expertise to design and the ability to innovate, because it won't get thefeedback it needs." there are strategic dangers as well. toole said that anunderlying motive of host countries is to acquire the technology, and, he added,"it is not long before a competitor has been developed." moreover, the costadvantages of offshore manufacturing can be transitory. a strong dollar, localwage levels, and the absence of trade barriers are strong incentives for offshoremanufacturing, according to toole, but "none of these factors is within acompany's control."nevertheless, most colloquium participants said they expected offshoreassembly of computer hardware to increase. similarly, u.s.headquarteredcompanies are expected to invest more in foreign r&d. according to preliminaryfigures from the national science foundation (nsf), u.s. firms invested $5billion in overseas research facilities in 1987, up 6.4 percent from the previousyear.9 u.s. computer manufacturers appear to be among the leaders in this trend.for example, ibm has two of its four major research centers overseas, andhewlett packard's fouryearold integrated systems center in bristol, england,accounts for about a third of that firm's central research effort. william j.spencer, vice president and head of the corporate research group at xeroxcorporation, described hewlett packard's move as an "example of a majorcompany taking a strategic view in its r&d investment." at the europeanfacility, hewlett packard can "take advantage of a large cadre of highly talentedpeople and an ability to buildšadd local value to compete effectively in europe,"spencer said.overview8keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tapping foreign talent and technology is essential for firms that do businessin international markets, and many companies see their investments in overseasr&d as a necessary ante for full acceptance in foreign markets, according toobservers. these investments also help counter the socalled "notinventedheresyndrome," the parochial view that all innovations originate in the united states."the postworldwarii era, when it was just automatically assumed that theunited states led the world in everything, is over," nsf deputy directory johnh. moore has said.10 "we need to wake up to the fact that there's a lot of goodwork going on elsewhere in the world. and we need to appreciate that fact andtake advantage of it."investments overseas are also expanding beyond research andmanufacturing, integrating the operations of firms headquartered in the unitedstates more completely into the fabric of foreign economies. as toole of ibmexplained, "it is very important for u.s. computer companies to establish andgrow market share in all of the markets where their products have a value toprospective companies. in the computer industry, it is extremely difficult tosurvive for long in either a market niche or a single geographical areaorientation."what is perhaps confusing to outside observers is how these internationallinkages are blurring the traditional concept of a "u.s. firm." is a firm with itsheadquarters in the united states but with most of its capital assets andemployees overseas truly a u.s. company? how does that firm differ from au.s.located subsidiary of a foreign company? obviously, the answers to thesequestions have important implications for federal policy and for business.colloquium participants grappled with these questions, offering a variety ofopinions of what constitutes a u.s. firm (see box). despite the diversity of views,most agreed that for a company to be considered a u.s. firm, it must contribute tobuilding capital and raising the standard of living in this nation. one way todefine the u.s. benefit is the value added by capital, management, design,engineering, manufacturing, distribution, sales, or service functions performed bypeople from the united states. in a heavily interdependent set of worldwideindustries, a given country's benefit is likely to be measured by the value added,which supports employees, taxes, infrastructure, reinvestment, and ultimately thestandard of living.cooperationcolloquium participants repeatedly addressed the issue of cooperationšcooperation between firms and among universities, government, and industry.cooperative efforts abroad clearly stimulated examination of cooperation, butthere was a strong perception that emerging technological and market challengesare creating a new mandate for cooperation in this country."japanese companies, in particular, have mastered the art of cooperating inorder to compete," explained colloquium participant david j. teece, professoroverview9keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what is a u.s. firm?answers from colloquium participantsa reasonable definition [of a u.s. firm] for many purposes would be onewith significant u.s. ownership and a fair share of technology manufacturingand development in the united states.[a u.s. firm is] one where the majority of the board, top managementand owners take a u.s.centered view of the welfare of the firm (whether itis multinational or not) and can be expected to consider the effects of theiractions on the welfare of the united states first. it is clear we know what aforeign firm is since we keep philips (signetics) out of sematech. u.s.firms are the others.what is meant, will be meant, should be meant are all importantquestions. the current connotation of a u.s. firm is one that is incorporatedin the united states and has a plurality of its business interest in the unitedstates or one whose tax payments are significant to the united states. asuggestion: a u.s. firm is one that is important to u.s. society andcontributes to the wellbeing of the united states.a u.s. firm is a company incorporated and headquartered in the unitedstates, which designs, builds, and sells computers on a worldwide basis.company control is with u.s. nationals. design is within the united states toexploit particular technology skills. financing is increasingly likely to comefrom outside the united states given the large supply of "cheap" dollars.manufacturing may be done outside the united states using manufacturing,manufacturingengineering, and assembly skills and foreign capital.u.s. computer companies (and other large companies) becomeincreasingly "global" in their operation and development/manufacturing,even research efforts, in addition to their traditional worldwide marketing. iwould call a company a "u.s. firm" as opposed to japanese, or german,[for example,] if the majority of ownership is u.s. based and, thus, its profitscontribute to building capital and the standard of living in this country.today's products and services are marbled with internationalinvolvement. a hightech product may well be designed in london, thesoftware developed in france, the parts fabricated in taiwan and the entireproduct assembled in torino for sale in the united states. which is moregerman,overview10keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for exampleša volkswagen produced in rio, or a ford made instuttgart? is the nobel prize awarded to a pair of swiss scientists workingfor an american company in lucerne a source of pride for switzerland, orfor the united states? or both? in today's global marketplace, ownership isoften irrelevant as a factor in a company's success. what really matters arethe kinds of contributions a firm can make to the localities where it resides.[i]n the rapid internationalization of business it is also important to ask,"what is the united states?" it is a country almost entirely populated bypeople who came from around the world to better their life. with the comingdecline in work force size and existing deficiencies in u.s. education, weshould be encouraging immigration of educated people from all countries.it is no longer meaningful to talk of u.s. firms. it may be somewhatmore meaningful to talk of "u.s.based firms," if their headquarters arelocated in the united states, and at least half of their business is conductedthere. the fact that the classic distinctions between domestic and foreignfirms has all but disappeared raises important policy questions. policiesthat are aimed to help "u.s. firms" can no longer be easily implemented.accordingly, it is probably necessary to think about policies in terms of theirimpact on u.s. economic activity, rather than on u.s. firms.of business administration and director of the center for research onmanagement at the university of california, berkeley. teece continued, "therehas been, and there remains, a recognition that by acting together, sometimes withgovernment assistancešbut without governmental barriersšjapanese firms cando better than they might by competing alone. u.s. firms must also recognizethat cooperation can be used to catch up with competitors, stay ahead ofcompetitors, and respond to foreign industrial policies."sometimes called "alliance capitalism," japan's efforts have inspiredcooperative projects in many nations, including the united states. someobservers, like teece, would argue that japan's success makes cooperation analmost mandatory condition for longterm survival in global markets. twocorollaries follow from this argument. first, u.s. firms and the federalgovernment must monitor the progress of the growing number of cooperativer&d projects under way overseas. second, the government must be vigilantabout trade barriers and other protectionist measures that other nations may taketo nurture the growth of their computer industries.many colloquium participants questioned whether some of the relativelyoverview11keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recent foreign cooperative research efforts, such as japan's fifthgenerationcomputer project, would translate into commercial successes for participatingfirms. "no doubt exists whatsoever regarding the seriousness behind theseefforts," said sam r. willcoxon, president of at&t business markets group."whether they're a challenge remains to be seen."11collective industrial research projects in the u.s. computer sector are arecent development. their formation was shaped by widening recognition that thecomplexity, scale, and risk of advanced computerrelated technologiesincreasingly demand more resources than individual firms, even market leaders,can afford. industry representatives at the colloquium commented most onsematech, the semiconductormanufacturing technology consortium jointlyfunded by private industry and the department of defense. they expressedoptimism, but they noted that it was premature to judge the performance of thisand other cooperative efforts in the computer sector. regarding such efforts ingeneral, gordon bell of stardent computer noted that cooperative researchprojects attract and sustain scientific and engineering talent.while joint r&d projects have a longer history in this country than istypically recognized, they represent only one realization of the cooperative linksthat must extend horizontally and vertically from individual firms, according toibm's toole. "we must improve cooperation at levels within companiesšbetween functions such as marketing, manufacturing, development, andresearch," toole said. relationships must also be developed with suppliers,customers, and, "more importantly these days, competitors." toole also extendedhis web of industrial cooperation to encompass universities and governmentagencies."with the fierce competition we face throughout the world, we can nolonger cling to traditional . . . armslength, businessasusual dealings," toolesaid. "we must find new ways and new areas in which to cooperate at all levels."the prospects for doing this may be poor; several speakers suggested that u.s.firms, grounded in the ideals of free enterprise and competition, still do not knowhow to cooperate.standardizationstandardization, the process of specifying technical requirements forcomputer hardware, software, and networking, has emerged as a strategiccompetitive issue. the marketshaping power of standards in the computer sectorwas first demonstrated 25 years ago. in 1964, ibm firmly entrenched itself as theworld's leading computer manufacturer by establishing its own internal standardfor computer components and peripherals, which was showcased in its 360system of compatible computers. software developed for one computer model inthe family would run on any other machine in the ibm product line. thiscompatibility assured ibm's customers that all of their computer equipmentoverview12keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.would perform in essentially the same manner and that their hardware andsoftware would not become obsolete with the next series of new productintroductions.for ibm, standardization permitted the company to spread its r&d costsover a wide array of products that served a largevolume market. by virtue ofibm's large market share, the company's proprietary standard became theindustry standard. but because ibm controlled the standard, it could makechanges, making it difficult for competitors to overtake the industry leader.today, with the proliferation of computing equipment and applications,there is a wellaccepted need to develop standards that attain at least a certainlevel of compatibility and connectivity among the machines of differentmanufacturers. indeed, more than 1,000 standards pertaining to computerrelatedtechnology have either been adopted or are under consideration by national andinternational standardssetting bodies.12computerrelated firms throughout the world are keenly interested in thedevelopment of these nonproprietary standards, with many trying to influence theoutcome of the decisions. some firms (e.g., sun microsystems), for example,seek to have their own standards adopted by the entire industry. but debate is notlimited to specific standards; it surrounds the entire issue of standardization.colloquium participants also engaged in the debate. at issue is where to drawthe line between necessary standardization and excessive standardization.virtually all agreed that standards are necessary for data storage and exchangeand for communication. beyond that pointšat the level of operating systems andhardware elementsšthe consensus deteriorated. the relevant issues will bediscussed in greater detail in each of the following chapters; the costs andbenefits from the manufacturer's perspective will be summarized only brieflyhere.standardization expands markets and lowers costs. moreover, by providingusers with a greater array of compatible machines from which to choose, itincreases competition. on the negative side, standardization, particularly if it isdone too early in a technology's evolution, can freeze the technology at a"primitive stage," said apple computer's tesler. in addition, tesler and othersnoted that standardization can eliminate innovation as a prerequisite for entry intocomputer markets, thus placing greater emphasis on highvolume, lowcostproductionša strength of asian competitors. it also places a premium onprotecting the intellectual property embodied in whatever innovative elements arepresent. adequate safeguards (e.g., patents or copyrights) must be maintained andenforced, especially internationally, to ensure that the innovator receivesappropriate return on investment.13given the global push for standardization, all colloquium participantsagreed, the issue cannot be ignored. u.s. firms, they said, must confront thequestion of what level of standardization is best, or they risk having the mattersettled by the competition.overview13keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the government roleperhaps the biggest gap in cooperation to bridge is the one betweengovernment and industry. here, too, the nature of the relationship remains to bedefined, even though the need for more constructive links between the two hasbeen emphasized in nearly every one of the numerous studies that have examinedthe flagging competitiveness of american industry.ironically, the u.s. computer sector is a creature of governmentindustrycooperation, motivated by a strategic interest, namely, national security. duringand after world war ii, the department of defense funded well over half of theresearch that resulted in the first electronic computers, and it supported much ofthe work that led to subsequent refinements and innovations that made themachines commercial products. as kenneth flamm has noted, only 4 of the 12major u.s. producers of digital computers in 1956 exist today.14 yet thetechnical roots of many of today's firms, old and new, he writes, "can be traced toexperience accumulated in the pioneering days of computing" when almost allr&d was sponsored by the nation's military services. a congressional committeeestimated that in 1959, 85 percent of electronics r&d in the united states wasfunded by the federal government.15 by 1986 federal support had slipped,accounting for less than 30 percent of the funding for u.s. electronics r&d. 16more than half of ibm's r&d during the 1950s was conducted undergovernment contract, and even after the commercialization of computers hadbegun, over a third was governmentsupported in 1963.17the u.s. government's influence extends over many of the importanttechnological developments in computer hardware and software, sometimescreating marketing niches effectively exploited by ibm's u.s.based competitors.for example, timesharing, a product of work supported by what is now known asthe defense advanced research projects agency, was a boon to the digitalequipment corporation, whose pdp6 computer was the first commerciallyavailable machine to offer the feature. today the federal government, primarilythrough the department of defense, continues to fund much of the basic researchin computer science and engineering, such as studies of gallium arsenide andother nonsilicon semiconducting materials. some of today's leadingedgecomputing technologiesšamong them, parallel processing and artificialintelligencešare outgrowths of militarysupported projects. this situationreflects the strong dependence of u.s. national security on advanced technology.although the precedent of cooperation between the government and thecomputer sector was established long ago, and the government continues to fundbasic research important to the sector, the relationship that has evolved is notcommensurate with changing global conditions. indeed, many colloquiumspeakers observed that the cornerstone of this relationshipšmilitary sponsorshipof computerrelated r&dšis much weaker than it was two or threeoverview14keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.decades ago, while at the same time it is not sufficiently complemented bycivilian support."in the absence of a national appreciation of the developing computer role,"said alan j. perlis, professor of computer science at yale university, "the supportby the military of computer development has been essential and farsighted." yetperlis and others noted the divergence of the military's needs and interestsšsuchas "radiation hardening" of electronic devicesšfrom those of the marketplace.''there has been too little effect on our economy, our society, our industry, andour quality," perlis said. military sponsorship tends to channel "computerdevelopment in far too narrow a way and prevents our society from adequatelyexploiting its potential.''in addition, factors crucial to success in commercial markets are not oftenhigh priorities in the development of products for the military. "there is a problemwith using military funding to drive the direction of computer innovation," saidjames h. morris, professor of computer science at carnegie mellon university."people who work on such projects are forcefed with money and never get afeeling for costs or markets."further skewing the governmentindustry relationship is the fragmentedregulatory and policymaking structure of the federal government. in the executivebranch, as many as 12 federal agencies help shape and carry out policies thatinfluence the activities of firms in the u.s. computer sector. in congress, 9 of the13 appropriations subcommittees are involved in determining the research budgetand specific allocations.18 this fragmentation and the lack of a coherentperspective on the cumulative effect of actions taken by widely dispersed unitswithin the federal bureaucracy pose serious obstacles to achieving thecoordination and cooperation that colloquium participants, as well as the councilon competitiveness and other groups, argue is needed."those who are likely to be in a position to implement any remedies," saidrobert m. white, president of the national academy of engineering, "are foundin many different organizations spread across the federal government and privateindustry. they deal in relative isolation with many separate and relative issueswhether in trade policy, tax policy, procurement policy, employment and trainingprograms, [or] research support. until there is a meaningful interaction, it will bedifficult to fashion a nationally coherent or coordinated response to the challengethat is now facing the u.s. computer sector."these factors may contribute to the perception, expressed by xerox'sspencer, that "cooperation between government and industry [seems like] anunnatural act. it seems so difficult for us to do."by contrast, broadbased cooperation between government and industry hasbeen a boon to the computer sectors of other nations. "foreign industrial policy isaffecting the outcomes in american markets all the time," said teece of theuniversity of california, berkeley. to assume that market and price mechanismsguide firms to pursue individual optima that result in a maximum benefitoverview15keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for the nationšan assumption that, teece said, "informs public policy in thisnation today"šis to ignore other important factors at work, including actions offoreign governments.some colloquium participants suggested that the nation has a governmentdirected industrial policy, in the form of a composite of fragmented decisions inareas ranging from defense spending and overall government procurement toantitrust laws. moreover, several studies suggest that the success of strategicallychosen industrial sectors in nations with such policies stems from factors otherthan direct government intervention.19while it can be difficult to sort out the nature and impact of governmentactions in the united states as well as abroad, the computer sector must not be apassive observer in the policymaking process. clyde v. prestowitz, jr., principaladviser on japan affairs to the u.s. secretary of commerce from 1983 to 1986,said firms should be making greater efforts to present their views and suggestionsto congress and federal agencies. patrick toole of ibm noted, "we have to do itnot only by meetings like this, but also by very strong industry associations.""the main thing that makes the computer industry different from otherindustries is that the rapid change of the technology far exceeds thepolicymakers' ability to change," argued heller of electronic data systems. hesuggested that this rigidity is the legacy of institutions shaped by concepts of law,education, work, and accounting that evolved during the industrial age. cautionedheller, "the heavily entrenched, industrial structural model works poorly in aservice society and worse in an informationbased world."notes1. u.s. department of commerce. "computer equipment and software," 1989u.s. industrial outlook (washington, d.c., 1989); 1989 world market estimateprovided via personal communication from a department of commerce analyst.2. quantitative estimates within the computer sector are particularly sensitive todefinitions and methodologies. comparisons should be made with caution asdifferent estimates seldom, if ever, measure the same market with the samemethodology. the numbers used in this report are generally as reported by thedepartment of commerce, supplemented where appropriate by industry and tradegroup data.3. gartner group, inc., stanford, ct, 1989.4. cbema. information technology industry global market analysis, industrymarketing statistics committee, washington, d.c., 1989.5. business week: innovation in america, october, 1989, pp. 177228.6. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, p. 2611.7. flamm, kenneth. creating the computer (washington, d.c.: brookingsinstitution, 1988), p. 101.8. dertouzos, michael l., richard k. lester, and robert m. solow, mitcommission on industrial productivity. made in america: regaining theproductive edge (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1989), pp. 262263.notes16keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9. buderi, robert. "u.s. companies hike investment in foreign r&d," thescientist, may 29, 1989, p. 1.10. buderi, the scientist, 1989, pp. 1, 6.11. one that bears watching, according to stardent's bell, is japan's sigmaproject (see chapter 3 of this report).12. gantz, john. "standards: what they are. what they aren't," networkingmanagement, may, 1989, p. 23.13. a computer science and technology board report on issues in the protectionof intellectual property in software is anticipated in mid1990.14. kenneth flamm, creating the computer, 1988, p. 81.15. kenneth flamm, creating the computer, 1988, p. 16.16. american electronics association, 1989, as reported in the competitivestatus of the u.s. electronics industry sector, u.s. department of commerce,1989 (draft version).17. american electronics association, in the competitive status of the u.s.electronics industry sector, 1989, p. 94.18. council on competitiveness. picking up the pace: the commercialchallenge to american innovation (washington, d.c., 1988).19. "even in japan and france, countries where the state is reputed to shape theindustrial structure in accordance with some national strategic vision," reportedthe mit commission on industrial productivity, "some of the most recentresearch is far more skeptical about the actual influence of state policy and moreinclined to emphasize the role of private actors." (dertouzos et al., made inamerica, 1989, p. 109).notes17keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2hardwarethe u.s. computer hardware industry, a diverse collection of small and largefirms, is composed of three major and integrally related industries:semiconductor manufacturing equipment producers, semiconductormanufacturers, and manufacturers of computers ranging from personal andportable systems to supercomputers and associated peripheral equipment. the$4.6 billion u.s. semiconductormanufacturingequipment industry makes thetoolsšwaferprocessing, testing, and assembly equipmentšthat semiconductormanufacturers use to fabricate integrated circuits and related electronic devices,the source of revenues totaling $24 billion in 1988.1 in turn, 40 percent of allsemiconductors sold in the united states are bought by domestic computermanufacturers, who, according to the department of commerce, were estimatedto have sold $70 billion worth of computing equipment in 1989.2 perhaps doublethat amount may have been earned by domestic manufacturers in 1989 if systemssoftware, service, maintenance, and leasing revenues are included, according toan industry trade group.3 each of these industries is, in turn, divided intosegments defined by the products they make and sell. colloquium participants didnot systematically survey the hardware industry, but rather drew on theirexperiences to comment on what they saw as critical issues and trends.serious cracks have developed in the chainlike relationship between theseimportant domestic industries. weakest in the chain is the semiconductorindustry, which at the start of this decade held commanding leads in worldmarkets for virtually all types of integrated circuits. the japanese pulled evenwith, and then surpassed, the approximately 250 u.s. merchant semiconductormanuhardware18keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.facturers in percentage of world sales beginning in 1985. by 1988 japanesemanufacturers held a commanding 48 percent of the world market, whereas theworld share for u.s. firms had fallen to 37 percent. 4observers quoted in the media and at congressional hearings have describedthe decline as ruinous, and evidence from the domestic industries that aresuppliers and clients of the u.s. semiconductor producers suggests that thedescription is apt. the position of the u.s. semiconductormanufacturingequipment industry has fallen precipitously relative to that of japaneseequipment makers. u.s. firms still claim more than half of the $7 billion worldmarket, but their japanese counterparts now lead in sales of lithographyequipment (for imparting circuit designs on silicon wafers) and other criticallyimportant tools.5 some steps have been taken to arrest this decline, primarilythrough the formation of the sematech consortium. more recently, several ofthe computer industry's leading hardware manufacturers have joined together inan ambitious effort to establish another major domestic supply of stateoftheartdynamic random access memory (dram) chips. but this effort has only justbegun, and its success is by no means certain. as it stands now, however, thenearly complete exit of u.s. merchant semiconductor suppliers from the marketfor dram chipsšby far the world's largest market for semiconductorsšweakens prospects for the equipment industry.computer manufacturers have felt the demise of u.s. dram productionfrom the client end. forced to buy the memory chips from japanese producers,which account for 90 percent of the world dram market, most u.s. computermakers faced serious shortages in 1988. some were forced to delay introductionsof new products and to cut production. 6 consumers also felt the pinch as risingdram prices translated into a 15 percent increase in the cost of some computermodels. (ibm, which produces dram chips for use in its products, was lessaffected by the shortage.) in contrast, japanese computer manufacturers, largeintegrated firms that produce semiconductors for their own diversified line ofproducts and sell the rest on the world markets, avoided the bottleneck andcontinued to increase their relative share of international sales of computers.the ripplelike effects and the contributing causes of what is now called the"dram fiasco" are instructive, and they will be discussed in greater detailbelow. colloquium participants suggested that other segments of the hardwareindustry may experience comparable crises during the 1990s.a comment by gordon moore of intel, the u.s. firm that invented the drambut no longer makes the chip, underscores the gravity that many ascribe to thesituation. "if you take the whole sequence of things," moore said, "in the end weare all going to be dead, and the end may be nearer than we think because thewhole structure necessary to remain competitive is, frankly, getting out of ourcontrolšincreasingly."hardware19keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductorsinvented in the united states in 1959, the integrated circuit launched whatmany call the computer revolution, and a seemingly endless series of advancesin device technology have sustained the revolution. of the hundredthousandfoldimprovement in computer performance since the 1950s (measured as a functionof the cost of informationprocessing capacity), the greatest share stems frominnovations in component devices (e.g., central processing units and internalmemory) built from integrated circuits. these devices are often referred to as"semiconductors," a reference to the base materials from which they are made.for 20 years after the invention of the integrated circuit, u.s. firms' masteryof semiconductor technology translated into preeminence in world markets, andthe rapidity of innovation was viewed as perpetuating the industry's dominance.in recent years, however, the relative importance of innovation as a competitiveadvantage has waned, and the value of manufacturing efficiency has risen, settingthe stage for the u.s. industry's decline."[t]o a very great degree, the united states arena functions as a kind ofpublic service organization for worldwide industry," said charles ferguson,postdoctoral associate at the massachusetts institute of technology's center fortechnology policy and industrial development. "we innovate and people thankus for the innovations that we develop and then incorporate them into theircommercial products, which they then sell, often to us."the "most spectacular and visible symptom" of this situation, according toferguson, is the nearly complete exodus of u.s. merchant semiconductormanufacturers (firms that produce electronic devices for sale to other companies)from dram markets. indeed, ferguson and many others at the colloquiumsuggested that this episode embodies the nature of the challenge confronting allof the interdependent segments of the hardware industry.the "dram fiasco"intel's moore believes that japan's rise in dram manufacturing began whenthe evolution of the technology shifted from a series of rapid, seemingly randomadvances to a predictable course. in the early 1970s, theory and practicedemonstrated that memory capacity would quadruple about every three years,from 1 kilobit, to 4 kilobits, to 16 kilobits, and so on. japan established a series ofprograms aimed at developing worldcompetitive capacity for manufacturing64kilobit drams, but, aided by a booming market for memory chips during thelate 1970s and early 1980s, that nation's firms beat the timetable. japanesesemiconductor manufacturers capitalized on the shortage to achieve a significantshare of the market for 16kilobit drams."beyond that," moore said, "they went to their usual strategy of overinvesthardware20keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ment," adding considerably to japan's drammanufacturing capacity. the firmsthen "engaged in dumping, selling significantly below their total cost," to sell theexcess product that resulted from the overinvestment in capacity.in the mid1980s, demand for semiconductors dropped, triggering anindustrywide recession and exacerbating the pricereducing effects of excessdram capacity. during that period, according to moore, the japanese firmsdemonstrated another attribute to go along with their manufacturing prowessša"tremendous tolerance for pain."during the dram glut of the mid1980s, the japanese industry lost anestimated $4 billion, about double the loss sustained by u.s. manufacturers."clearly, they won," moore said. "they came out with a 90 percent market sharein drams, and we abandoned the business." according to mit's ferguson, "in1986, the world dram market was $1.5 billion. this year [1989], it is probablygoing to be $10 billion"šapproximately a sixfold increase.today the united states is home to three merchant manufacturers ofdramsšmotorola, micron technologies, and texas instruments (whichmanufactures most of its components abroad)šand most observers believe thecontinued existence of the firms in this market is tenuous. with the exception ofibm, which has its own drammanufacturing facility in burlington, vermont,u.s. computer makers are forced to shop overseas for much of their neededsupply of memory chips.why did u.s. merchant semiconductor manufacturers choose to exit fromthe dram market? moore's recounting of the factors underlying intel's decisionnot to compete is illustrative.by mid1985, intel had completed the design of a "good 1megabit dram"and had worked out the manufacturing process, moore said. instead of proceedingto the massmanufacturing stage, the company chose to forego making the $400million investment in equipment required to compete for about a 10 percent shareof the world market. according to moore, the company could not afford theinvestment and decided to leave the market, opting to concentrate on logiccircuits and erasable programmable readonly memories (eproms). "i think hadwe made the dram investment at that time," moore said, "we would be a muchweaker company today."today it is highly unlikely that an individual u.s. semiconductor firm wouldopt to enter the market and help bolster domestic production, according to mooreand others at the colloquium. in addition to japan, south korea and other asiannations, as well as western european countries, are building plants that will addgreatly to world drammanufacturing capacity."for a company to go into a business like that with the idea of makingmoney," moore said, "frankly seems like a real folly. it is going to requiresomething more than the usual market motivations to get a significant reentry inthe united states."hardware21keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free market economics would appear to suggest that the united states doesnot need to manufacture drams, given that other countries appear to do so morecheaply and that the world semiconductor industry seems destined for anotherglut of memory chips. computer makers and other customers can purchase theirchips from overseas suppliers, and u.s. semiconductor producers can devotetheir resources to products with higher profit margins.while acknowledging that this perspective is embodied in the tacticalthinking of individual firms, many colloquium participants pointed out that thecollective result of these tactical decisions can be sectorwide harm. the nearlycomplete loss of the dram market, they maintained, inflicted strategic damageon the entire hardware industry, and perhaps the entire u.s. computer sector.why? an answer is that drams are technology drivers. although theirdesigns are far less sophisticated than those for logic devices, drams have thedensest circuitry of any integrated circuit: the same standardcell unit may berepeated millions of times on a single chip. thus drams are the commercial testbed for tools and methods that achieve everfiner line widths. once perfected andmastered, this manufacturing technology allows chip makers to squeeze more andsmaller transistors and other subcomponents onto their microprocessor chips, gatearrays, and other types of integrated circuitsšthe new devices that are the basisfor the next round of improvements in computer equipment.consequently, in all but abandoning dram production, u.s. merchantsemiconductor manufacturers lost the primary means for "addressing the kind ofmanufacturing issues that we have not done as well as the japanese," moore said.moreover, the developers of the tools needed to correct these manufacturingweaknesses are suffering from the tandem effects of the loss of a major domesticmarket and the growing prowess of their competitors. hewlett packard's doylereported, for example, that a japanese semiconductor company executive told himthat 70 percent of the equipment in the firm's plant for making 1megabitdrams had come from u.s. suppliers. in the company's facility for making thenext generation of memory chipsš4megabit dramsšonly 30 percent of theequipment had come from the united states."it is an extremely disturbing situation," said mit's ferguson. "if you are anamerican semiconductor producer, you have to ask yourself how deeply in yourheart of hearts do you really trust canon, nikon, and advantest. the answercannot be terribly comforting." nearly a quarter of advantest, the world's largestmaker of digital semiconductor test equipment, is owned by fujitsu, a japaneseconglomerate that makes semiconductors, computers, and consumer electronicsgoods.even a company as large as ibm, which has a tradition of meeting many ofits needs internally, is feeling the effects, finding that it must become more selfdependent than it might otherwise prefer. "we use the best of the u.s.infrastructure, which, unfortunately, is not enough," said toole. "we have tosupplement what is available in tools and materials by our own developmentswithin the company."hardware22keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the dram situation is emblematic of what many have characterized as the"hollowing out" of u.s. industry, the loss of the manufacturing infrastructure thatsupports many sectors of the economy.7 the computer sector and the federalgovernment have recognized this problem, and they have combined theirresources to form the sematech consortium, aimed at developing theadvanced manufacturing technology needed for fabricating 4megabit dramsand the next generation of logic circuits.even if sematech meets all expectations, its success may notreinvigorate the semiconductor and semiconductormanufacturingequipmentindustries. in the area of drams, for example, it is unlikely that an individualfirm will take the risk and make the capital investment required to achieve amajor presence in dram markets.as a result, moore and others said, the strategic commitment that buildingsuch a facility would require will not be forthcoming without external incentivesor a means of distributing the inherent risk. interestingly, shortly after thecolloquium seven hardware manufacturersšintel, ibm, hewlett packard, digitalequipment corporation, national semiconductor, advanced micro devices, andlsi logicšannounced their intention to build a joint manufacturing facility forproducing memory chips. called u.s. memories, inc., the facility would requireabout $1 billion in capital, half of it to be provided by the seven founding firmsand by additional partner firms that are being sought. the rest would be raisedthrough debt financing and other means. although business details have not beenmade public, initial plans called for production of 4megabit dramsšbased on adesign licensed from ibmšto begin in 1991. however, less than five monthslater, observers questioned the future of u.s. memories after ibm announced itwould license some 4megabit dram technology to micron and because of theabsence of commitments by other major u.s. computer manufacturers.8 whileany one venture must be evaluated on its merits, these circumstances and theshadow they cast on u.s. memories once again called into question u.s.industry's capacity for sustaining a strategic, cooperative effort.another means to help secure the still fragile position of u.s. semiconductormanufacturers, moore and others noted, would be to subsidize memorychipproduction to assure adequate supplies. like federal subsidies for agriculturalproducts, a dram subsidy would set a guaranteed minimum price for u.s.madechips.beyond dramsthe u.s. semiconductor industry continues to maintain significant leads inmicroprocessors and other advanced areas of integrated circuit technology. inaddition, colloquium participants predicted that the industry would continue to bethe source of many of the innovations that drive the evolution of semiconductorsand the products that use them, including computers. participants werehardware23keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.far less certain, however, about the marketing advantages that would convey withinnovation, given the rapid diffusion of technology and the demonstratedmanufacturing strengths of japanese firms and other asian nations."we had as big an advantage in drams [as] we now have inmicroprocessors," said moore. "i think it is a matter of time until the competitionis just as strong there. we cannot keep moving to the edge and living there veryeffectively." signs of this progression are already evident, particularly in marketsfor applicationspecific integrated circuits. drammanufacturing capabilities aredirectly transferable to these fully or partially customized electronic devices, andjapanese firms now control about 40 percent of this highgrowth market.9speeding the competition's catchup efforts, according to several colloquiumparticipants, are technologylicensing agreements that, while advantageous toindividual firms, are strategically damaging to the hardware industry. among thetechnologies transferred to japanese semiconductor manufacturers in recentlicensing agreements are two advanced microprocessor designs based on reducedinstruction set computing (risc) architecture. licensing payments can alleviateindividual firms' cashflow problems, of particular concern to small startupfirms. also, by accelerating the diffusion of a new technology, licensing canexpand the relevant market. however, licensing can also work like a trojanhorse: often, foreign licensees emerge as the top competitors in licensors'markets.a particularly troubling aspect of the increase in licensing to foreign firms isthat it reflects a relative dearth of licensing and other strategic alliances within theunited states. colloquium participants noted that large u.s. firms in the industryare often approached for financing from innovative startup firms. but nearly asoften, those large firms are not responsive, forcing the startup company to lookto the queue of foreign investors who come to the united states to shop forpromising new technology developed by entrepreneurial companies. (seechapter 5 for a discussion of this phenomenon.)computer equipmentglobal competitive factors shaping the semiconductor industry are alsoinfluencing the world computer industry. before the late 1970s, u.s. computerimports were virtually nonexistent; in 1988, sales of foreignmade computers andrelated equipment captured 39 percent of the $51 billion u.s. market.10 as is thecase for semiconductors, u.s. firms hold the dominant position in markets fortechnologically advanced products, such as supercomputers,superminicomputers, workstations, and highperformance machines with newprocessing architectures. but in the industry's largest unitvolume market,personal computers, foreign competitors account for more than 40 percent ofworldwide sales, which are expected to total $25 billion in 1989.11 whetherpersonal computers become the computer manufacturing industry's equivalent ofthe dramhardware24keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may well be determined by the manufacturing performance and strategic actionstaken by u.s. firms during the 1990s.the similarities between the competitive factors shaping the semiconductorand computer industries do not end there, however. the foremost foreigncompetitors in computer markets include many of the same japanese firms thatnow account for more than about half of the worldwide sales of semiconductors.not coincidentally, these firms have not experienced the same dram shortagesthat have beset many u.s. computer manufacturers.''there is a great deal of evidence," said mit's ferguson, "that the memorymarket is subject to strategic controlšwhether coordinated or not is unclear. . . .it is subject to strategic control by the collection of vertically integrated japaneseelectronics firms that dominate not only japanese semiconductor production, butalso japanese computer, telecommunications equipment, and, to some extent,consumer electronics production. what is interesting about that, i think, is thestriking degree to which this situation demonstrates the continuing ability ofjapanese firms to both cooperate and compete." similar trends are emergingamong the growing computer sectors of other asian countries, including taiwanand south korea, which are gaining a growing share of the personal computermarket.like the pattern of competition facing u.s. semiconductor makers, thetechnological trends steering the evolution of the computer industry also arecoming into view. these trends will promote significant changes in industrystructure. most significant, perhaps, is the commoditization of computers,particularly at the low end of the product spectrum.commoditizationwhereas individual companies may now manufacture thousands or severalhundred thousands of machines in a year, soon the annual production levels of"each competitive, successful firm" will exceed millions of units, fergusonpredicted. "as a consequence, the ability to manufacture in very large volumes,the ability to design products rapidly, to insert them into production rapidly, tohave a worldwide sourcing, manufacturing, and distribution network [willbecome] ever more important. that is an area in which . . . the united states isnot doing very well."c. gordon bell of stardent computer outlined the technological factorsunderlying this trend. according to bell, all of the components that will be usedin the commercially available machines in the year 2000 are now underdevelopment. his reading of the field suggests that personal computers at thestart of the next century will be as powerful as today's supercomputers (whilesupercomputers of the day will themselves be far more powerful). speeding thistransition will be the alreadyvisible movement to distributed computingenvironments, in which users can simultaneously exploit the resources andhardware25keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.applications not only of their local machines but also of any number of computersthat are accessible through a network. both trends will increase demand forsmaller computer systems, driving down their price and stimulating supply.according to bell, while the performance of all levels of computers(measured by the standard metric of millions of instructions per second, or mips)has been increasing at doubledigit rates since the 1960s, the processingcapabilities of microcomputers have been increasing at the astounding rate ofabout 40 percent annually, as compared with approximately 14 percent forminicomputers and mainframes. with the anticipated widespread use of risctechnology in microcomputers, performance of what traditionally has been theindustry's lowend offerings will increase at an annual rate of 70 percent.bell did not foresee the extinction of highend markets, such as for scientificuses and other computationintensive tasks. but he raised questions about howdemand for computers with different levels of performance will change. willmany people who require supercomputers today find that the powerful personalcomputers of tomorrowšoperating alone or in combination with othersšmeettheir needs? will new applications and new approaches to problems emerge thatcannot even be addressed with today's most powerful machines? answers to theseand other questions will determine the size, structure, and profitability of thecomputer industry in the future. bell suggested that change will be relativelyradical and that the vast majority of computers for sale at the beginning of thenext century will resemble consumer electronics goods and will be produced insimilar volumes.technological convergence of industriesthe comparison of computers to consumer commodities was also made byferguson, who foresaw similarities that went beyond volumes of production.according to the mit researcher, a common technology base of "digital optics,digital microelectronics, and digital magnetics"šthe technology areas that havebeen the wellspring of advances in computer and telecommunications equipmentšare "going to be used in a wide spectrum of products." included in this categoryof products, by ferguson's accounting, are digital facsimile machines, printers,highdefinition televisions, and home communications and information systems.early commercial versions of these items are already available; other products areunder development.an example of this new trend toward horizontal integration in design andproduction is canon, a japanese firm. known to most american consumers as amanufacturer of cameras, canon also makes laser printers, photocopiers, andphotolithography equipment. with this diversification into new product lines,which exploit the same optical and electronic technologies, the company'srevenues have increased tenfoldšto $10 billionšduring the last 10 years,ferguson said.while ibm has a broad product range, the u.s. computerhardware industryhardware26keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overall is not characterized by extensive horizontal integration. moreover, thevirtually complete loss of the nation's consumer electronics industry makes itdifficult for u.s. companies to exploit the converging technology base and theproduction economies of scope it implies and to diversify into many productlines.manufacturingboth commoditization and convergence to a common technology base makemanufacturing efficiency and flexibility essential for competing in domestic andglobal markets. "this scenario is manufacturingand semiconductorintense and,hence, subject to intense competition in areas in which we perform poorly," saidbell, adding later that the nation's general "lack of manufacturing ability" is theprimary source of the hardware industry's declining competitiveness. accordingto ferguson, ''industries already are making a transition to a massproduced,lowunitcost structure. those industries are increasingly dominated by asianfirms."ferguson predicted that u.s. manufacturing weaknesses will become anincreasingly costly liability as manufacturing capabilities become the primary"determinant of longrun competitive success" in computer manufacturing andthe growing cluster of related industries. moreover, the continuingšand, somewould say, acceleratingšerosion in the upstream industries that supplymaterials, manufacturing equipment, displays, and electronic components willhandicap u.s. computer manufacturers' abilities to develop the necessary level ofmanufacturing proficiency."we have to find ways to improve and to protect our fragile manufacturingbase," ibm's toole said. "we are at a huge disadvantage because of the virtualabsence of consumer electronics."as pointed out in several studies, japanese firms have achieved higherquality products at lower cost through continuous improvement in processing.incremental improvements, accomplished by fostering the translation ofinnovations into new products, can help a firm maintain a competitive advantage.a telling indicator of the different manufacturing perspectives of japanese andamerican firms is their spending patterns. citing a study by edwin mansfield,doyle of hewlett packard noted that the average u.s. company spends 70percent of its r&d budget on product development and only 30 percent on themanufacturing process. in the average japanese firm, the percentages andpriorities are reversed.standardizationhardly separate from the industryshaping trends described above, theinternational push for standardization (affecting computer hardware, software,and data communications) is a catalyst in each hardware industry. althoughcarriedhardware27keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.out by domestic and international standardssetting bodies, the push is promptedby users seeking compatibility and interconnection among the machines ofdifferent manufacturers. companies may also advocate standardization if aparticular set of standards improves their competitive position or at leastdiminishes the advantages of the market leaders. two examples, using ibmproducts, illustrate how standardization can be a boon or a bane to an individualcompany. based on internally developed standards, the 360 system family ofcompatible computers cemented ibm's leadership position in the largeinternational market for mainframes. the company's proprietary control of whatbecame a de facto industry standard gave it a clear advantage, and othercomputer manufacturers directed their attention to market niches not filled byibm mainframes.ibm chose a different tack when it made its relatively late but hurried entryinto the personal computer market, revealing its microcomputer architecture tothe rest of the industry and purchasing the machine's operating system from anoutside vendor. the openness of the company's standard was effective inpromoting the development of software and peripherals by other firms, assuring,as ibm intended, that customers had ample support. the strategy made the ibmpc a marketing success. but within about five years after the computer wasintroduced, cheaper pc "clones," most assembled in the far east, began to claimsignificant shares of the market, and they continue to do so. u.s. sales ofimported clones in 1988 were up 50 percent over the previous year.12 toconfound clone manufacturers, ibm has introduced a new family of personalcomputers (the personal system/2 series) with proprietary features.while ibm was reasserting more proprietary control over its line ofpersonal microcomputers, sun microsystems was exhibiting yet another approachto standardization, actively encouraging foreign and domestic firms to adopt itssparc microprocessor. some observers predict that sun is destined to repeatibm's experience with its personal computer, but sun chief executive scottmcnealy espouses what others view as a pragmatic view of the drive forstandardization. "i don't believe the world can go back to proprietary systems,"mcnealy said after his company licensed two taiwanese firms to manufacturepersonal computers based on sun's microprocessor design.13 sun is a staunchadvocate of standardization, and through its licensing agreements with foreignand domestic firms, it is maneuvering to have its system adopted as the industrystandard, thereby creating a relatively highvolume market.critics of the openarchitecture stance taken by sun and other u.s.basedcompanies argue that these firms have made it easier for foreign competitors toperfect the technology, speeding their entry into highend computer markets nowdominated by u.s. firms. although colloquium participants did not agree on thepoint at which standardization handicaps innovation, most agreed that userdemand for increased compatibility among the machines of different vendors andfor a greater choice of applications will result in more hardware standards. mostalso agreed that as the number of software and hardware featureshardware28keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shared by different vendors increases, the importance of manufacturing efficiencyincreases, and more firms may enter computer markets, competing on the basis ofcost and product quality rather than innovation. given the nation's manufacturingweaknesses, ibm's toole said, "standardization will probably hurt both thetechnology and systems competitiveness of the united states, as it moves thecontest to the area of japan's greatest strengths."notes1. u.s. department of commerce. "electronic components, equipment, andsemiconductors," 1989 u.s. industrial outlook (washington, d.c., 1989), p.309; 1990 u.s. industrial outlook (washington, d.c., 1990).2. u.s. department of commerce, 1990 u.s. industrial outlook, 1990; figureprovided via personal communication with a department of commerce analyst.3. cbema. information technology industry global market analysis, industrymarketing statistics committee, washington, d.c., 1989.4. dataquest as cited in "japanese solidify dominance of semiconductormarket," washington post, january, 4, 1989, p. f1.5. u.s. department of commerce. 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, p. 309.6. u.s. department of commerce. 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, p. 262.7. see, for example, jodi t. allen. "regaining america's dulled industrial edge:the answer is right here at home," washington post, may 10, 1989, p. f3.8. richards, evelyn. "future of joint chip venture now in doubt," washingtonpost, november 10, 1989, p. f1.9. dertouzos, michael l., richard k. lester, and robert m. solow, mitcommission on industrial productivity. made in america: regaining theproductive edge (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1989), p. 249.10. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, p. 261.11. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, pp. 269to 2611.12. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, 1989, p. 267.13. fisher, lawrence m. "2 taiwan licenses set by sun microsystems," newyork times, june 22, 1989, p. d4.notes29keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3softwaregrowing at a rate of about 25 percent a year, estimated global revenues fromsales of software exceeded $65 billion in 1989.1 moreover, when the value ofsoftware developed within businesses and other organizations is taken intoaccount, the size of the market for software is much larger. measured by salariesand other costs, the value of internally generated software in the united statesmay range between $150 billion and $200 billion.2these figures are compelling evidence of the attractiveness of the softwaremarket, which is dominated by u.s. firms. they also attest to the increasinglyimportant role that programs and their applications play in enhancing investmentsin hardware. moreover, the growing emphasis on software development spurs theinnovation of new equipment, which in turn creates ideas for new applicationsthat require new software."as software gets developed," explained alan perlis of yale university, "itexposes opportunities for the application and creation of hardware. the two worktogether, and there is no permanent boundary between them. there is acontinuous shift, one way or another." thus, for example, the emergence of newprocessing architectures, notably parallel processing, gives rise to a need for awhole new body of softwarešwhich may in turn enhance the development of newhardware.the current situation has changed dramatically in less than 15 years. prior tothe introduction of the personal computer, software functioned somewhat as a"loss leader," an oftenfree inducement for buyingšand continuing to buyšaparticular vendor's computer equipment. software development was part andparcel of hardware development, and computer manufacturers were nearly thesoftware30keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sole source of programs, which were written to run on their machines only. thefew independent software firms that did exist wrote programs tailored toindividual vendor's machines. sales of about a thousand copies were thebenchmark for a highly successful software package.starting with apple computer's popularization of the personal computer, thesize of the software market grew immensely, spawning small and large firms thatderive all or most of their revenues from this market. today a million copies ofpopular software packages may be sold. moreover, increasing but still modeststandardization has made it somewhat easier for developers to adapt programs foruse on the computers of different manufacturers. in addition, even the largestcomputer companies recognize that they have neither the financial resources northe technical staff necessary to provide the full array of software support thatpotential buyers of their machines now demandšwhile larger buyers ofsoftware, with similar resource limitations, look to the software industry to meettheir needs affordably.out of these seeds grew the burgeoning software industry. some u.s.software firms are now very large, the biggest reporting annual revenues of about$1 billion, but most are quite small, sometimes consisting of not much more thanone or two people "with a personal computer and an idea." this diverse collectionof u.s. firms accounts for more than 60 percent of world sales of software.3 atpresent the u.s. industry enjoys a commanding lead in the world market, buthindsight suggests that no lead in markets for computers and computerrelatedparts is secure."assuming some of the dire predictions . . . come true," said samuel h.fuller, vice president for research at the digital equipment corporation, "then alarge part of our hardware [will be] . . . manufactured and eventually designedoutside the united states. is there the kind of infrastructure and support in theother industries of the computer sector that they could remain, in fact, healthyindustries in their own right? can software exist as an industry without thesupporting underlying hardware?" the answers to these questions are not clearcut, but fuller suggested addressing potential problems before they become realones. software "is an area where we have to learn how to remain strong, ratherthan take it for granted," he said.software: a highly unusual productarguably one of the most important products of the age of high technology,software has properties that make it distinct from all other products. the largestand most sophisticated sets of programs, such as those written for air trafficcontrol systems or earlywarning defense systems, are among the most complexof human creations, rivaling the crowning physical achievements of modernengineering. yet software development has features that make it more akin to anart or a craft than to a hightechnology enterprise. it is an expensive, slow,software31keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and laborintensive process that has undergone only incremental improvements inproductivity.4another special characteristic of software is that it typically does not remainconstant. observed perlis, "the thing that has been missed by softwareengineering to date, to everyone's great peril, is the concept of evolutionšthatsoftware, as soon as it comes to exist, must change. the most successful softwareis that which is unstable and incomplete." perlis explained that "unlike hardware,software gives the illusion that the costs of change are negligible since theyapparently involve only scribblings. this is not so. software affects itsspecification so that both undergo continuous change."other major properties that distinguish software, according to perlis, arenetworkingštoward the end of direct communication between programs, andautomationšsince "it must be the case that most of our programs run essentiallyindependently of us." finally, perlis explained that "in the computer, programsare in a sense live. . . . they can do things we find extremely difficult to došthatis, to keep informed in a broad way about what is going on in the world."perhaps the most complex pieces of software entail integrating isolatedcollections of computer, communication, and other types of equipment intocoherent informationprocessing systems. systemsintegration software, themeans of accomplishing this complex linkage, often must be customized to meetthe diverse requirements of customers, explained laszlo a. belady, vicepresident and program director for software research at microelectronics andcomputer technology corporation (mcc). because of this customizationprocess, software development can be considered as much a service activity as amanufacturing process.software is itself increasingly valuable in the production and modificationof software. researchers throughout the world are developing productivityenhancing tools and methods for specifying, writing, editing, compiling, testing,and verifying programs. although many are the proprietary possessions ofindividual companies, the tools already in hand have helped shorten the softwaredevelopment cycle, particularly for easily specified, straightforward applications.however, continued leadership in software calls for greater investments indeveloping and using software development tools. noted lawrence tesler ofapple computer, "in order to compete with, say, the philippines where the laborcosts are lower for programmers, we need to lower our overall cost of producingsoftware by improving our tools."in the software industry, low levels of productivity growth are a sharedshortcoming, besetting firms in the united states, japan, western europe, andeverywhere else. in the united states, the most visible efforts to enhanceproductivity in software development, including the software research programsat mcc and the software productivity consortium (spc), were encouraged byfrustrated users, notably defense contractors interested in reducing programmingsoftware32keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.costs. the software industry has not pursued a coherent strategy to improvesoftware development, not the least because of the implicit costs anduncertainties.toward a bifurcated marketcurrent trendsšin particular, the emergence of largevolume markets forpackaged software and the growing demand for customized softwarešarestimulating a division within the industry, points out laszlo belady of mcc. onesegment, he said, will concentrate on software packages that, although varying insize and complexity, can serve many different customers without majorcustomized alterations. "these packages can be produced anywhere," saidbelady, suggesting that u.s. firms serving this market will be most vulnerable toforeign competition because "everybody has the same chance."in belady's second category, systems integration, competition will bedetermined by the ability to manage complexity, to develop applications tailoredto the idiosyncracies of individual enterprises: "what you have to do in order tomake this complex integrated application work is to provide the glue, that is,additional software, which does the traffic control and holds the pieces together."this category, according to belady, is where the greatest business opportunitiesmay lie and where u.s. firms may have an inherent advantage.successful software of this second type can only be developed throughextensive cooperation between the customer and the contractor, beladyemphasized, and "it is impossible to come up with a huge computerized integratedapplication for an enterprise where the vendor comes and does everything . . . itcannot be done without team work." for members of such teams, "it is not enoughto teach programming," he said, "but you also have to give reallife experience,even at school, and teach people how to work together and not just to excelindividually."belady explained that if we wish to master the necessary complexity of thissecond software category, we must exploit the potential of computers themselvesin retraining individuals. he described retraining as "an incredible opportunity, anincredible benefit to the country." belady stated that retraining could beinvaluable in making this country more flexible and able to cope with the manynew challenges that the "accelerating change of industry and society" confrontsus with.education for better software developmentand usethe link between education and the ability to stay competitive was madesuccinctly by tesler: "if other countries have bettereducated populations incomputer science and software engineering, then we will fall behind." manycolloquium participants commented on the promise for improved education andtraining as means to achieve better software and better software development.software33keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.colloquium participants cited university computer science programs as aparticularly valuable asset to the software industry, because they provide neededpersonnel. "at times, people will argue that because of our education and becauseof our innovative spirit," observed fuller, "we [the united states] will continue tohold a commanding lead in the area of software." the proportion of americanborn students enrolled in these programs has dropped substantially, however."whereas it is bothersome that half of our graduate students are from foreigncountries," said james h. morris of carnegie mellon university, "we should tryto make that a competitive advantage and give them every opportunity andencouragement to stay, both at the graduate and undergraduate level."getting the most out of software may, as perlis suggested, entail developingsystems that "get the human being out of the loop," but achieving that endrequires human talent and skill. all colloquium participants had suggestions forimproving educational programs in computer science and software engineering.tesler, for example, pointed to the need for a practical perspective, commentingthat "in terms of computer science and software education, what i would like tosee coming from the colleges is people with more practical experience . . .[including experience doing] major projects on teams to revise other people'ssoftware, which is what one ends up doing in industry quite a lot." the value ofincreasing the exposure of faculty and graduate students to industrial softwareproblems and development conditions has been noted elsewhere by the computerscience and technology board.5a recurring theme was the importance of interdisciplinary training that goesbeyond software and hardware issues per se. tesler related such training tomaintaining a specific competitive advantage: "one thing that i think the unitedstates can maintain a lead in is human interface design, which makes applicationsoftware distinctive, but to do that, our students have to be very broad in theireducation. they cannot learn only technology; they have to learn somethingabout psychology, something about art, and learning to work in teams withpeople of other disciplines. . . . we can stay ahead, particularly in the far east, . . .by maintaining these crossdisciplinary development teams."but participants' concerns about education extended to the generalpopulation. the health of the entire computer sector and the development of thetechnology will depend to a great degree on how society chooses to usecomputers and extend their applications. "the important thing to remember," saidyale's perlis, "is that software is intended, as is the computer, . . . to make lifemore imaginative for all of us." he added that, because of the technology'sinfluence, society will be changing continually.therefore, perlis and others said, computing must be integrated into all areasof study. from growing familiarity with the technology among broad segments ofthe population, ideas for new applications will emerge, fostering the evolution ofthe technology and driving the growth of the software industry and others. "theeffective use of computing," said abraham peled, vice president ofsoftware34keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.systems research and director of computer sciences at ibm's t. j. watsonresearch center, ''will be the key to the industrial competitiveness of the countryas a whole, as products are conceived and developed inside a computer instead ofthe laboratory, and integrated directly with manufacturing [and] with the fieldforce."education is an immediate concern. "if we see it as longterm, and thereforenot requiring immediate attention, we will never get around to it," emphasizedtesler, "and i think that is what we have been doing in this country for the last 20years."foreign challengesome erosion of the nation's lead in software markets is inevitable, but iflimited, it could have positive effects, according to apple computer's tesler."some degree of decline is healthy for the world economy," he said, and it will"stimulate more attention by u.s. software companies to international markets."already, noted tesler, "for routine types of software creation, the sorts of thingsthat run businesses, . . . people are beginning to find that they can buy softwaredevelopment services from other countries ten times more cheaply than they canget them here." several u.s. firms have already responded to this reality byestablishing software development centers in such countries as singapore andireland, where they benefit from relatively low labor costs. domestic companiesalso "import" temporary foreign workers to write code for basic, or standard,software packages. india, for example, advocates exporting its programmers towork on international software conversion projects. how much of this activitytakes place is not known, but it does involve leading u.s. companies.foreign production of packaged software is also growing. tesler pointedout, "some of the more innovative packages in the personal computer markethave come from other countries, generally in europe, say, france in particular.but as i have traveled around the world, i have seen interesting software in otherplaces."to enhance their competitive prospects, japan and western europe haveconcentrated on developing productivityenhancing tools and techniques, as wellas methods for verifying the reliability of programs. to remedy gaps in expertiseand to sidestep licensing restrictions, japanese firms have also establishedsoftware research laboratories in the united states. other countries that havemade their domestic software industries economic priorities, such as the people'srepublic of china, india, malaysia, and taiwan, are focusing, for now, on largevolume reproduction of basic software rather than on innovation. some firms indeveloping countries, capitalizing on the low cost of replicating software andweak international protection for intellectual property, market imitasoftware35keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tive packages.6 such copied products undercut sales of legitimate products anddrain resources for legal action for copyright infringement.the impacts of japan's most visible efforts to achieve parity in softwaremarkets are uncertain. colloquium participants saw neither the japanese fifthgeneration computer project nor the realtime operating system nucleus(tron) project as yielding breakthroughs that could threaten the u.s. softwarelead. they were more cautious in their appraisal of a cooperative effort involvinggovernment and industry to develop software industrialized generator andmaintenance aids (the sigma project). sigma "is a software production andindustrialization system developed for the purpose of improving the fundamentalenvironment for software development in japan,"7 building on at&t's unixoperating system. unix, developed by at&t, is one of the leading candidatesfor a standardized computer operating system for the entire industry. the some 40japanese companies participating in the sigma project have all agreed to use aspecific version of unix. with a standard operating system, according to oneline of reasoning behind sigma, japan could be able to address deficiencies insoftware development."the openness of unix," morris of carnegie mellon warned, "makes it anideal place for the japanese to enter the u.s. software market. look out."while ongoing developments clearly indicate a japanese push to penetrateu.s.dominated software markets, these efforts may not pose the most formidablechallenge to u.s. firms. "the real software competitor is europe, not japan,"mcc's belady maintained. "europe 1992' will reinforce the successes of [thecooperative research program] esprit in the area of standardization and formalmethods 'creeping' into industrial applications."8the european community has also emphasized development of socalledformal methods for software engineering. if successful, formal methods couldmake some software development more systematic and less craftlike. moreover,formal methods can also enhance software quality by giving more assurance thatsoftware does not contain errors and will perform as specified.foreign competition has been constrained by u.s. dominance in computers,which has fed u.s. prominence in software. although machine compatibility isincreasing, getting the software developed for one vendor to work on thecomputers of another is far from effortless, and users are reluctant to switch tonew hardware vendors and an associated new set of software vendors. increasingstandardization and, as has been the rule for three decades, continuing declines inthe cost of hardware for a given level of performance could eliminate this barrierand open the door for increased foreign competition in software markets. underthese circumstances, it is imperative that u.s. software developers understandbefore their competition how to program computing structures that will emerge toachieve higher performance (e.g., multicomputersšdistributed processingšandmultiprocessors).software36keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.standardizationsoftware research in europe and japan has a common thread, a push towardstandardization. underlying this push is the undisputed assumption thatstandardization will improve productivity, lower the cost of softwaredevelopment, and increase competition. virtually all software firms are advocatesof these ends, but they disagree on whether standardization is the best means toachieve them. discussions among colloquium participants were representative ofthis disagreement.comments by apple's tesler characterize one view of the issue. ''anystandard that has to do with data communicationsšwith exchange of databetween computersšis absolutely critical," he said. he maintained that tostandardize beyond that point would encourage competition from imitator firmsand slow the rate of innovation in software and hardware."standards and what goes on inside a computer are another matter," teslersaid. "standardizing processor designs by standardizing operating systems, mycompany feels, [will make the] united states very vulnerable to competition fromabroad. . . . japan and [south] korea do very well when they can find somethingthat has been standardized, or [they] create a standard and then leverage that toreduce costs, reduce prices, and gain market share and take the market away."tesler continued, "one thing that we [at apple] have done is very carefullyprotect the insides of our computer, both the operating systems software and thehardware designs, so that they cannot be copied. we are very bothered by thefact that there are moves in the industry to try to standardize on those sorts ofthings, because we think . . . that is basically giving away the show to thecompetition from the far east."others in the industry are not bothered by the movement for a standardizedoperating system. as mcc's belady noted, "many people believe thatstandardization is necessary for progress." according to this view, standardsestablish a base level of conformance for welldeveloped technologies, freeingthe industry to concentrate on areas where advances are likely to have a greaterimpact on the capabilities and applications of computers.raj reddy, professor of computer science at carnegie mellon university,argued that failure to achieve some standardization of operating systems would becounterproductive, diluting the efforts of programmers, who are already in shortsupply, and draining financial resources. "i think we should be standardizingroutine things, including operating systems, and trying to use our creativity athigher levels," reddy said.preventing the adoption of standards is not the answer to maintainingcompetitive u.s. software and hardware industries, he maintained. if, in thefuture, foreign firms can produce powerful yet inexpensive workstations andu.s.software37keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.companies cannot, reddy argued, the disparity will stem from a problem that ismore fundamental than standardization.the implications are similar for firms that develop software only. byfostering high levels of compatibility among the computers of different vendors,standardization would greatly expand software markets, uniting a fragmentedcustomer base and eliminating the need to write unique code for each of the manyoperating systems that now exist. as for hardware manufacturers, efficiency ofproduction would be a key determinant of the market success of softwarecompanies.fuller of dec warned of a proliferation of standards and called for a moredeliberate approach to the issue. "[w]ith too many standards, i believe, we willtie the hands of developers and inhibit innovation," he said. the challenge, asfuller described it, is to develop a "set of wellselected standards" for hardware,software, and communication areas that are at a mature stage of technologicalevolution. "the rest of the playing field," areas where ideas and technology arechanging rapidly, should be left "open for innovation,'' according to fuller.the questions of what to standardize and when to do it are as contentious asthe issue of what the specifications for particular standards should be. areoperating systems at a mature stage of evolution, for example, or do significantadvances lie ahead? once in place, would standards make it difficult for new,superior ideas and technologies to gain acceptance and, ultimately, market share?fuller suggested that effective standardization by many users on unix illustratesthe mixed consequences of standardization.tesler noted, however, that reducing the cost of equipment is only onefactor to be considered in decisions to develop or encourage standards. notingthat the costeffectiveness of standards will decrease as they age and technologyimproves, tesler said that companies that "leap ahead" of the standard will beexcluded from a major segment of the marketšthe federal government and,perhaps, its contractors.debates over standardization will continue in domestic and internationalarenas. but if the push for standards continues to gain momentum, standardizationwill greatly influence the business strategies of software companies. perhaps theonly choice for u.s. firms, several speakers suggested, is to join forces anddevelop u.s. standards that are superior to those now under consideration."if the japanese are getting together and making a standard," reddy asked,"why do we not get together and make a better standard than they do, and alwaysstay one step ahead of the competition?"notes1. u.s. department of commerce. "computer equipment and software," 1990u.s. industrial outlook (washington, d.c., 1990); figure provided via personalcommunication with a department of commerce analyst.notes38keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2. dertouzos, michael l. richard k. lester, robert m. solow, mit commissionon industrial productivity. made in america: regaining the productive edge (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1989), p. 264.3. u.s. department of commerce. "computer equipment and software," 1989u.s. industrial outlook (washington, d.c., 1989), p. 263.4. computer science and technology board, national research council. scalingup: a research agenda for software engineering, (washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press, 1989).5. computer science and technology board, scaling up: a research agenda forsoftware engineering, 1989.6. the cstb has explored intellectual property issues in software through aworkshop and forum in the fall of 1989. a report will be issued in mid1990.7. national technical information service. "foreign technology," abstract no.37, 031, september 13, 1988.8. esprit, the european strategic program for research and development ininformation technology, is an umbrella program that encompasses some 200specialized projects. one product that has emerged from esprit is the portablecommon tool environment (pcte), a standardized substrate, or foundation, fordeveloping software for large systems. pcte accommodates existing andemerging software engineering tools, which permits programmers to exchangetools and researchers to develop new ones that enhance the utility of the softwaresubstrate. eureka, a european community research and development programfocused on commercially promising technologies and innovations, has providedfunding for a software factory based on pcte.notes39keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4services and systems integrationonce thought of as separate entities, telecommunications and computingequipment have merged to become "information technology," the umbrella termfor the growing array of digital devices and software that gather, process,display, and exchange data and information. according to the department ofcommerce, revenues for computer professional services (e.g., contractprogramming, systems and network management, education and training on theuse of computer systems) were expected to reach $37 billion in 1989.1 the stillevolving merger of technologies has added emphasis to the notion thatinformation is a strategic asset that every competitor must have. this notion hasspawned a large and rapidly growing market for informationrelated services:database and videotext services, contract programming and design, valueaddednetworks, training and education, data processing, systems integration, andothers. annual rates of growth in nearly all segments of the services industryexceed 10 percent; in some, growth rates top 20 percent and are expected toremain at that level for the near future. 2one booming segment, and potentially the most lucrative, is systemsintegration, which entails designing, implementing, and maintaining complexsystems of computing and communication equipment and software, often incombination with other types of equipment and systems. systemsintegrationfirms help businesses and other clients achieve the desired interoperability oftheir information technology. the systems mesh technologyšoften acombination of equipment, software, and networkbased services supplied bymany different vendorsšwith an organization's activities, operations, structure,and plannedservices and systems integration40keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.development. some firms specialize in turnkey systems, but most providecustomized systems that are developed in accordance with customers' needs. in1989, system integrators were expected to earn approximately $13 billion, withestablished firms reporting annual revenue increases of more than 15 percent intheir domestic business and more than 25 percent in their foreign operations.3hardware and software manufacturers, accounting firms, communicationscompanies, and other types of companies have targeted the systemsintegrationmarket, and the number of businesses diversifying into the market is growingrapidly. in 1988, more than 1,450 u.s. firms earned all or the bulk of theirrevenues from systems integration.4 the u.s. market for systems integration isthe world's largest, and it has attracted western european and japanese firms.entry is achieved almost exclusively through acquisitions of u.s. firms ratherthan through startup subsidiaries.systems integration: a u.s. business conceptthe u.s. federal government launched systems integration in the 1960s,when federal agencies hired contracting firms to design largescale systems tocoordinate data processing or communication operations. although still youngand growing, the u.s. systemsintegration industry is in a much more advancedstage of development than that of the emerging foreign competition. thedifference, according to jeffrey m. heller of electronic data systems (eds), canbe attributed to u.s. firms' early recognition of the business opportunities inintegrating computing and communications equipment that organizations wereassembling from various vendors as they tried to keep step with technologicaladvances and the apparent opportunities they created. building on expertiseacquired in work done for the federal government, pioneering firms have recentlybranched into commercial markets, which were slow to develop at first but havebeen gaining momentum with the growth of private networks and other largescale private applications."[t]he gradual move in the industry toward open systems architectures andnetworking standards," said paul a. turner, executive director of the pricewaterhouse technology center, "created an opportunity for brokers to interposethemselves between clients and the traditional proprietary hardware and softwarevendors."for prospective clients, turner added, systemsintegration firms offered an"alluring" service: "a reduced tiein to the proprietary systems of any one vendor, amore costeffective solution to the needs of the client, made possible by 'cherrypicking' the best of the offerings of several vendors, and all this coupled with asingle source of management and accountability that gave the chief informationofficer some degree of career insurance."the attractiveness of the concept has been proven, compelling even vendorsservices and systems integration41keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of hardware to set up systemsintegration units that, in principle, are free to usethe products of other manufacturers. given the bright forecast for the industry,the stream of newcomers may increase."systems integration," said irving wladawskyberger, vice president ofibm's data systems division and general manager of their kingston facility, "is anarea we all expect to continue to grow for a very simple reason: the same forcesthat are driving the technology and producing the tens of millions . . . ofworkstations with the networks and huge data bases, those same forces aredriving complexity. this business would dry up if complexity disappeared, but ithink there is about as good a chance of that happening as finding a parking spacein manhattan."elements of successbeing the first to market with a commercially valuable service is oneobvious and important factor contributing to u.s. firms' dominance of thesystemsintegration market. another is the large domestic market that served as aspringboard for expansion into foreign markets, which are now growing morerapidly than the one in the united states.wladawskyberger and mcc's belady suggested that an american flair formastering complexity may also be fundamental to the strong showing of u.s.systemsintegration firms. "management of complexity is a most americanendeavor; it really plays well to the things we are good at," wladawskybergersaid, summarizing the position thus: "it is skills intensive; it is highly technicaland, so, our r&d effort will serve us well."turner of price waterhouse elaborated on the implications for skills. "asoften happens," he said, "the major advances come from effort in those areas thatfall between the cracks of the conventional disciplines. the skills . . . necessary toperform a radical reevaluation of system functionality include the conventionaltechnicalsystem skills, but also vital are the skills needed to understand thebusiness, [its] management, and the organizational issues. and also required,critically, is a problemsolving process that gets the people involvedšand that isall of them, both users and systems designers, thinking outside the box andbeyond the obvious solutions."inherent in the process of integrating multivendor information technology isthe need to form flexible partnerships, not unlike the horizontal and verticalcooperative relationships that many have advocated for other industries in thecomputer sector. in the european market, for example, eds competes "ratherheavily at times with ibm," heller explained. however, he noted, "we teamtogether sometimes and [eds is] their customer and they are ours. so, we havecomplex relationships.""seldom does a system integrator have all the resources needed to do aparticular job," turner added, "and these partnerships increasingly cross nationalservices and systems integration42keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.boundaries and lead to a very complex set of interdependencies, but ones that arerequired in order to cope with the diversity and complexity of technology . . . ."other factors that underlie the success of u.s. systemsintegration firms areneither unique to this market nor cultural in origin. rather they are good businesspractices, sometimes applied in ways that may go beyond conventionalexpectations. foremost among these is the demonstrated importance ofdeveloping close working relationships with customers, a point made by allindustry representatives at the colloquium. customers want, according to onespeaker, a "total applications solution," requiring intricate understanding of aclient's operations.price waterhouse's turner noted that businesses have invested heavily ininformation technology, but many, particularly those in (other) service industries(e.g., financial services), have not realized expected increases in productivity. infact, the service sector has experienced a "clear slowdown in productivity," hesaid, after an "unprecedented spending binge" on information technology.systems integration can solve this dilemma, but it requires a ''backtobasicsquestioning" of the functions served by information systems that have oftenevolved in piecemeal fashion. needed applications of information technologymay be quite different from those considered to be common practice.speed is another requisite attribute. systemsintegration firms must meetchanging needs and opportunities, placing a "premium on being able to movefast," turner said. "solutions to problems that can be solved with yesterday'sanswers can be provided by the client's own resources."given the intricacy of the working relationships between systemsintegrationfirms and their clients and the often substantial investment that integrationrequires, industry representatives stressed the importance of a local presence inforeign markets. closeness and longevity of contact can also overcome thesuspicion that new entries often encounter in other nations.diversity in the world market"networked computing is a galloping customer requirement" throughout theworld, according to sam r. willcoxon of at&t. ongoing deregulation oftelecommunications services in many countries and the confluence ofcommunications and computer technology could fuel "exponential" growth inoverseas markets, he said.in the european community, the competition facing u.s.based firms comesfrom two primary sources. one is inhouse competition. many organizations drawon internal resources and technical staff to design and develop their own systems,according to heller. "that has always been our [eds's] competition as we tried toget involved in this business back in the '60s," he said. "so, we feel like from amarketing standpoint, we know how to address inhouse compeservices and systems integration43keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tition," he added. large hardware and softwaremanufacturing firmsšsocalledfullservice providersšconstitute the other category of competition.in addition, european firms that produce software are only beginning toexpand into systems integration, according to heller. several companies haveemerged as "formidable" competition in niche markets for specialized systems,such as for computeraided design and computeraided manufacturing.japan, south korea, and other far eastern nations are more difficult marketsfor systemsintegration firms. heller described the use of outside firms forinternal tasks as "countercultural." "they like doing everything in an integratedsense and for themselves," heller said. ''it is a sign of weakness" to hire anoutside firm and entrust a contractor with the responsibility for enhancingfunctional and strategic capabilities. nevertheless, eds has managed to makesome inroads in the japanese market.turner added that price waterhouse's japanese office encountered stiffresistance upon its entry into the systemsintegration business. over time,however, the firm's marketing efforts have become progressively moresuccessful.at this point in the industry's development, as heller observed, systemsintegration as an exportable service is largely a u.s. invention that the worldmarket is gradually emulating. at&t's willcoxon noted that the concept ofsystems integration is still evolving, but at a differential pacešfaster in theunited states than in most other parts of the world. interestingly, early advancesin overseas markets to date have been facilitated by business relationshipslaunched in the united states. for example, the requirement for a local presenceoverseas by accounting firms like price waterhouse that serve multinationalclients has provided a springboard for serving foreign clients, a developmentnoted by turner, while the merger of eds with general motors opened doors tonew relationships with foreign firms for eds, according to heller.dependence on other computerrelatedindustriesthat the global systemsintegration market is poised to take offšoffering an"exponential" increase in business opportunities, in willcoxon's viewšis notdisputed. nor is the characterization of u.s.based enterprises as world leaders inthis market. but will the apparent u.s. advantage deteriorate if the underlyingindustries in the u.s. computer sectoršhardware, telecommunicationsequipment, and software manufacturingšfalter in the world marketplace?major players in this market acknowledge its dependence on othercomputerrelated industries. strategically, heller pointed out, eds views thehealth of the other industries in the u.s. computer sector as directly affecting thehealth of domestic systemsintegration firms. "[i]t behooves us to have a verystrong force in both software and hardware domestically," heller said. this is soeven though, in the short term, the lower cost or higher quality of some foreignmade goods may influence his firm's buying decisions, or local laws may requireuseservices and systems integration44keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of components manufactured in the home country.electronic data systems carries ''a fair amount of capability in the softwarearena," heller noted, "but not to the extent that we want to shift a major portionof our investment into carrying it as fully as the industry itself. in the hardwarearena, we have no interest in that kind of shift in capital investment. so, longterm, we are willing, able, capable, and have the intention of supporting thedomestic capability, whether that means in terms of our dollars, our energy, orour political influence. . . . [w]e see it as a team effort."standardizationon scales small and large, systems integration is made easier by standards:the greater the level of standardization, the greater the level of interoperabilitybetween computers and other digital devices as well. today, as noted in earlierchapters, idiosyncracy rather than standardization is the norm, and systemsintegration firms have devoted some of their resources to overcoming barriers tocompatibility. "we have had to formulate solutions where standards didn't exist,"heller said. from an industry wide perspective, the process may be inefficient, aduplication of investment and effort. standards can motivate innovation byserving, explained heller, "as the act of declaring innovation significant . . . ,[establishing] a benchmark that the next round of innovation must significantlysurpassšor leapfrogšor sidestep." but without adequate safeguards forprotecting intellectual property, according to heller, standardization will quickenthe transfer of innovations from inventor to imitator. therefore, if standardizationis to increase, there must be stronger safeguards for preserving the returns toinnovation and greater international compliance with those laws, in heller's view.at&t's willcoxon contended that without greater standardization, the"magnificent opportunity for productivity improvement" that computers affordwould go largely unrealized. "users are beginning to reject closed proprietarysystems that isolate their data in computers that can't talk to each other," he said,adding that clients want to ''mix, match, and interconnect products from whatevervendors meet their needs."standards are critical to meeting customers' varied needs, enabling theinformation industry to "really begin to deliver on its promises," according towillcoxon. willcoxon called for an "enlightened combination of cooperation andcompetition." he said that firms must cooperate in developing and selectingappropriate standards and then compete in "devising solutions that are besttailored to user needs."turner of price waterhouse offered a complementary view. whileacknowledging fears that standards may hurt innovative software and hardwarecompanies, he urged firms to view the issue from the perspective of users whohave invested heavily in information technology but who have not reaped theanticiservices and systems integration45keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pated benefits. if standards can deliver "better productivity enhancement," thenfirms must accede or risk "increasing dissatisfaction from users."but would high levels of compatibility between the computer andtelecommunications equipment of different vendors eliminate the need forsystemsintegration firms? absolutely not, according to industry representatives."[t]here are a lot more things involved than just whether boxes and softwarehook together compatibly," heller said. the "real valueadded" part of systemsintegration is the "understanding of the problem you are trying to solve.''given the number of hardware and software options facing customers andthe many potential approaches to solving a problem, systemsintegration firms arenot likely to see complexity or demand for their services evaporate withincreasing standardization, according to heller and other industryrepresentatives. raj reddy of carnegie mellon university shared the followinganalogy: "just because you have a vocabulary and a language and a syntax and adictionary, it doesn't mean you can write a bestselling novel. a bestsellingnovel is the composition of these things in ways that make an attractive plot and asolution and various other things. i think no matter how many standards youhave, you still have that problem of creating the bestselling plot and novel. thatis the systemsintegration business."perhaps, as several colloquium participants suggested, the debate overstandards should shift from whether they are needed to how standards aredeveloped and how they influence innovation and technological progress. roberte. kahn, president of the corporation for national research initiatives, suggestedthat rather than viewing them as "unchanging over time," standards should beconsidered dynamic, evolving in step with technology. with a flexible standardsetting system, the "critical issue" becomes how to manage standards so theyaccommodate change, in kahn's view.infrastructure for the information agefirms that specialize in computer and communications services are, ineffect, building an information age equivalent of the highway system, aninfrastructure that accommodates the flow of information in textual, graphic, andvoice form. systemsintegration firms, for example, link onceindependentislands of hardware, applications, and their specialized domains of software into afunctioning whole, just as roads connect previously isolated communities intozones of commerce. like the businesses that now line many stretches of thenation's highway system, a growing array of electronic databases and otherspecialized services have sprouted up to serve an increasing number of userswhose computers are connected to networks.colloquium participants argued that this movement toward networkbasedenhancement and integration of computer and communication capabilities isproceeding much more haphazardly than did the development of the nationalservices and systems integration46keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.highway system; the full promise of networked computingšin which onecomputer can communicate with any other, regardless of its location or its typešis far from being fulfilled. many obstacles stand in the way of makingcomputertocomputer communication as easy as making a telephone call. thepotential economic advantages of a nationwide information network appear to bemotivating japan and western european countries to begin developing thenecessary infrastructure. in the united states, where the geographic scope andscale of the task and its cost are significantly greater, a cohesive approach islacking.in recent years several groups, including the computer science andtechnology board, have called for the development of a national informationinfrastructure or a partial implementation of this concept devoted to the supportof research and development.5,6 at the colloquium, charles ferguson of mitexplicitly advocated a governmentcoordinated program to build a nationwideadvancedtechnology computer communications infrastructure over the next oneor two decades. the network would be the conduit for communications requiredby an evergrowing number and variety of digital devices, from computers andtelephones to highdefinition television sets.according to ferguson, a national information infrastructure will not onlybecome an economic necessity, but its development also will be a direct stimulusto a "very wide spectrum of information and technologyintensive industries."manufacturers of base technologiesšfor semiconductor packaging, automatedassembly, optoelectronics, and production of printed circuit boards and fiberopticcablešwould benefit from infrastructureoriented research projects and,ultimately, from the demand generated by the actual construction andimplementation of the network and the associated user equipment. moreover, theproposed network could be the means for u.s. reentry into markets for consumerelectronic equipment, which increasingly incorporates the same digitaltechnologies used in computers (see chapter 2).some colloquium participants equated a governmentled project to build anational information infrastructure with the u.s. decision in the early 1960s tosend astronauts to the moon by the end of the decade. the "symbolic value" aloneof such a project could "galvanize the technical community" and the rest of thecountry, suggested wladawskyberger of ibm. but more important,wladawskyberger and others stressed, is the great underlying utility of having anetworked economy. "if u.s. industry generally is served by inferior networksand digital systems,'' ferguson has written, "the economy will suffer. conversely,if the united states were to possess the world's most advanced [information]infrastructure, the economy would benefit, and so probably would u.s. vendorsof digital information systems.''7one significant benefit would be to open up new markets for informationand informationprocessing productsšmarkets that the united states mightunderstand and exploit before foreign competition does. a possibility is tocomputerize commerce, using digital communications among computers actingas agentsservices and systems integration47keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for companies to find suppliers, determine price and availability of parts,negotiate deliveries, convey shipping information, and deal with problems. thisarray of services goes far beyond what electronic data interchange achievestoday. it is an example of the kind of service that needs careful fostering bygovernment and other institutions; it is not simply a university research project.although no one at the colloquium opposed the idea of a nationalinformation infrastructure, levels of enthusiasm for the concept varied. heller ofeds advised proponents to define clearly the national purpose that would beserved by such a network. he also cautioned that private firms would notembrace the proposal without government leadership and governmentsponsoredincentives for companies that contribute to developing a public good. withoutincentives, firms will act in their own selfinterest and avoid projects that do notbenefit them directly.proponents of a national information network also injected cautionary notesinto their endorsements of the concept. for example, stardent computer's gordonbell, who helped craft a proposal for a national research and education networkwhile he was an assistant director of the national science foundation, warnedthat continuing erosion of the nation's manufacturing base may mean that manyinfrastructural components, such as switches and optical fiber, may have to bepurchased from foreign suppliers. he also advised focusing first on networkingfor researchers, to avoid making the task so large and complex as to beunmanageable.ferguson of mit has cautioned that if proprietary controls of networkoriented cooperative research projects are lax, foreign firms may benefit morethan u.s. participants. there is also the danger, he maintained, that policiesintended to preserve the u.s. market for domestic firms could result in "crudeprotectionism." if policies are designed to benefit only a few selected industries,the competitiveness of others that produce goods and services based on digitaltechnologies could suffer, ferguson suggested. a potential outcome is greaterforeign penetration of u.s. computer and networking markets, in his view."i think it is the government's business to provide infrastructure," saidrobert w. lucky, executive director of the communication sciences researchdivision at at&t bell laboratories. "i don't think there is money in this rightnow, but i think the nation needs it. . . . [w]hat it requires, i think, is governmentleadership, not government regulation."notes1. u.s. department of commerce. "information services," 1989 u.s. industrialoutlook, (washington, d.c., 1989), p. 452.2. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, p. 454.3. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, p. 454.4. u.s. department of commerce, 1989 u.s. industrial outlook, p. 452.notes48keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5. computer science and technology board, national research council. thenational challenge in computer science and technology (washington, d.c.:national academy press, 1988).6. computer science and technology board, national research council. towarda national research network (washington, d.c.: national academy press,1988).7. ferguson, charles h. "hdtv, digital communications, and competitiveness:implications for u.s. high technology policy," vlsi memo no. 89506,massachusetts institute of technology, vlsi publications, february, 1989, p. 6.notes49keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5business and marketingthe market is the final judge of a firm's caliberšits ability to manage itscapital and human resources to develop and produce goods and services tailoredto the preferences of consumersšand the competitiveness of an industry reflectsthe capabilities of its constituent firms. in growing industries, innovation can be aprime determinant of marketing success. as an industry matures, however,manufacturing efficiency, sales, marketing, and other factors become the criticalingredients of competitiveness. "in many cases," observed lawrence tesler ofapple computer, "we lost our competitive edge not because of technology, butbecause of better management and smarter strategy.""increasingly, market success depends on early product introduction todetermine customer requirements," observed william j. spencer of xerox. "thelessons learned from selling and servicing your own product and watchingcompetitors must be quickly incorporated into product changes that meet marketneeds. the high content of electronics and software in current and future systemswill lead to ever more rapid introduction of new products and an increasedrequirement to respond in shorter times to market needs."spencer added that, unfortunately, many of the nowessential attributes forcompeting in domestic and global marketsš"listening to customers, learningfrom the market, and quick reactions"šare "not the hallmarks of u.s.corporations." the consequences of this deficiency can be ''loss of market share,lower revenues and profits, and an inability to support longterm initiatives,including r&d in u.s. corporations."colloquium participants focused on the causes and symptoms of flaggingcompetitiveness in important computer sector industries. like spencer, manybusiness and marketing50keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.saw overarching problems, difficulties spanning many parts of the u.s. economybut perhaps imposing an especially heavy toll on the researchintensive computersector. for example, john l. doyle of hewlett packard advised his businesscounterparts, as well as government officials, to heed the findings of thepresident's commission on industrial competitiveness.1 that body found, doylesaid, "four causes of u.s. industrial decline: failure to develop human resourcesas well as our competition, inadequate incentives for saving and investment, tradepolicies that failed to recognize global reality, and a slowness in thecommercialization of new technology." of overriding concern to individualfirms, he suggested, is the failure of many to integrate manufacturing withdevelopment."it has been said that the manufacturing industry has passed through threephases, pursuing efficiency, quality, flexibility, and now innovation," doyle said."but these are not alternatives. they are cumulative, and competitivenessdemands improvements in all four."discussions at the colloquium focused on several key problems that, ifuncorrected, will continue to hamper the performance of individual firms and thecomputer sector as a whole.isolating the issuestechnology management and transfersuccess, says an adage, has many owners. this timeless insight has taken anironic twist in the computer sector. u.s. enterprises, sometimes building onresearch performed at the nation's universities, have spawned many commerciallysuccessful innovations. innovative firms may receive proper acknowledgment fortheir pathbreaking efforts, but, too often, foreign companies have claimed thecommercial rewards of invention.a growing body of business literature has documented the failure of u.s.firms to capitalize on innovations that later proved tremendously successful inforeignmanufactured consumer products. among the many legendary examplesis the japanese dominance of global markets for video recorders, invented by theampex corporation in 1956. through the 1960s, the california firm claimed a 70percent share of the world market for video recording technology. then came thevideo cassette recorder (vcr), an industrywide, standardized format thatsuddenly eclipsed ampex's proprietary format and attracted many competitors."[t]he basis of competition quickly became manufacturing and the ability tomove quickly through the design cycle," recounted richard s. rosenbloom,professor at harvard's graduate school of business administration. "what hadbeen a sixyear product life cycle collapsed to six months. ampex neverdeveloped the skills needed to compete in that kind of business, never anticipatedthatbusiness and marketing51keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.its business could come that way, and found itself very quickly limited to a narrowand shrinking niche in an industry that it created and which expanded ahundredfold as a result of its technology."obviously, vcrs are not computers, although the technological similaritiesbetween the two are increasing. nevertheless, the problems that confoundedampex are not unique to vcrs, or even to the broader consumer electronicsindustry, rosenbloom maintained. "i think that is a story," he said, "that canhappen throughout the information products industries to companies that arebanking on sustaining proprietary positions and banking on a set of skills thathave served them well to date but that are not guaranteed to serve them in thefuture."addressing the same issue from a different angle, rosenbloom noted thatsome of the largest businesses in the computer sector have failed in major effortsto diversify into new markets. ibm's venture into telecommunications, at&t'smove into the merchant market for memory chips, and xerox's attempt to branchinto workstation production failed to fulfill expectations for reasons other than alack of technological expertise, rosenbloom suggested. "they had no troublegrasping intellectually the science and technology of those new businesses," heexplained, "but somewhere they lacked the industrial capacity to establish acompetitive advantage in a marketplace that called for something different fromwhat they were offering.""there is more than random error here," he said. the direct causes of the"persistent failure of leading firms to adopt new technology that has later provenastonishingly important to the industry" remain elusive, according torosenbloom. he speculated that part of the problem may be endemic to theamerican style of management and perhaps to the way managers are educatedand trained. but remedies will not be forthcoming until the problem is thoroughlyunderstood, he maintained. "there is something systematically vulnerable aboutthe way american companies have built positions in industrial markets and havetried to sustain their dominance in those markets," rosenbloom said.clues may come from tracing the oftenfragmented lineage of commerciallyvaluable technologies. james h. morris of carnegie mellon university describedthe evolution of the userfriendly human interface embodied in apple's highlysuccessful family of macintosh computers. like many other innovations, itoriginated in an organization that can lay claim to many of the technologicaladvances that underlie successful products, but the innovating firm did not guidethe technology to commercial fruition.morris traced the roots of the successful user interface, which ischaracterized by a bitmap display, a pointing device ("mouse") for guiding thecursor, and screen "windows," to federally funded research conducted at thestanford research institute (now sri international) during the late 1960s. acollaborative project between sri and the xerox palo alto research centeressentiallybusiness and marketing52keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transferred the technology to xerox corp., which continued the effort and drewon programming developments in europe and at u.s. universities. many of theembryonic components of the user interface technology were embodied inxerox's experimental alto computer of the early 1970s. eventually, thecompany introduced the xerox 8010 star system, the first commercial product tofeature the interface that is now used in virtually all computer workstations (seefigure 5.1).the star system represented a major advance in commercial technology,according to morris, who was involved in the product's development, but it wastoo expensive. "we didn't think about marketing and the cost of these things,"said morris. he attributed this "marketing myopia" to most of the staff's previousexperience in research funded by the department of defense, where costconsiderations often do not enter into evaluations of a system's performance.through circuitous events, the approach pioneered at xerox was eventuallyperfected at apple, but success was not immediate. the lisa computer, apple'sfigure 5.1key technology transfer paths leading to the macintosh series of computers.source: courtesy of james morris, carnegie mellon university, 1989.business and marketing53keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.first product with the advanced human interface, did not win many customers,but a subsequent introduction, the macintosh, has helped the company secure asignificant share of the global market for personal computers.morris's examination of failed attempts to transfer technology internallyyielded several common themes. contrary to conventional thinking, morrisexplained, many commercially successful ideasšat least in the softwareindustryšdid not originate with small startup firms, but rather they were theoffspring of "rather large research investments made by rather big companies."startup firms, however, often succeeded where established firms failed: theydeveloped good ideas into costeffective products.morris speculated that large firms may fail to capitalize on promisinginnovations because their attention is divided among many product lines. as aresult, they may overlook a line of research that is ripe for development; incontrast, a small firm that seizes a good idea concentrates almost entirely ondeveloping the innovation. perhaps that is why technology transfers betweenfirmsšwhat morris called "hostile transfers"šare more successful than thosethat are attempted internally.moreover, a firm that capitalizes on an innovation pioneered elsewhere isnot limited to using an idea in its original form. "if somebody is taking somethingwithout permission," morris said, "they are free to pick and choose what theytake and don't take." the same may apply to foreign firms that capitalize onresearch developments pioneered in the united states. their selections andadoptions of u.s. technologies are likely to be guided by marketingconsiderations that innovating firms fail to recognize, according to morris.to the benefit of the u.s. computer sector, greater emphasis on cooperativeresearch could promote technology transfer in the united states, morrissuggested; "intermixing" of organizations and technologists appears to facilitatethe kind of "creative technology transfer" that u.s. firms have found so difficultto do internally. in addition, with japan and other nations challenging orovertaking u.s. leadership in key areas of technology, u.s. firms should broadentheir purview of science and engineering research, morris advised. u.s. firmsshould be just as quick to exploit commercially promising innovations thatoriginate overseas as foreign firms are to capitalize on the results of research donein the united states. "in some sense," morris observed, ''grabbing something fromanother country . . . is a more powerful and better thing to do." john doyle ofhewlett packard was even more direct: "i believe that not legally using goodideas from our competitive products is improvident.''harnessing complementary assetseven if firms master the complexities of innovation and technology transfer,there is no guarantee that they will succeed in the market. "[m]any of the ideasbusiness and marketing54keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and productsšonce introduced to the market and, often, before they areintroducedšare essentially available to everyone," explained david j. teece ofthe university of california at berkeley. "they can be reverse engineered, theycan be improved upon, and so forth."unless an innovative firm controls or has access to all the necessary"complementary assets," teece said, such as specialized manufacturingcapabilities and welldeveloped distribution and marketing channels, it will notrealize the commercial benefits of its r&d accomplishments. instead, thosebenefits will flow to "imitator" or ''followup'' firms that have harnessed thesecomplementary capabilities, teece explained.much of the success of japanese firms in global markets can be attributed totheir mastery of the competitive elements that support the commercialization ofinnovations. design cycles and the time needed to develop manufacturingproficiency for a new product are often faster in japan than in the united states."therefore, [japanese firms] can take what is best out there in the world stock ofknowledge and bring it into the market ahead of the competition and take a goodchunk of the market," teece said.given the success of this approach, it is not surprising that japanese firmsinvest the bulk of their r&d dollars in process improvements. the attention toprocess extends even to the processes of research and development. thepenetration of supercomputing, for example, into electronics and automotiver&d in japan suggests a japanese advantage in applying advanced tools toimprove design innovation, reduce production time, and improve quality. in theunited states, firms tend to allocate most of their r&d dollars to developing newproducts. if u.s. firms do not devote more resources to developing manufacturingcompetence and other complementary capabilities, continued investment inproductoriented research could be selfdefeating because results will quickly betransferred to competitors, teece maintained. if a firm innovates, it must"simultaneously be in a position" to commercialize the innovation, he observed.the integrated structure of japanese firms and industries facilitates rapidproduct introduction because it facilitates the harnessing of complementaryassets. for example, many of japan's electronics firms manufacturesemiconductors and other components as well as the computers and otherproducts that use such devices. in addition, these firms often have partialequityshares in companies that produce needed specialized assets, such assemiconductormanufacturing equipment. moreover, competing firms developrelationships to address issues of mutual concern.most firms in the u.s. computer sector control few of the specializedcomplementary capabilities that teece believes are necessary for competing inglobal markets. this may reflect, in part, a lack of vertical integration. in theunited states, ibm may be the only computer sector firm that has achieved levelsof integration comparable to those of the larger japanese electronic firms. it isbusiness and marketing55keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hardly selfsufficient, however. recognition of that fact may explain why ibmhas assumed a leading role in forging cooperative relationships among u.s.hardware manufacturers.teece argued further that the computer sector as a whole is losingcomplementary capabilities. as the sector's domestic infrastructure of materials,component, and equipment suppliers erodes, its ability to compete will alsodeteriorate, even if u.s. firms continue to be prodigious sources of innovations.this point was also noted by yale's perlis, who observed that "the thing thatwe seem to be losing to the japanese is the infrastructure that is most important.it is nice that ibm can make everything from 'a to z' and that other companiesexist. what is most important is that, when they look around for some activity,technique, [or] equipment that they need to fulfill an idea to produce somethingworthwhile, it will not be there. they will have to spend large amounts of time,funds, and energy to gather what should have been around the corner."in his writings, teece has disputed the "notion that the united states canadopt a 'designer role' in international commerce while letting independent firmsin countries such as japan, [south] korea, taiwan, or mexico do themanufacturing."2 in the long run, he believes, the majority of benefits will flow tothe firms that make the products rather than to the companies that supply designsor other knowledgebased, intangible assets "whose true performance features aredifficult to predict."a somewhat different view was offered by joel birnbaum, vice presidentand general manager of hewlett packard's information architecture group. if afirm buys components from foreign suppliers, he contended, it still can succeed indesigning and marketing systems. birnbaum used hewlett packard's popularlaser jet printer as an example, which was also cited earlier in the colloquium byanother speaker, of how u.s. firms are becoming increasingly reliant on foreignmanufacturers of components. "we buy the print mechanism from canon, but wedid a much better job than they did of figuring out what goes around it, the pagedefinition formats, how to service it, how to document it, how to package it, howto market it, and how to manufacture the entire product." the result is a highvalueadded product, one with annual sales exceeding $1 billion. according tobirnbaum, standardization accommodates the development of valueaddedproducts and services, allowing firms to use the best components theinternational market has to offer and to sell their products throughout the world.complementary capabilities will become especially critical as morecomputer products evolve into commodity products, as many at the colloquiumpredicted. in commodity markets, teece said, "manufacturing matters. that iswhere marketing matters. that is where many other things [besides innovation]matter. so, while one cannot in general say that manufacturing always matters, ithink it matters in this industry, . . . where one doesn't have good intellectualproperty protection." strengthening international intellectual property lawsbusiness and marketing56keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.would benefit innovative firms, he added, but there are "inherent limits" tosafeguards that might be extended to intellectual property.an argument for cooperationthe importance of complementary assets suggests that a promising avenueto maintaining a competitive u.s. computer sector is cooperation. cooperationbetween manufacturers and suppliers and even between competitors can effect asharing of some complementary assets. recognizing this possibility, many u.s.enterprises have turned to foreign firms, allowing their technologies to belicensed in exchange for manufacturing expertise and capital. but failure tocooperate and to make necessary assets available domestically results in tacticaldecisions that benefit individual firms but may eventually harm the entire sector.thus, as the international push for standardization grows and as computerscome to resemble consumer commodities, "cooperation becomes increasinglyimportant," facilitating the strategic thinking and investments that were absentduring japan's rise to dominance in dram production, teece maintained.changes in management styles and in policies governing the structure of u.s.industry will be needed to achieve the levels of cooperation that globalcompetition demands, he added. for example, perceptions about the constraintsresulting from antitrust laws may discourage cooperation, although the lawsactually allow a wide range of mergers, joint ventures, and so on.teece also stressed the importance of integrating science policy andtechnology policy, which now overlap only slightly. "if you don't connect thedevelopment of scientific capability with technological capability, there won't betoo many national benefits," he said. according to computer sectorrepresentatives, that link must extend to the federal research laboratories. severalcriticized the paucity of commercially relevant technologies that have beengenerated by the laboratories. to date, argued hewlett packard's doyle, thereturns from research conducted at the more than 700 taxpayersupportedfacilities have not been commensurate with the nation's annual investment ofabout $20 billion.managerial incentives and short time horizonsunited states business as a whole is consistently criticized as being myopic,focusing on shortterm gains at the expense of longterm competitiveness. thecomputer sector is no exception, according to colloquium participants. nor has itescaped the consequences of this shortterm outlook that are most evident,perhaps, in the deterioration of the manufacturing base.but is there a single, fundamental cause of the problem? the list ofdetrimental influences includes the federal budget deficit, tax policies thatencourage consumer spending over saving, stockholders' expectations forimmediatebusiness and marketing57keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.returns on their investments, managers' emphasis on high quarterly and annualprofits and neglect of investments in equipment and r&d projects that arecritical not to next year's profit statement but to their firms' performance three ormore years down the road. perhaps, as several studies have suggested, thistendency to risk the future for shortterm gain reflects, in part, attitudes impartedduring managers' educational training.all of these factors, and probably others, contribute to the short timehorizons of u.s. firms. sorting through the list and assigning the proportion ofblame attributable to each factor diverts attention from the critical task ofaddressing the problem in all areas. as colloquium participants noted, the issue isclearly recognized as one directly affecting the health of the entire computerindustry. each responsible party, from the federal government to individualfirms, must act, participants emphasized. otherwise, u.s. firms will continue "tooptimize locally," not globally, and foreign companies that act on the basis oflongterm, strategic interests will continue to gain in markets.at the level of the individual firm, both ferguson and teece recommendedevaluating the incentives that guide management decisions. for example, theshortterm emphasis of u.s. managers, teece suggested, "may be due to the factthat their incentive structure is weighted, in some cases at least, too heavily infavor of salary and not enough in terms of stock."learning from failure and responding to the marketinterpreting the results of his own studies and that of other researchers,mit's ferguson described the emergence of an approach to manufacturingmanagement that is now well established in japan, is currently being adopted insouth korea and taiwan, but is uncommon in the united states. the hallmarksof the approach are short design cycles due to the partial sharing of differentproduct designs, close coordination between design and manufacturing, and avery flexible manufacturing system.one attribute of the japanese system is that it accommodates failure, severalspeakers noted. "in the vcr story," said harvard's rosenbloom, "there werethree generations of vcrs that the japanese, particularly sony, introduced beforethey finally got to the one that worked, and each time they learned some thingsthat were very important in developing the next generation." "failure," he added,"is an inherent part of learning, which is an inherent part of innovation.''doyle pointed out, however, that the consequences of introducing a poorlyreceived product differ among markets. in contrast to commodity consumerelectronic goods, highcost products for business customers leave little marginfor error. for now, design and development cycles for business computersystems, doyle suggested, must be longer than those for consumer products.however, he added, "the trouble is that industrial marketing [appears] to bebusiness and marketing58keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving closer to consumer marketing." rapid product development couldbecome more important, placing u.s. firms at a disadvantage.the role of small entrepreneurial firmssmall entrepreneurial firms have been popularly associated with the vitalityof the u.s. computer sector. to their credit, they have been the wellspring ofmany of the innovations that have paced the technological and market advancesof computerrelated products. however, recent competitive shifts have brought tolight the limitations of smaller firms and the consequences of assuming that theirstrengths will preserve the interests of domestic industries overall.in retrospect, for example, startup semiconductor firms appear to havedestabilized the industry and have lacked the resources to continue developing themanufacturing expertise necessary to stave off the challenges of betterfinancedand betterorganized japanese competitors. 3 had the u.s. semiconductorindustry undergone consolidation, the argument continues, the resultant verticallyintegrated firms would have been in a strategic position to meet the competitivechallenge.the history of the semiconductor industry also supports a contrary view:large u.s. firms may not be dynamic enough to compete in the rapidly changingindustry. many conglomerates and large u.s. electronics firms did diversify intosemiconductor manufacturing, but most eventually withdrew. ibm is the mostnotable exception. looking at the computer sector more broadly, there is theproblem, previously noted, of an inability of large firms to capitalize quickly oninnovation. as carnegie mellon's morris observed, while many innovationsoriginated in large firms, their successful commercialization was often realized bysmall startup companies (see above, "technology management and transfer"section of this chapter).these events present a quandary. "in the united states," ferguson said,"there is the striking fact that a very disproportionate fraction of innovation andnewness comes from small entrepreneurial firms." the phenomenon appearsunique to the united states. "that is not the case in japan or [south] korea,"ferguson added. "korean manufacturing is dominated by four verticallyintegrated, diversified industrial complexes. in japan, eight firms account formost electronics production. the smallest of them [has annual revenues] of $10billion."gordon bell of stardent computer stressed the importance of small firms incomputer manufacturing, arguing that productivity is "inversely proportional tosize. . . . i have been in two startups, each with 50 engineers," he said, "and iassure you i could not have done those same projects in a large organization with500 people. it would have taken twice as long, and the quality would not be thesame."colloquium participants did not dispute the firmsize dichotomy and itsbusiness and marketing59keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.apparent relationship to innovation. the general failure of large u.s. firms todemonstrate the same speed in reacting to the market as their asian counterparts,several suggested, stems from management and organizational problems.compared with companies that have flat management structures and only a fewintegrated divisions, hierarchically structured firms lack the cohesion andversatility needed to respond quickly to market opportunities."i would argue," said william r. hambrecht, president and cochiefexecutive officer of the venture capital firm hambrecht & quist, "that theentrepreneurial young company has done a good job of competing . . . because[it] is usually the ultimate integrated business unit. it has representations fromother functions, but they are all in one room."also troubling to computer sector representatives was the apparentlyincreasing prevalence of foreign investment in small hightechnology companies.in exchange for needed capital and, perhaps, manufacturing expertise, thesestartup firms are often licensing their technology to foreign firms, which maylater emerge as competitors. (it should be noted, however, that licensingarrangements may be the only option for entering a foreign market in whichaccess is government controlled.)foreign firms find the united states to be a very attractive place to shop fornew ideas, ferguson added. to underscore his point, ferguson told of a japanesefirm that was setting up a holding company in the united states to invest in newtechnology in computer and other areas. the firm allocated $2 billion for thispurpose, he noted.unfortunately, established u.s. firms have been less receptive than theirforeign competitors to small firms seeking assistance to develop their ideas. onefactor that may contribute to this reluctance is that pioneering new technologiesentails risks. an established firm may forego the chance to make a technologicalleap, deciding instead to respond if and when an innovation proves commerciallypromising. another factor may be the socalled "arrow effect," which suggeststhat marketleading firms benefit by slowing the rate of technological advance.4hambrecht suggested that established u.s. firms have begun to change theirviews on entrepreneurial firms. in recent years, he said, large firms havedemonstrated "growing acceptance . . . that entrepreneurial companies are goodplaces to develop products" and look at them "less as threats and more aspartners."consolidation ahead?venture capital provided much of the seed money that led to the u.s.computer sector's flush of growth during the 1970s and early 1980s, giving rise tosuch firms as digital equipment corporation, apple computer, microsoft, andsun microsystems. according to hambrecht, the flurry of new company forbusiness and marketing60keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mation is ebbing, and today's startup firms will often face formidable obstacles.much of the nation's estimated $40 billion pool of private venture capital hasbeen invested in the computer sector, to the point of overstimulating entry of newcompanies, hambrecht maintained (see figure 5.2). returns to investors havefallen dramatically since the late 1970s, and the numerous new companies createdwith the influx of venture capital have made it increasingly difficult for today'sstartup firms to carve out a market niche that offers the potential for aboveaverage earnings growth."[e]ven when we were right," hambrecht explained, "even when we pickedthe right people in the right niche at the right time, and they [the startup firms]executed well . . . they found a crowded landscape. . . instead of having areasonably free run to exploit their product position, they were in a corporatedogfight."with fewer apparent opportunities available to potential startup firms,investors have soured on the computer sector and, according to hambrecht, thesector may not regain its allure. one reason for this outlook is the shortenedhorizons of venture capital funds. in principle, venture capital is invested with theaim of longterm earnings growth. but increasingly, investors expect quickreturns, and they have become more averse to risk. fund managers are respondingin kind, hambrecht added.in hambrecht's view, the hardwaremanufacturing industry has begun tomature, and forces of consolidation are already in evidence. computermanufacturing continues to outperform other parts of the economy, but annualrates of revenue growth in many segments of the industry are about half of whatthey were in the late 1970s. moreover, costs of entry have soared, not only forequipment but also for setting up marketing channels and other components.hambrecht noted that intel began manufacturing semiconductors in 1968 with aninitial investment of $3 million. today, building and equipping a modernsemiconductor plant would cost about $300 million.another deterrent to starting new companies in the hardware industry isstandardization. acknowledging the arguments for and against standardization,hambrecht said his firm has decided that "standards are a way of life andstandards mean hardware becomes a commodity." opportunities to developcomputers that surpass standardized versions and gain market acceptance will befew, he predicted.given these trends, formation of new companies will continue to slow, andintraindustry mergersš"the strong buying the weak"šwill increase, according tohambrecht. in the shortterm, consolidation will appear to promote greaterefficiency in the industry, he explained, noting that a reduced flow of venturecapital creates the need for more cooperation within an industry. hambrecht alsosounded a warning, however: as the entry of new firms decreases, establishedfirms will slow their product development efforts to increase theirbusiness and marketing61keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 5.2venture capital raised and distributed in the united states. source: courtesy of hambrecht & quist, 1989.business and marketing62keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.returns. this situation, akin to the experiences of the u.s. automobile,textile, and consumer electronics industries, sets the stage for increasedcompetition from foreign firms, according to hambrecht.hambrecht's outlook for the software industry is considerably brighter.software innovation, he believes, is the key to "aboveaverage profitability andthe ability to build a truly successful business"šalthough they do not now,investors will eventually recognize the growth potential of softwaredevelopment.notes1. president's commission on industrial competitiveness. global competition:the new reality (washington, d.c.: government printing office, 1985).2. david j. teece. "capturing value from technological innovation: integration,strategic partnering, and licensing decisions," in technology and globalindustry, bruce r. guile and harvey brooks, eds. (washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press, 1987), pp. 9192.3. dertouzos, michael l., richard k. lester, robert m. solow, mit commissionon industrial productivity. made in america: regaining the productive edge (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1989), p. 256.4. as kenneth flamm explains the arrow effect, "for the established leader, anew product may very well compete with its existing product lines in somemarkets. profits on the new product are then partially offset by lost profits onother offerings. for a new entrant, there is no offsetting loss, and the perceivedreturn to entry will be higher" (kenneth flamm, creating the computer,washington, d.c.: brookings institution, 1988, p. 227).notes63keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6turning pointthe maturation of the computer sector and the escalation of foreigncompetition place the sector at a turning point. u.s. semiconductor manufacturersand their suppliers face the prospect of continuing losses of market share toforeign firms. in turn, manufacturers of computers and related equipment findtheir base of domestic support eroding as competitors strengthen theirs. for now,the nation's software, services, and systemsintegration industries sit atop globalmarkets, but given events in other parts of the sector and developments abroad,one feels compelled to ask, for how long?building on strengths, overcoming existing problems, and averting new onesrequire "a massive change in thinking," noted at&t's lucky. "i am left with thesense that we have a consensus on what is wrong," he said, reflecting onconditions in the hardware industry, "but no collective will to do anything aboutit."the history of numerous other industries and the observations of allcolloquium participants underscore how difficult significant change will be toachieve. as harvard's rosenbloom described it, "[t]here is somethingsystematically vulnerable about the way american companies have builtpositions in industrial markets and have tried to sustain dominance in thosemarkets."the computer sector is saddled with perceptions from its earlier years thatmay no longer be appropriate and that may motivate a complacency amongpolicymakers that is unwarranted, in view of current realities. for example, "wehave become slaves to the image of the entrepreneur shaping technologyšthegarage computer or spreadsheet software package," warned belady of mcc."unfortunately, many software projects, especially those having considerableturning point64keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risk and which have lengthy development periods, cannot emerge from such anenvironment. bits and pieces from the academic side have difficulty gettingintegrated. the massive efforts aiming at improved tools and techniques forcomplex system design and sustained by longterm stable funding at [japanese]companies . . . have few counterparts in the united states.''the u.s. computer sector is too large and too complex to link the fortunesof each its three major industry groupsšhardware, software, and services andsystems integrationšin a dominolike fashion. yet as representatives from eachindustry group pointed out at the colloquium, there are strategic dependenciescommon to all. and these dependencies are likely to grow as technology, theterms of competition, and the structure of the sector change at a rapid rate, one ofthe hallmarks of the sector. therefore troubles in one industry can haveimplications for all and, as computing becomes more pervasive, for the entireeconomy.an asset at riskthe woes of the u.s. semiconductor and semiconductormanufacturingequipment industries focus concern on another major chunk of the hardwareindustry, computer manufacturers. if u.s. computer manufacturers were tosurrender their leading position in global markets, would the consequences be anyworse than those wrought by market declines in steel or other mature industries?if computer manufacturing is indeed becoming a mature industry, as hambrechtand others maintained, might it not be more efficient to use computers that aremanufactured elsewhere, freeing up resources for production of highervalueadded goods and services? these questions are not uncommon."there are a lot of people who are still not convinced that there is aproblemšthat manufacturing needs to be preservedšand those people are ininfluential positions, making decisions in the government," said john e. mcphee,director of the office of computers and business equipment at the departmentof commerce.colloquium participants shared the view that a narrow economic analysisfocusing on comparative production efficiencies across countries ignores therationale for a more strategic perspective. computer development andmanufacturing are not simply ends in themselvesšalthough they are nontrivialends in terms of their contribution to the gnp, the balance of trade, employment,and other conventional measures. rather, they are intricately linked both to thedevelopment of other computerrelated products, including software and servicesas well as other types of hardware, and to advances in the use of computertechnology. the use of computers contributes increasingly to the competitivenessof virtually all industries. in short, computers themselves are an engine oftechnological change, a prerequisite for national growth in a global economy.the special and increasingly intrinsic value of computerrelatedtechnologies was captured by perlis of yale.turning point65keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the computer is a tool of thought and function. it helps us model and it itself ismodeled. as an agent of control it permits us to interact with nature at all levelsof granularity from the stars to the quarks. the computer is crucial in our effortto escape from the biological polyhedron that evolution has consigned us to: it iscrucial in the operations that extend the temperature range, the atmosphericpressures, the years of life, the atmosphere, and the health that are required forus to continue to exist. we must never forget that we are at the beginning of thecomputer age, so that exploration of its role must continue into the foreseeablefuture. thus the physical form of the computer may change, but our recognitionof and dependence on the abstract concept "computation" will continue todeepen. it is inconceivable that we could function without the computer. ofcourse we must not worship the machine as an idol but we must domesticate it sothat it serves both as a good and as a performer. the computer must be expectedto play a role in almost every human activity.it is because of the growing pervasiveness of computing, argued perlis andothers, that we cannot yield a leadership role complacently. "for the computerindustry," commented perlis, "yielding control to foreign concerns will have animpact in the intellectual sense that yielding agriculture would have in thebiological sense." echoed teece from the university of california at berkeley,"the computer industry generates significant positive technological and marketdemand spillovers to other industries. moreover, for a nation to capture thesespillovers, it is necessary to have a domestic computer industry."despite the great progress that has been made in making computers easier touse and finding new ways to use them, colloquium participants acknowledgedthat businesses and individuals are still learning to use computers. the growth ofthe systemsintegration business and other services reflects some of thedifficulties users have experienced. taking advantage of distributed computingrequires "thinking outside the box and beyond the obvious solutions," pricewaterhouse's turner observed. new, more productive ways of doing businessšperhaps revolutionary, when compared with the mechanized approaches tocomputing so common todayšare likely to result. indeed, computers and theirconvergence with telecommunications equipment and other technologies presentthe opportunity to create new businesses and even new industries.in education, the arts, and virtually every other field of endeavor, computersand software are extensions not only of human abilities, but also of the humanimagination. this is a "world of restless technology," said yale's perlis, and thecomputer is likely to insinuate itself into most societal and economic affairs. noone, he added, can "predict with any accuracy whatsoever what the role of thecomputer will be in our lives or our children's lives. . . . one thing we can verywell be sure of is [that] it will be far different from what it is today."although the united states does not have a monopoly on new ideas, it is aprodigious source, demonstrated best perhaps by the pioneering innovations thatlaunched the computer revolution and the information age. a healthy computerturning point66keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sectoršone that does not rely on imported hardware and softwarešwill becritical to generating and applying the new ideas that set the stage for futuretechnological and economic advances. a computer sector that is healthier thanthe one that now exists will be essential for u.s. firms and the nation as a whole.setting a course for improvementcolloquium participants expressed general agreement on where remedialactions are needed, differing principally on how to resolve issues in the area ofstandardization. they were unanimous about the need for action; as ferguson putit, "the time is fast approaching, i think, when we really have to mobilize." theagenda emerging from the colloquium includes the following key areas requiringaction.cooperationsigns that the computer sector has begun to mobilize are appearing. moststriking, perhaps, is the effort to establish u.s. memories, inc., a joint drammanufacturing facility funded by hardware industry firms that was announced injune of 1989. the production facility, if successfully launched, would workclosely with sematech, the privately supported and governmentfundedconsortium that is developing methods and equipment for manufacturingadvanced integrated circuits. such novel cooperative arrangements represent afundamental break from past ways of doing business, but more are likely to beneeded, many colloquium participants believed: "we are learning aboutcooperation," ferguson noted, "but japanese firms understand it already."teece, of the university of california, also noted the importance ofcooperation and in his writings has stressed the need to form alliances inaccordance with shifting corporate and market boundaries. as the digitaltechnologies once used almost exclusively in computers continue to spread totelecommunications, consumer electronics, and other areas, new interfirmrelationships will be required to harness the manufacturing, marketing, and othercapabilities required to compete in global markets.the role of government"we need government support," said heller of eds, "but let me also pointout that we need to support the government," the nature of this nowessentialrelationship, which also includes universities, has been slow to materialize. amajor obstacle is the fragmented structure of the federal government andindustry.given the environment in which computerrelated industries operate, whatdoes the computer sector need from government? according to several computturning point67keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.er sector representatives, the answer is likely to involve creating conditions thathelp businesses and government to adjust to competition in a global economy.''whether we succeed or fail," said john doyle of hewlett packard, "depends onhow we manage our businesses and how the government manages the businessenvironment."most colloquium participants saw the government as playing an enablingrole, as setting up a policy and regulatory framework that accommodates theflexibility needed to compete in global markets and fosters a longterm strategicview of competitive issues.taking this argument further, paul turner, director of research at pricewaterhouse technology center, cautioned against an active, protectionistposture. "like it or not," he pointed out, "we are now part of a global economywith complex interdependencies that are ill understood. in such circumstances itis surely wise to recall the obligation of physician to patient expressed byhippocrates: 'first do no harm.'"in areas such as education and tax and trade policy, all of which are vitallyimportant to the computer sector, the government must play a lead role.according to many participants, that leadership responsibility should also extendto initiatives designed to create an infrastructure for the information age,including a national computer network. with the aid of industry, governmentshould be addressing what infrastructural elements are needed and determiningwhich elements are likely to emerge through the marketplace and which willrequire federal or state incentives, teece advised.responsibility for other initiatives deemed critical to the performance of thecomputer sector, teece also recommended, should rest with private industry,assisted at times by government. "if there should be an industrial policy," he said,"it should be what i call a private industrial policy, led by industry, with industrydollars, perhaps supplemented by a small amount of government dollars."manufacturingspeaker after speaker emphasized the importance of competence inmanufacturing, reinforcing the conclusions reached in many examinations of thenation's competitiveness. it is an acknowledged fact that foreign competitors thathave eclipsed u.s. firms in many domestic and international markets haveachieved their marketleading positions on the strength of their manufacturingcapabilities. the ability of the hardware firms to recover market share and to fendoff challenges in product areas they still dominate will be determined largely bytheir ability to make highquality products efficiently and to insert innovationsquickly into their product designs and manufacturing processes."the primary ingredient for success in the next decade," said ibm's toole,"is speedšspeed in development and speed in delivering derivative products ofturning point68keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.very high quality to the marketplace. to win, one needs to be competitive in allareasšcompetitive designs; welltrained employees; a strong infrastructure oftools, materials, and components; and muchimproved manufacturing prowess."unfortunately, the means to upgrade manufacturing capabilities in thecomputer sector are diminishing. "the first problem that we face collectively,"ferguson maintained, "[is the declining capabilities in a] number of basetechnologies, component technologies, and component markets [that] are quitecritical to the ability of a downstream systems firm to succeed in the computerindustry."standardsperhaps the most contentious issue discussed at the colloquium,standardization is gaining international momentum, and the u.s. computer sectormust reckon with it. one way to view standards was characterized by teece. "thewhole role of standards is one that cannot be underestimated," he said, "becausecontrol of standards confers protections akin to patents."the discussion about standards should not revolve around whether thereshould be standards or not, according to teece. "the point to recognize is that ifone controls standards, one can turn that into a competitive advantage." morrisand others noted that the standards game is international and that "universalinternational" standards can place u.s. vendors at a disadvantage. consequently,harmonizing the actions of all u.s. partiesšindividual firms, the computersector, and the governmentšis necessary.the challenge may be even greater than the colloquium's discussion oftechnical aspects suggests. the united states is in some sense outnumbered ininternational standards arenas, because each country effectively has an equalvote. consequently, innovations, leadership, and early deployment in this countrycan be vitiated by politics. the current onecountry/onevote system could beused by regions to protect local businesses by promoting a series of mutuallyincompatible standards adopted in individual regions, although this wouldultimately be to the disadvantage of all involved, given the benefits ofstandardization discussed elsewhere in this report.educationconcerns about education ranged from the sector's needs for people withscientific and engineering talent to the broader need for education to supportmore and better uses of computerrelated technologies. the government hastraditionally been crucial in providing support for the education of the country'scomputer scientists and engineers. the results have been extremely positive,according to stardent's bell, who maintained, "i think we [the united states] havethe most creative engineers. i think we have the finest scientists in comturning point69keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.puter science going." however, in comparison to the level of effort othercountries are now expending, he said, "we do have a training problem."the nation cannot afford to carry the burden of 25 percent of its highschoolage youth dropping out, according to heller, who argued that there is amismatch between education and other institutions that compose our economicinfrastructure and the evolving economy: "most of the institutions of the u.s.infrastructure were created to administer the industrial age society" and may nowbe in some respects obsolete.obviously, the interest of the computer sector are affected by this nationalproblem. "for marketing to succeed," perlis said, "there has to be a market. . . .not only do we need an educated work force to be able to perform jobs, but weneed an educated force that wants to know [and is] interested in essentiallyexpanding [its] own knowledge." in the notsodistantfuture, in perlis' view,computers and their applications will be integral to virtually every effort intendedto extend one's personal knowledge.widespread and imaginative use of computers in education can help tobetter equip tomorrow's adults for contributing to u.s. society, severalparticipants suggested. in turn, new, more effective uses of computers mayevolve from the familiarity with the technology that is cultivated througheducation and training. the future industrial competitiveness of the entire nation,one speaker noted, may largely be determined by how effectively the generalpopulation uses computers.closing observationsthe agenda that emerges from the colloquium implies the need for sustainedfollowup measures by industry, government, and universities, acting togetherand independently. the nature of the necessary interaction, as well as themechanisms and the extent of cooperation, must be defined through a continuingdialogue that has only just begun. from this dialogue, perhaps, will come thenecessary leadership to ensure that the united states responds effectively to thestrategic challenges mounted by foreign competitors. fragmented, piecemealresponses will not be sufficient. one clear lesson of the 1980s is that simplyinvoking the need for leadership is not enough. for government and industry,incremental tinkering at the margin will not be enough, either. the computerscience and technology board will examine several of the issues raised in thiscolloquium in more detail, and it urges decisionmakers in industry, government,and academia to do so as well.turning point70keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes71keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes72keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix acolloquium programmonday, may 22, 19898:00 p.m.keynote addressclyde v. prestowitz, jr., senior associate, carnegie endowmenttuesday, may 23, 19898:30 a.m.introduction and welcomerobert m. white, president, national academy of engineeringsamuel h. fuller (colloquium chairman), vice president of research,digital equipment corporation8:45 a.m.hardware panelchair:robert w. lucky, executive director, research communicationssciences division, at&t bell laboratoriesc. gordon bell, vice president, research and development, ardentcomputer corporation*charles h. ferguson, postdoctoral associate, center for technologypolicy and industrial development, massachusetts institute oftechnology* ardent has since merged with stellar computer to become stardent computer, inc.appendix a73keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gordon e. moore, chairman, intel corporationpatrick a. toole, senior vice president and general manager oftechnology products, ibm corporation10:15 a.m.break10:30 a.m.software panelchair:samuel h. fuller, vice president of research, digital equipmentcorporationlaszlo a. belady, vice president and program director,microelectronics and computer technology corporationjames h. morris, professor of computer science, carnegie mellonuniversityalan j. perlis, professor of computer science, yale universitylawrence g. tesler, vice president of advanced technologies, applecomputer, inc.12:00 p.m.lunch in the refectory alcove1:00 p.m.services and systems integration panelchair:irving wladawskyberger, vice president, data systems division andgeneral manager kingston, ibm corporationjeffrey m. heller, senior vice president, electronic data systemspaul a. turner, director of research, price waterhouse technologycentersam r. willcoxon, president of business market group, at&t2:30 p.m.break2:45 p.m.marketing and business aspects panelchair:william j. spencer, vice president, corporate research group, xeroxcorporationjohn l. doyle, executive vice president, hewlett packard companywilliam r. hambrecht, president, hambrecht & quistrichard s. rosenbloom, professor, graduate school of businessadministration, harvard universitydavid j. teece, professor, w. a. haas school of business, universityof california at berkeley4:15 p.m.synthesis, recommendations, and responseappendix a74keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bcolloquium participantsnorman achilles, u.s. department of statedonald m. austin, u.s. department of energydavid beck, u.s. international trade commissionlaszlo a. belady, microelectronics and computer technology corporationbrian c. belanger, u.s. department of commercec. gordon bell, stardent computer, inc.kathleen c. bernard, cray research, inc.joel birnbaum, hewlett packard companyjane bortnick, library of congressmichael boudin, u.s. department of justicecharles brownstein, national science foundationjames h. burrows, u.s. department of commercevirginia castor, u.s. department of defenseskip dalton, digital equipment corporationambassador peter jon de vos, u.s. department of statejohn l. doyle, hewlett packard companyc. f. emde, national aeronautics and space administrationcharles h. ferguson, massachusetts institute of technologysamuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationoliver grave, federal trade commissionbruce guile, national academy of engineeringwilliam r. hambrecht, hambrecht & quistchristopher h. hankin, u.s. department of statejeffrey m. heller, electronic data systemsappendix b75keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lee holcomb, national aeronautics and space administrationkenwin jarboe, senate subcommittee on government information andregulationraymond l. jones, u.s. department of commercerobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiativesphilip kardis, senate committee on budgetwilliam m. kendalljohnston, u.s. department of statev. n. kryuvov, embassy of the u.s.s.r.alfred m. lee, u.s. department of commercerobert w. lucky, at&t bell laboratorieswilliam maher, federal communications commissionjohn e. mcphee, u.s. department of commercesamuel merrill, jr., library of congressgeorge p. millburn, u.s. department of defensekatie miller, senate judiciary committeegordon e. moore, intel corporationjames h. morris, carnegie mellon universityjames m. murphy, jr., office of the u.s. trade representativedavid b. nelson, u.s. department of energymichael r. nelson, senate committee on commerce, science andtransportationjames d. otis, supercomputer systems, inc.charles t. owens, national science foundationabraham peled, ibm t.j. watson research centerjorge perezlopez, u.s. department of laboralan j. perlis, yale universityn. scott phillips, house armed services committeejames r. porter, national academy of engineeringclyde v. prestowitz, jr., carnegie endowmentj. mark pullen, defense advanced research projects agencyraj reddy, carnegie mellon universitywilliam a. reinsch, office of senator john heinzcesare rosati, u.s. department of staterichard s. rosenbloom, harvard universitygary russell, u.s. department of laborsteven saboe, u.s. department of stateliz sadove, house committee on energy and commercewilliam scherlis, defense advanced research projects agencyjacob schwartz, defense advanced research projects agencymary shaw, carnegie mellon universitymichael skarzynsky, u.s. department of commercev. slavyantsev, embassy of the u.s.s.r.william j. spencer, xerox corporationappendix b76keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stephen l. squires, defense advanced research projects agencywill stackhouse, jet propulsion laboratorydavid j. teece, university of california at berkeleylawrence g. tesler, apple computer, inc.andre m. van tilborg, office of naval researchpatrick a. toole, ibm corporationpaul a. turner, price waterhouse technology centerthomas a. weber, national science foundationharvey weiss, digital equipment corporationambassador e. allan wendt, u.s. department of staterobert m. white, control data corporationrobert m. white, national academy of engineeringmary wileden, u.s. department of the treasurysam r. willcoxon, at&tdeborah wincesmith, u.s. department of commerceirving wladawskyberger, ibm corporationwilliam wulf, national science foundationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, executive directordamian m. saccocio, staff officermargaret a. knemeyer, staff associatemark bello, cstb consultantpamela r. rodgers, cstb consultantdonna f. allen, administrative secretarycatherine a. sparks, secretaryappendix b77