detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/166information technologies and social transformation184 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309035293 | doi 10.17226/166national academy of engineering; bruce r. guile, editorinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.series on technology and social prioritiesnational academy of engineeringinformationtechnologies and socialtransformationbruce r. guile editornational academy presswashington, d.c. 1985iinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, nw washington, dc 20418the national academy of engineering is a private organization established in 1964. it sharesin the responsibility given the national academy of sciences under a congressional charter grantedin 1863 to advise the federal government on questions of science and technology. this collaborationis implemented through the national research council. the national academy of engineering recognizes distinguished engineers, sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs,and encourages education and research.funds for the national academy of engineering's symposium series on technology andsocial priorities were provided by the andrew w. mellon foundation, the carnegie corporation ofnew york, and the academy industry program. the views expressed in this volume are those of theauthors and are not presented as the views of the mellon foundation, the carnegie corporation, theacademy industry program, or the national academy of engineering.library of congress cataloging in publication datamain entry under title:information technologies and social transformation.(series on technology and social priorities)papers presented at a symposium held in conjunction with the 1984 annual meeting of thenational academy of engineering.1. electronic data processingšsocial aspectsšcongresses. i. national academy of engineering. ii. series.qa76.9.c66i52 1985 303.4'834 854830copyright © 1985 by the national academy of sciencesno part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, orin the form of a phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, orotherwise copied for public or private use, without written permission from the publisher, except forthe purposes of official use by the u.s. government.isbn 0309035295printed in the united states of americaiiinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.symposium advisory committeechairmanjoseph v. charyk, chairman and chief executive officer, communications satellite corporationmemberssolomon j. buchsbaum, executive vicepresident, customer systems,at&t bell laboratoriesharlan cleveland, dean, hubert h. humphrey institute of publicaffairs, university of minnesotan. bruce hannay, vicepresident, research and patents, bell laboratories(retired)james brian quinn, william and josephine buchanan professor ofmanagement, amos tuck school of business, dartmouth collegestaffbruce r. guile, national academy of engineering fellowpenelope gibbs, symposium series secretaryiiiinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceinformation technologies are perhaps the most aggressive technologies ofthe current age, generating progress, change, and turbulence in many branchesof industry and in the lives of organizations and individuals. microelectronicsystems are shrinking in size and cost, growing in performance, expanding theirrange to the world level, and crossing cultural boundaries. as societies attainhigher orders of information handling, existing social institutions are faced withthe dual challenge of directing and accommodating social change driven bytechnology. with this in mind the national academy of engineering (nae)held the second of its symposia on technology and social priorities, inconjunction with its 1984 annual meeting, titled information technologies andsocial transformation.the symposium, held on october 4, 1984, brought scholars of technologyand society together with technologists, social scientists, and representativesfrom the industrial, legal, and public sectors to discuss the interaction ofinformation technology with social institutions. the topics addressed included areview of recent developments and likely futures in information technology, acomparison of information technology to historical developments in othertechnologies, and discussion of the interaction of information technology withbusinesses, homes, property rights in information, and various hierarchies ofsocial organization. the six papers presented at the symposium, with commentsby discussants asked to prepare remarks on the papers, make up this volume. itis, i think, an exceptionallyprefacevinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interesting collection of insights about the role of technology in society ingeneral and the likely impacts of information technology in particular.the council of the national academy of engineering voted to dedicate thesymposium to the memory of george m. low, who died on july 17, 1984. inhis 27 years with the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa),mr. low made major contributions to the mercury, gemini, and apolloprograms as an engineer and an administrator. he became deputy administratorof nasa in 1969 and served in that position until he became president ofrensselaer polytechnic institute in 1976. mr. low was elected to the nationalacademy of engineering in 1970 and was the recipient of the academy'sfounders award in 1978. at his death mr. low was a member of the councilof the nae and chairman of the joint national academy of engineeringnational academy of sciencesinstitute of medicine committee on science,engineering, and public policy.bruce guile, a fellow at the national academy of engineering, was, inlarge part, responsible for the symposium. working with the advisorycommittee, he helped formulate the content of the symposium, worked with thespeakers to ensure cohesion of the presentations, and served as an editor toproduce this volume.the editor acknowledges with gratitude the counsel and help of severalacademy staff members. jesse ausubel, special assistant to the president of thenational academy of engineering, offered helpful advice and answeredquestions throughout the process of holding the symposium and editing thepapers. penelope gibbs, in addition to typing correspondence and themanuscript, handled the lists and labels that make a symposium happen.dorothy sawicki of the national academy press offered sound editorial adviceand prepared the manuscript for publication.robert m. whitepresidentnational academy of engineeringprefaceviinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents introductionjoseph v. charyk 1 the evolution of information technologiesjohn s. mayo 7 commentsby ernest s. kuh 33 the information age: evolution or revolution?melvin kranzberg 35 commentsby gunnar hambraeus 53 the twilight of hierarchy: speculations on the global informationsocietyharlan cleveland 55 commentsby alexander h. flax 79 property rights in informationanne wells branscomb 81 commentsby jordan j. baruch 121 information technologies in the homewalter s. baer 123 commentsby roland w. schmitt 151contentsviiinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. computers and businesstheodore j. gordon 154 commentsby ruth m. davis 168 about the authors 171contentsviiiinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixinformationtechnologies and socialtransformationinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xinformation technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introductionjoseph v. charykthe papers in this volume reflect an attempt to balance two competingviews on the way that information technologies and social institutions interact.in particular, in designing the symposium upon which this volume is based wetried to strike a balance between the optimism often generated by technologicalpotentials and the pessimism that sometimes accompanies a cursoryexamination of how technology may alter the quality of life. if there is a singletheme to this volume it is a considered evaluation of the mutual adaptationbetween information technology and social institutions. how do businesses,families, and the legal system accommodate new technologies and what willchange as a result of their accommodation? to what extent are developments ininformation technologies driven by the desire to do things differently in homesor businesses? will the flow of information across national bordersšallowedby advancing information technologiesšchange the character of internationalrelations between industrialized nations?in the abstract, questions concerning the rate and direction of mutualadaptation between technology and society are of importance to the scholars oftechnological evolution. on a less abstract level the same questions may be ofinterest to individuals in two ways. first, in their capacity as representatives ofinstitutions individuals seek to understand the direction and character of changein their institutions and in the world in which the institutions function. second,in their capacity as participants in society individuals are inherently interestedin the future they are likely to experience. it is our hope that the theme ofintroduction1information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accommodation between technology and social institutionsšreflected bothwithin individual papers and between competing arguments in different papersšwill be of interest to those reading in either capacity.in the first paper john mayo reviews the recent history and probablefutures of several information technologies including integrated circuits,computing technology, software, and photonics. particularly interesting is theoverview of likely futures he provides by working through some relativelysimple calculations of the physical limits on existing technologies. additionally,mayo discusses the forces that drive change (both social considerations and thepush of technological possibilities) and the gates (economic considerations andsocial predispositions, for example) that control the rate of change. theseelementsšthe driving forces and the gatesšset the stage for discussing thechanging character and use of existing technologies and allow the elaboration ofpossible scenarios for future development of emerging technologies.in the second paper melvin kranzberg uses historical analysis tounderstand the social and technological changes that may be brought about bychanging information technologies. kranzberg compares the classical industrialrevolution to the potential information revolution in our own time. kranzberg'sanalysis leads him to conclude that we are indeed facing a social revolution andthat the revolution is driven not only by changing information technologies butby interaction between social institutions and a wide range of technologicalinnovations. information technologies will evolve in, and contribute to, a socialrevolution brought on by rapid changes in energy, materials, and industrialmanagement technology and made up of changing social norms, economicconditions, and attitudes toward science and technology.additionally, kranzberg offers an interesting interpretation of cultural lag,the slowness with which social institutions respond to changing technology. ifnothing else, cultural lag is evidence that culture imposes its willšalbeitunconsciously and in a somewhat disorganized wayšon the development anduse of new technologies. the important insight that accompanies thisobservation is that technology is a ''quintessential human activity ... it bears thecontradictionsšthe 'goods' and 'bads'što be found in all complex humanactivities.''mayo and kranzberg, taken together, lay the foundation for the volume.mayo focused specifically on changes in the technology of informationhandling. his unit of analysis is a particular technology, and he is persuasiveabout the direction of development of specific information technologies. mayois a technological insider taking a veryintroduction2information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.informed look out from the specifics of information technologies; the power ofhis arguments comes from comparing the development of existing informationtechnologies to the likely development of emerging technologies, and fromcomparing the potentials of competing emerging technologies. kranzberg, incontrast, chose as his analytical unit not the technology but rather the process ofchange in the organization of social institutions. as a result, his paper placeschanges in information technology in a broader perspective in terms of othertechnologies and social institutions. kranzberg stands somewhat outside thespecifics of information technology and looks broadly both at the place anyparticular technology can hold in a social transformation and at the role thatinformation technology may hold in current social transformations.mayo and kranzberg together identify the tremendous potentials ofinformation technologies and place those potentials in perspective bothhistorically and relative to other current technological changes. each of theother four authors takes a particular slice of the issue of interest by discussingthe interactions between information technologies and different specific socialinstitutions.the papers by harlan cleveland and anne branscomb are almost exactlypaired to explicate a debate over the adaptability of important social institutions.cleveland, in his paper on the twilight of hierarchies, takes a broad look at fivehierarchies that have served as means of social organization, and considers howadvancing information technologies may erode the forces that have historicallyheld those hierarchies together. he examines hierarchies of power based oncontrol, of influence based on secrecy, of class based on ownership, of privilegebased on early access, and of politics based on geography. he sees dramaticpotential for change in a wide range of human endeavor as a result of emerginginformation technologies.anne branscomb focuses on a specific social institutionšthe u.s. legalsystemšand examines how that institution will adapt to changing informationtechnologies, particularly the informationbased property rights accorded toindividuals. branscomb's focus is explicitly on the manner in which the legalsystem adapts. she finds, in her analysis of recent case law and legislationrelating to property rights in information, evidence that the system is changingin a way that is consistent with the existing structure. branscomb seemsconvinced that the current legal system will adapt effectively to changinginformation technologies.cleveland and branscomb appear to disagree, but, on close examination,one finds that the disagreement is not over process but over degree. bothrecognize that social institutions will adapt; it is in theintroduction3information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nature of institutions to change in response to changing conditions, and someinstitutions, like the legal system, are specifically designed to be adaptive. thedisagreement comes in hypothesizing about whether the rules that have guidedand facilitated change in the past will be adequate to accommodate thisparticular dramatic technological change. the question lies in whether thechanged form of an institution will be recognizable. will it function in the samemanner and be capable of serving the same goals? branscomb asserts,implicitly, that the legal system is resilient and effective. cleveland argues thatthe adaptation required by this new technology will fundamentally alter thecharacter of many of our institutionsšincluding how the u.s. legal systemvests individuals with informationbased property rights. their disagreementover degree of adaptation will be settled, not surprisingly, only by time andexperience.walter baer and theodore gordon, like anne branscomb, work close tothe interaction between information technologies and a particular social system.baer, in his paper on information technologies in the home, divides theactivities in the home into four major typesšworking at home, doing chores athome, learning at home, and relaxing at homešand considers the impact ofmore powerful and pervasive information technology on each type of activity.in each of the four cases baer is cautious about the effects of technologicaladvance. particularly persuasive is his hypothesis that both time budgets andmoney budgets play an important role in determining the use of informationtechnologies in the home. the time savingsšrather than the money savingsšrealized by providing home buying services or financial services are perhaps themost important force pulling these services into the home. additionally, newservices brought to the home through emerging information technologies,especially entertainment services, will compete with television, radio,neighborhood softball games, and casual family conversation for a relativelyscarce minute of available leisure time.gordon, in his paper on information technologies in business, selects fourexamples of the way that information technologies may affect business anddevelops each example by explaining a likely path for development and thenhypothesizing about the consequences. particularly interesting are gordon'sdiscussions of the impact of programmable automation on employment and ofthe implications of computer simulation for training. though gordon seessubstantial change in business operations due to information technologies, heexpresses some doubts that the character of business will change. in the endbusiness still "takes raw materials, adds value, and sells products."introduction4information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this is fundamentally the same cautious note that baer strikes byconsistently reminding the reader that information technologies are more likelyto follow the desires and predispositions of individuals than to lead them.though there are similarities between the likely experiences of businessesand homes in adapting to information technologies, there are also importantdifferences. the most important difference in likely experience derives from thefact that businesses are organized primarily for profit while homes exist tosatisfy a wide range of individual human needs. businesses, since they areorganized to serve less diverse goals, may be more adaptive to opportunitiesprovided by technology than are individuals or family units. the potentials ofinformation technologies would seem to lie more, for example, in reducing thecost of business operations than in improving the quality of companionship orchild rearing in the home.like any treatment of a broad topic, this volume does not address a numberof issues of great interest. in particular: how will emerging information technologies affect educationalinstitutions and federal, state, and local governments? how will international political activities be influenced through thepotential availability of secure voice and teleconferencing facilities anddata basesšthe advent of sophisticated "hot lines"? direct mail, made possible by the potentials of inexpensive computing,has already revolutionized constituency contact and fund raising inindustry associations, professional societies, charitable organizations,and political coalitions. how will continuing development ofinformation technologies affect the activities of these organizations inthe 1990s? how will the merger of previously regulated telecommunicationsentities and competitive unregulated informationprocessing firmsevolve? what will determine who will own, operate, and control highcost facilities serving multiple needs where duplication of facilities iseconomically or operationally unrealistic? how will critical decisions be made as to allocations and use ofnaturally limited facilities (frequencies and satellite orbital locations)? will restrictions be applied to the kinds of services that various entitiesare permitted to provide and, if so, is it possible to enforce them in thetotally digital environment that is rapidly emerging? what forces will guide the emergence of communications standardsand where will that guidance lead? what role will the standards thatemerge play in determining the direction for the research anddevelopment that will bring us the next generation of informationtechnologies? what role will state utility commissions and local portauthorities play in determining what service will be available? as information flow across international boundaries explodes andpoliticalintroduction5information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.control becomes more and more impotent in the new informationtechnology world, what international organizations or mechanisms willemerge or should be created to ensure international order andcooperation? are there public interest or universal service considerations that shouldbe elements of u.s. information policy, and how will they be definedand implemented?the list goes on. nonetheless, the six papers in this volume, with thecomments offered by the discussant for each paper, provide an introductionšand a few steps beyondšto the manner in which information technologies areforcing, and being shaped by, transformations in a range of social institutions.even more importantly, the papers in this volume may offer examples of amanner of thinking about technology and social change that readers can use tounderstand the technologydriven social transformation where they work andlive. that, anyway, is our hope.this introduction would be incomplete without acknowledging theinvaluable role played by bruce guile in planning, organizing, and bringingtogether the contributions represented in this volume. his energy and initiativewere crucial to the success of this program.introduction6information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of information technologiesjohn s. mayothe interaction of technology and societyhumans were given capable and inquisitive minds, so they endlessly seekbetter ways of doing things. this drive, coupled with an innate curiosity and astrong drive to unlock the secrets of nature, has created a steady stream oftechnical innovations over the ages.these innovative efforts have focused on the means for survival, comfort,and accumulation of wealthšwith the hierarchy of needs extending fromphysical basics of existence to higherlevel wants associated with selfactualization. a principal thrust of innovation today continues towardtechnological advances that enhance the productivity of labor and free humansof tasks done more economically by machines. an insatiable appetite forconvenience, comfort, and entertainment products and services, as well as formeans to overcome natural barriers like geography and travel time, creates aconstant pull on technology. the pull is especially strong in areas relating to thequality of life, and there have been many technical innovations to meet thatneed. but the opportunities are far from exhausted.among society's newest demands on technology is for the means to handlethe vast amount of information generated by modem life. this informationexplosion stems from sophisticated business practices, new residential services,substantially increased record keeping through extensive data bases, and theglobalization of our advanced society.the information technologies have evolved over many years to assist agrowing portion of the work force devoted to the generation,the evolution of information technologies7information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.processing, transmission, storage, retrieval, and general use of information.bureaucracies generated during the major wars and the rapid growth of socialservices in recent decades have helped increase the number of informationworkers in the u.s. work force, producing a permanent change in our way oflife. stimulated by these and other spurts of rapid growth, the percentage ofinformation workers in the u.s. work force has grown from about 10 percent in1900 to about 30 percent in 1940 to about 50 percent in 1970. since 1970 thefraction has held at roughly 50 percent, probably as a result of the newelectronic information technologies that augment human efforts. the computer,along with telecommunications, is making today's information work force moreefficient, much as the engine raised productivity during the industrialrevolution. in both cases, society's thirst for technology to reduce labor was metin striking ways by a wide range of innovations of varying impacts.this thirst for technology creates a steady pull on innovation. in addition,the technologies themselves provide a push. from the families of alltechnologically feasible innovations of all time has come an almost endlessreservoir of potential technology. however, between society's pull and the pushof technology are two powerful gates, as shown in figure 1. the technologyavailable to society at any particular time is only that which can flow past thetechnology gate, which isfigure 1the flow of innovation into society.source: at & t bell laboratories.the evolution of information technologies8information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.operated by a series of strong forces. among them are r&d prowess,characteristics of the embedded technology base, natural sequencingconstraints, and perceived standards limitations: the force of r&d prowess is the sum of all the contributions ofindividual laboratories. the prowess of an r&d laboratory is limitedby the skills of its scientists and engineers and by the capabilities of itssupport environment, including both financial and physical resources.laboratory prowess also clearly depends on the wisdom and judgmentof the r&d management team.the embedded base of technology, such as existing systems orproduction facilities that represent a large investment, impacts thecharacteristics of the r&d laboratories and the factories that maketheir products. it often leads the r&d laboratories to seek innovationsthat have great synergy with the embedded base, which can be either acurse or a blessing. on the one hand, this force can limit theintroduction of new technology as well as discourage breakthroughs intotally new directions. on the other hand, it brings focus and resources.with good systems engineering, older technologies can be phased out,current ones upgraded, and entirely new ones introduced, all in waysthat are synergistic with the embedded base.natural sequencing simply means that the invention of the integratedcircuit, for example, would have been unlikely before the inventionand development of the transistor. the imposition of standards prior to innovation can narrow thetechnology gate by forcing r&d laboratories to focus on innovationsthat meet preconceived standards, but which may in the long run not bethe best innovations at all.innovations that pass the technology gate must also pass the social gate.the forces that operate the social gate include economics, the common good,public receptivity, and regulation and legislation:the economic force depends not only on the marketplace, but also onthe national economic structure. currently, we see a significantdifference in the way economic forces affect innovation in the unitedstates as compared to japan. closely related to economics, but not always in concert with it, is theforce that makes technology serve the common good. society willeventually, for the most part, either ignore or legislate againsttechnology that does not serve the common good. the issue of public receptivity is related to that of the common good. inthe united states, the public defeated the supersonic transport andappears to have nuclear power on its deathbed; however, it stillremains to be seen whether such innovations do not indeed serve thecommon good.regulation and legislation have been and remain powerful forces at thesocial gatešforces very active in throttling technology on behalf ofsociety.the evolution of information technologies9information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.much social good has come from such actions, but not without frequentadverse impact in the long run.the forces operating at the social gate are extremely powerful in selectingthe innovations that actually succeed. they serve as a "tollgate" in the gapbetween the push of technology and the pull of society. the gating forces willbe further examined, following the discussion of the information technologiespushing at the gate.technologies that survive both gates have primarily three types of impactsin the society they enter, depending heavily upon their character. first, ofgreatest impact are the "killer" technologies such as the engine, which replacedthe horse, and the transistor, which replaced the vacuum tube. their impact, ofcourse, extends far beyond these major replacements, to opening whole newfields of opportunity. included among these are opportunities to satisfypreviously unknown or unrecognized societal needs and wants, often of anincreasingly sophisticated nature.second in impact are the "new domain" technologies. although they donot replace earlier technologies, they do open up entirely new areas ofopportunity. an example of the new domain technologies is automatic speechrecognition and synthesis, a rapidly developing technology that will eventuallyallow inanimate objects such as cars and appliances to speak and listen much ashumans do.third, there are the "niche" technologies, which play a very important rolein meeting society's needs. when they first appear, however, they are oftenmistaken for killer technologies. for example, when broadcast televisionbecame feasible, many expected it to kill newspapers, radio, and movies.instead, it found its own niche and satisfied a thirst in society not previously metšor perhaps even recognized.information technologies and their limitsthe growth in information jobs cited above is but one major indicator ofthe rapid transition of our society to an information base. another majorindicator is the rapid growth in information technologies. george stibitz'sinvention of the first digital computer, the achievement of universal telephoneservice, and the invention of solidstate electronics paved the way to theinformation age. the technology of the information age is digital. theinformation is represented as digits, which are generated, processed,transported, stored, recovered, and displayed in order to do useful things forhumans. the key technologies forthe evolution of information technologies10information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manipulating digits are integrated circuits, computing technology, software, andphotonics, as discussed below.integrated circuitsthe most powerful force of technology today is the expanding capabilitiesof silicon integrated circuits. a tiny chip of silicon can contain an electroniccircuit consisting of hundreds of thousands of transistors and all the necessaryinterconnecting conductorsšand its cost is only a few dollars. the circuitry onthat chip is equivalent to about 10 years of work by a person soldering discretecomponents onto printed wiring boards. it is this tremendous improvement inthe economics of circuit assembly, coupled with similar improvements in thereliability of individual circuit functions, that accounts for the power of thistechnology.a common measure of progress in integrated circuit technology is thenumber of components that can be squeezed into a singlechip circuit. figure 2shows the exponential growth in components per chip over the past twodecades, and a projection for the next decade. the number of components perchip of silicon is still increasing by a factor of 100 per decade. today the limitis almost 1 million components on a chip; by 1990, it will be at least 5 million;and by the year 2000, between 10 and 100 million.figure 2changes in component density for silicon production, 1960 to 1990.source: at&t bell laboratories.the evolution of information technologies11information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the limits of integrated circuit technology as we know it today aredetermined basically by how big we can make a chip and how small we canmake the line widths used to define a working transistor. these limits can easilybe estimated by assuming the largest practical chip to be about 1,000 squaremillimeters, and the smallest transistor to be fabricated using 0.1micrometer(µm) line widths (a length of about 400 silicon atoms). when reasonable spacefor electrical isolation and interconnections is allowed, the resulting limit iseasily derived to be about 100 million components per chip. for such a chip,using known technology, electrical isolation and interconnections wouldconsume approximately 90 percent of the chip area.the magic of the everexpanding capabilities of integrated circuits willtherefore be with us for at least another decade. component reliability willcontinue to increase dramatically, and integrated circuit chips will performmore and more functions, ever faster and cheaper. this progress will makepossible increasingly powerful, reliable, lowercost digital systems and muchmore flexible approaches to systems design. integrated circuit progress ismaking it possible to have digital systems everywhere, be they for computing,robotic control, office automation, or telecommunications. clearly, this forcewill continue to be a major spur to further progress in the informationtechnologies.computing technologycomputing technology is a major beneficiary of the power of integratedcircuits. figure 3 shows the past trends in computer processing power andforecasts the future. processing power is expressed in millions of instructionsper second (mips), and each data point in the figure represents a specificcomputer introduced into the marketplace. most notable is the rapid progress inprocessing power of the singlechip computer or microcomputer, which hasbeen doubling each year. extrapolation of the trend of the last decade forecaststhat microcomputers will have processing power comparable to that ofminicomputers and large, generalpurpose mainframe computers(maxicomputers) by the early 1990s. because the computer is the ''engine'' ofthe information age, having the power of today's largest computers on a chip oreven a few chips of silicon to go in automobiles, appliances, toys, offices,factories, and homes is a tremendous driving force.the trend curve of components per chip in figure 2 showed that by 1990integrated circuits will be within a factor of 10 of the physical limit of thetechnology known today. that implies the maxicomputers, minicomputers, andsinglechip microcomputers as we now know themthe evolution of information technologies12information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have an ultimate limit of a few 10s of mips. however, the limit of chipprocessing power is not a limit to the processing power of computing. forcomputing is rapidly moving toward new architectures involving multiplicitiesof processing elements such as singlechip computers. multiplicities of suchchips, however, are inherently more expensivešlargely because of the highcosts and difficulty of interconnecting and programming them to function assingle systems. for automobiles, appliances, tools, home computers, and thelike, we can assume that most will operate with an ultimate computing power ofthe order of 10 mips or less per computer. but an automobile, for example,may eventually have a dozen or more computers.figure 3trends in processing power of computers, 1970 to 1990.source: at&t bell laboratories.softwaresoftware is vital not only to the operation of information age systems, butalso to their interlinking with each other, with data bases, and with people. thedemands for software are growing explosivelyšfor tailoring systems tocustomers' needs, for making them reliable, and for making them easier to use,or "friendlier." these demands, in turn, are leading to increasingly complexsoftware, ironically, to achieve user simplicity.unfortunately, software is the "bottleneck" information technology.currently, it is generated principally by people, and most enterprises generatemore software by hiring more peopleša very difficult and costly approach. itstill takes a programmer approximately one year to produce a few thousandlines of code. in telecommunications, athe evolution of information technologies13information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.large electronic toll switching machine uses more than 2 million lines, a localelectronic switcher more than 1 million lines, and system 85, a private branchexchange (pbx), almost 2 million lines. industry has learned in the last fewyears how to manage big software systems, developing them to meet cost, time,and performance objectives. but it desperately needs an improvement inprogramming productivity to sustain both the growth in complexity and theincreasing demand for software systems.the rate of progress in improving programming productivity remainsextremely low. figure 4 compares at&t bell laboratories' productivitygrowth for producing software with that for design of silicon integrated circuitchips and circuit packs. the bad news is common throughout the industry.software productivity is improving very slowly. the good news is theincreasing productivity of the electronics designers, and that is largely asoftware success story. in fact, without computeraided design, much of theprogress in today's most important technology would be impossiblešandtomorrow's tasks, hopeless. even though chip complexity has increased 100fold over the past decade, computerautomated tools permitted us to use thesame design effort, as well as to significantly improve our ability to get errorfree chip designs.there will eventually be dramatic improvements in programmingproductivity. they will come from continued improvements in computer aidsfor software design, leading eventually to automatic genfigure 4hardware and software productivity, 1975 to 1984.source: at&t bell laboratories.the evolution of information technologies14information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.eration of applications programs. such a breakthrough in software productivitywill first require development of durable and detailed technical standards, newmethodologies for requirements generation, and large software design programsfor structuring, generating, and testing code. progress may first come throughgreater development of reusable software components with standardizedinterfaces. even those standards do not exist and will be difficult to achieve.early circuit designers rapidly solved that problem for hardware components.clearly, it can also be done for software components.there is an argument, based on the analogy of motors, that today'ssoftware problems are transitory. when motors were new, users "hooked themup" to grinders, saws, and numerous other elements to create functional tools.but as that technology matured, users' needs were met by functioning systemsthat contained motorsšdrills, grinders, saws, washing machines, dishwashers,cars, toothbrushes, toysšan endless list. the analogy suggests that sooner orlater a wide spectrum of software systems will be available so that most userswill be able to buy functional information age products that perform the neededtasks. these products will just happen to contain softwarešmuch asdishwashers and refrigerators, for example, just happen to contain motors. theuser could not care less, so long as the dishes are clean and the food cold. suchfunctional softwarebased products are rapidly emerging in the marketplace, butthe trend has just begun.photonicsphotonics is the key information age technology for transmitting largeamounts of digital information. there are two key innovations: the laser andultrapure glass fiber. combined, they provide a transmission capability that farexceeds that of copper wire and radio to meet the most stringent needs of theinformation age.photonics technology has progressed rapidly. in about a decade thetechnology has achieved some difficult technical milestones:highpurity, ultratransparent, and highstrength glass fibers; constructing longlife lasers that can operate at room temperature andat the appropriate wavelengths: optimizing the mode of lightwave propagation in the fiber and shiftingfrom multimode to singlemode fibers for many applications; determining and exploiting the unique wavelengths at which fibertransmission losses are the lowest; developing means for wavelength multiplexing of multiple bit streamsonto the same fiber; andthe evolution of information technologies15information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. developing singlefrequency light sources which desensitize systemperformance to wavelength dispersion in the fiber.where is innovation in photonics leading lightwave systems? the currenttechnical frontier is in increasing bit rates. the basic trend continues towardhigher communications capacity per fiber and greater distances between signalamplifiers or repeaters. for example, since at&t introduced the first fullservice commercial lightwave system in 1977, fiber capacity has increasedalmost 10fold, from 672 calls per fiber to 6,048. the corresponding amplifierspacings have increased from about 8 kilometers to more than 30 kilometers. inlaboratory experiments described recently, at&t bell laboratories set a"distance record" by transmitting 420 million bits per second over 125 mileswithout amplification. also, 2 billion bits per second were transmitted over 80miles using no amplification. that pulse rate can transmit the entire 30volumeencyclopaedia britannica in a few seconds. underlying these accomplishmentsis healthy progress not only in glass fibers and lasers, but also in photodetectorsand many other system components.the limit of loss in today's fibers is shown in figure 5. the twowavelength bands at which the loss of practical fibers is both low and near thelimit are in the regions around 1.3 and 1.5 µm. most new designs operate inthese bands. actual signal losses achieved in these bands are close enough tothe theoretical losses that major new breakthroughs in silicon fiber performancedo not seem likely. on the other hand, advances in materials processing couldlead to entirely new materials systems for fibers. also, the power output oflasers will rise, and the sensitivity of signal detection subsystems will improve.so getting from today's capability of 125 miles without amplifiers to a fewthousand miles without amplifiers may yet be feasible. the difference is notspectacular for domestic communications. but the capability of sending signalsa few thousand miles without amplifiers is significant in globalizing theinformation age, for it would enable us to span the oceans with passivelightwave systems.what is the limit of lightwave technology as we know it today, and whenwill we reach that limit? extrapolation of progress in the rate at whichinformation can be sent through fibers and the distance it can travel withoutamplification, coupled with a little analysis, suggests the answers. figure 6shows that the product of rate in megabits per second (mbps) and distance inkilometers (km) has been doubling yearlyšand this will probably continue forthe rest of the decade, at least. each data point in the figure represents theleading edgethe evolution of information technologies16information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accomplishment for a single wavelength channelšcontinually dominated byat&t and the japanese.figure 5lightwave communications technology.source: at&t bell laboratories.simple detection theory can be used to estimate the physical limit oftoday's lightwave technology. the estimate involves combining the theoreticalloss and nonlinear behavior of glass fiber with an assumed maximum allowablelaser power of approximately 1 watt and a minimum requirement of about 10 to100 photons per pulse. this forecast suggests that the technology limits willpermit the development of lightwave systems with each channel operating 10 to100 times faster than today's best. wavelength multiplexing will extend thislimit by another factor of 10 to 100, giving an ultimate limit of about 109, or 1billion, mbps/km.the evolution of information technologies17information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 6lightwave technology capacitydistance achievements, 1975 to 1990.source: at&t bell laboratories.the next technical frontier in reaching this limit is probably sophisticatedmultiplexing, modulation, and detection schemes. for example, quantizedfrequency modulation of the laser and coherent detection in the receiver maysignificantly expand the information carrying capacity of fiber systems.technologies likely to emergethere is a vast reservoir of new technologies that will have significantimpact on further evolution of the information age. they are discussed here inapproximate rank order of importance. among them is at least one potentialkiller technology. there are also areas where possible breakthroughs couldextend today's technology into entirely new domains. and of more modestimpact are new materials systems and clever innovations that create the nichetechnologies.potential breakthroughs in silicon circuitsas noted earlier, the limits of today's silicon technology are basicallydetermined by how small a working transistor can be made and by how large achip can be made. the first possible breakthrough would be at the small end,where the current requirement is for a transistor defined by 0.1µm line widths(a length of about 400 silicon atoms). perhaps we will find a way to break thisrequirement and progressthe evolution of information technologies18information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.into the domain of molecular electronicsšcircuits based on eversmallerdevices, possibly down to individual molecules.the second possible breakthrough would be at the large end, now limitedby a chip 1,000 square millimeters in area. the ultimate breakthrough herewould be defectfree wafers so that the chip itself could consume the wholewafer. such waferscale integration would increase the number of componentsper chip by perhaps a factor of 100.a third possible breakthrough would be a new, reliable, but cheap way tointerconnect two or more integrated circuit chips so that they would operate asif they were one. this would enable a mosaic of simpler chips to do as much asor more than a single complex chip. such a breakthrough would reduce the highcosts of interchip connections, which is the force that now motivates us tosqueeze increasing numbers of components on an individual chip. and it wouldopen up totally new opportunities for radically different approaches to systemsdesign and architecture. it would extend the magic of silicon technology beyondthe edges of the monolithic chip, and it would fold the burden of systeminterconnection into the domain of photolithography and batch processing.integrated opticsintegrated optics is a potential killer technology lurking at the gate. thereis a possibility that most tasks currently done by electrons will someday be doneby photons. so huge amounts of information may someday be transmitted,switched, and processed entirely by photons. integrated optics systems arealmost sure to emerge for at least specialized jobs. before such allphotonicsystems appear, however, combined electronic and photonic circuits willincreasingly be integrated into the same circuit and possibly onto the same chip.advantages include reduced parasitics, leading to higher speed, increasedsensitivity, and optical interconnections. these result in reduced packaginglimitations, less ground noise, and no induced noise in the optical elements.such optoelectronic circuits also interface gracefully with lightwavetransmission systems.the next step, allphotonic integrated optics, is farther away. muchinnovation will be required before optics can come close to matching theprocessing power of today's integrated circuits. moreover, today's optical logicrequires relatively high power, with the associated problems of heat dissipation.and optical logic is also physically large compared to integrated circuit logic.at&t bell laboratories andthe evolution of information technologies19information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.others are working diligently to advance integrated optics technology. it maywell become the same kind of driving force in the future as integrated circuitsare today.new computing and software architecturesnew architectures for both computing and software are surely feasible.past thinking has been conditioned by the work of von neumann and machinedesigns centered around the limited computing resources of one main processorand associated memory.vast new opportunities now exist for "nontraditional" computer systemsarchitectures. designers may use multiple processors, and they have theflexibility of distributing fast memory throughout the fabric of a machine'slogic. microprocessor chips will increasingly be integrated into complexdistributedprocessing architectures. this is a promising way to link a numberof lowcost, relatively lowpower microprocessors into a single system with thecombined processing power of all the component chips.such a distributedprocessing system, based on the limits of today'sintegrated circuit technology, places an enormous burden on software. forexample, a good distributedsoftware operating system must coordinate all theseparate processing unitsšperhaps as many as 1,000šas one system, yetpermit each to work on a different problem. the software system must permitaccess to remote files or other data storage in a way that is transparent to theuser, and it must permit remote execution of programs, independent of wherethe data reside and of which particular processing unit is working on theproblemšagain, transparent to the user. all this represents a very fine marriagebetween the capabilities of integrated circuits and the needs of distributedsoftware systems. the full potential of software architectures based on thelimits of integrated circuit technology is yet to be fully understood. but it is anencouraging trend that distributedsoftware architectures are emerging at a fastrate. and these architectures increasingly look like the structures of the world'slargest distributed computing networkšthe u.s. telephone network ofthousands of interconnected switching machines.userfriendly interfaces and computer speechthe full potential of the information technologies will not be realized untilit is easier for people to use softwarebased systemsšto deal with computers ontheir own terms and possibly in their own language.the evolution of information technologies20information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it is interesting to note that even though the telephone network is theworld's most complex computing system, the power of that vast network isavailable even to a child with virtually no training. such powerful and simpleways to access the new machines of the information age do not yet exist.a major breakthrough is near at hand. machines that recognize andrespond to human speech can now be built. speech synthesis is well along, andspeech recognition is progressing nicely. vocabularies for recognition arecurrently limited, however, and some systems require "training sentences" fromall users in order to recognize their speech. but the growing capability ofintegrated circuits is sure to produce eventually a few chips of silicon that areequivalent to portions of the brain, the ear, and the voice box. then mostmachines and appliances will be able to speak and listen much as humans do.but speech recognition is a demanding course: whole sentences require 100times more processing and about 10 times more memory than isolated words.data networksachieving the full potential of the information technologies requires theinterconnection of the physically separate computers made commonplace bysilicon technology. increased digital networking is required to interlink thecomputers not only with one another, but also with various large data bases.and this networking must include local clusters of homes and offices, as well aslocations around the world. fortunately, the telephone networks of the worldare rapidly moving toward endtoend digital connectivity. but they must beexpanded to include more pervasive data packet switching. importantly,networks must extend their software control to interconnect with the user'ssoftware, so that data network needs can be "dialed up" by the user and madeimmediately availablešavoiding the delays of manual order processing andmanual provisioning. there have been significant breakthroughs in suchtechnology. the dacs, or digital access and crossconnect system, firstintroduced some years ago by at&t, is leading the way. information agetelephone switching machines such as the at&t 5ess * electronic switch areadding even greater capability to meet the growing needs of automated datanetworks.integrated circuits based on compound materialsthe integrated circuit industry is based mainly on silicon. a significantstart has been made in a potentially competitive materials system,* ess is a trademark of at&t technologies, inc.the evolution of information technologies21information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gallium arsenide, which is but one of the many possible compoundsemiconductor materials. gallium arsenide has two features especially worthyof note. first, electron speed is higher than in silicon, so gallium arsenidedevices of comparable dimensions are faster. second, because gallium arsenideis compatible with lightwave technology, there is the potential of combiningboth electronic and photonic circuits on a single chip. figure 7 compareslaboratory results in gallium arsenide with the earlier production progress curvefor silicon. the rate of progress is impressive, but the leading edge ofcomplexity of gallium arsenide still has a long way to go to catch up with thatof silicon. further, a saturation effect may set in, for as the feature sizes ofgallium arsenide integrated circuits become smaller and smaller, the material'sadvantage of higher electron mobility diminishes with the correspondingincrease in electric field. it is simply too early to predict the ultimate extent towhich gallium arsenide will transfer significant production away from silicon.the potential of largescale integrated circuits based on other compoundsemiconductor materials is largely unknown. however, at&t belllaboratories recently reported the world's fastest semiconductor integratedcircuitšwhich operates at 90 gigabits per second. it is made of very puregallium arsenide and aluminum gallium arsenide in a multilayered, selectivelydoped heterostructure configuration.figure 7trends in component density, silicon production, and gallium arsenideannouncements, 1960 to 1990.source: at&t bell laboratories.the evolution of information technologies22information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.laser materials systems and yieldsthe materials systems for lasers are in a relatively primitive state today,resulting in rather low manufacturing yields. improved materials systems andstructures would greatly lower the cost of lasers and, in turn, accelerate the paceof advancement of lightwave technologies. because molecular beam epitaxypermits control of materials down to the atomic levels, it offers exciting andexpanding opportunities to customfabricate new materials that may lead to newdevice concepts, including lasers.technology selection and the pace ofinnovationnow that we have a view of the key technologies, their limits, andpotential new technologies, let us further examine the gating forces thatdetermine how the winning technologies will be selected and the resulting paceof innovation.marketplace economicsthe dominant force pulling innovations through the technology and socialgates today is the needs of the marketplace. for decades electronic technologieshave been pulled into the marketplace as fast as humanly possible. today'stechnology, however, is so rich that it can do more things than society mightfind useful. increasingly, marketing resources are required to sort outinnovations and potential innovations, to contain the scope of development, andto focus investment on the applications that will win in the marketplace. thisgrowing force of marketing in the information technology arena is creating newand challenging relationships. such a giveandtake relationship betweenmarketers and technologists has long operated in lowtechnology fields such assoaps and toothpaste. today, there is a similar, rapidly evolving relationship infields of highest technology, especially in computers, software, andtelecommunications.the pull of the marketplace rests largely on willingness to pay. to impactsociety significantly, an innovation must be of sufficient intrinsic value thatusers will not only pay the traditional manufacturing, sales, and related costs,but compensate for the high cost of development as well. information ageproducts are very r&dintensive. for example, r&d accounts for most of thecost of software, and the viability of software in the marketplace more stronglydepends on sales volumes and copyright protection than do traditionalmanufactured products.technology selection is strongly tied to cost trends. for example,the evolution of information technologies23information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the proliferation of digital systems ties directly to the falling cost of a digitallogic circuit, as shown by the curve in figure 8. with each passing year, newdigital systems become economically feasible because their costs drop belowwhat the user is willing to pay. the figure also shows that at 1 dollar per logicgate, the telecommunications industry could economically justify two digitalsystems: one called t1, for voice transmission on wire pairs, and a digitalcontroller for the less local electronic switch. at 10 cents per logic gate, the4ess electronic switch, a large digital toll machine, and the dimension®private branch exchange became feasible. at 1 cent per logic gate, 5essinformation age local digital switches became feasible, along with a widevariety of microprocessorbased ''intelligent'' telephones and terminals. digitallogic costs are now in the range of a tenth of a cent per gate and will be on theorder of a millicent per gate by 1990. each year as these logic costs continue tofall, the costs of a wide range of new information age products will drop belowthe threshold of user willingness to pay. the result is a mushrooming family ofintelligent productsšand the mushrooming phenomenon is not likely to slowdown before the year 2000. the resulting economic climate will create a widerange of innovations, and economic forces will sort out the winners.a user's willingness to pay is not an absolute. so technology selection isstrongly affected by public opinion and advertising. the case offigure 8digital integrated circuit costs, 1950 to 1990.source: at&t bell laboratories.the evolution of information technologies24information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.videotape recorders versus the videodisk is an interesting example, even thoughthey are not functionally equivalent. it seems that society has selected thevideotape machine as the winning technology, possibly because of its recordingcapability. the totality of forces that produced that selection is very difficult tocharacterize, but i suggest that the technologist needs help if he or she expectsto forecast the technology selection process.r&d economicsthe force of economics is somewhat stronger at the social gate than it is atthe technology gate, but even so it is a powerful force behind our r&dlaboratories and even our university research centers. for at their limits the keytechnologies are extremely expensive to develop.the pace of innovation and, to a lesser extent, the direction of innovationare increasingly controlled by r&d economics. clean rooms, feature patterningequipment, electron beam machines, and the like are terribly expensive at themicrometer level of capability and will become even more expensive as wemove to submicrometer geometries. small companies and universities areincreasingly becoming followers rather than leaders. today most universitiescannot afford the requisite equipment, and even the wealthier ones are having toform special alliances with industry to raise the needed capital. the situationwill ease somewhat as more universities find that complete fabrication facilitiesare not essential for strong teaching programs or even specialized research. butthe trend is still there: the leading edge r&d that produces the significantinnovations that guide all of industry can be afforded by only a few institutionsin our society.government of course plays a large role in r&d economics. of particularimportance are the general economic climate of the nation, tax incentives,antitrust relief, and sharing of the output of the federal laboratories, as well astechnology initiatives in the department of defense and the nationalaeronautics and space administration. each of these forces is managed on itsown, but the sum of all the forces is not managed to speed the pace oftechnology and optimize the nation's technical position.r&d prowessthe prowess of our industrial, government, and university r&dlaboratories remains a major factor in technology selection and the pace ofinnovation. competence and motivation of individual scientiststhe evolution of information technologies25information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and engineers are vital to r&d prowess, but management of those laboratoriesalso is very important. a prerequisite for innovation in a particular area is thededication of people and capital resources to that area, and creation of anatmosphere conducive to innovation. at&t bell laboratories is widelyacknowledged for having the winning combination, as well as for creating mostof the innovations for the information age. their inventionsšincluding solidstate devices, lasers, and a wide range of telecommunications and informationtechnologyšspawned new industries that have gained significant innovativestrength of their own.the power of these innovations to meet social needs is so great that theyhave forced change in some of society's major institutions. by opening up vastnew frontiers of business opportunity and spawning numerous competitors,solidstate technology blended telecommunications and data processing and ledto the restructuring of those industries, just as the engine forced restructuring inthe industrial revolution. industry structure, in turn, is a strong force intechnology selection and in pacing innovation.we are dealing with extremely powerful technologies whose forces are atbest barely under our control. continued u.s. industrial competitiveness isheavily dependent on the prowess of our r&d laboratories. without a superiortechnical position, we could not be a force in technology selection or in the paceof innovation. the breakup of the bell system has created a national challengeto ensure that the new environment has at least the r&d capabilities of the old.certainly, at&t is fully dedicated to continuing the innovative strengths ofat&t bell laboratories. however, the communications industry is much morefragmented than it was, and there are no means for managing it collectively.this is in sharp contrast to the major u.s. r&d competitor, japan, which hasnumerous mechanisms for guiding its collective r&d efforts at the nationallevel. ironically, japan has succeeded with its high technology by usingmethods, including statistical quality control, largely copied from the old bellsystem.ensuring the future prowess of our r&d laboratories will take more thanblind faith that competition among our r&d enterprises will spur results thatare more innovative and cover wider domains than the collectively managedenterprises abroad. success will come from meeting two broad challengesposed by the new environment. first, our industries in general must continue todevote the needed resources to ensure steady streams of innovation from eachr&d laboratory. and second, in this new environment, each of the r&dlaboratories must continue to add its innovations promptly to the advancement ofthe evolution of information technologies26information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.science by continuing free and open dialogues within the technical communities.regulationfew actions can throttle the flow of technology and slow the pace ofinnovation more than regulatory actions. in general, regulatory actions direct anentire industry or the most able within that industry. actions are usually basedon issues other than technology selection or pace, but the result may haveenormous impact on technology. regulating an entire industry always has thepotential peril of handicapping every one of the affected domestic companiesand of benefiting every one of the foreign competitors. regulators mustacknowledge that the nation's major innovations will continue to come from itsmost able enterprises, and thatšthrough their action or inactionšthey oftenhave the power to throttle the outputs of these enterprises.this throttling of technology comes from action as well as inaction. forexample, legislative action ruled at&t out of the international satellitebusiness and thus led to the disbanding of the pioneering telstar satellitedevelopment team, an act that hardly accelerated the flow of satellitetechnology to the marketplace. regulatory inaction delayed the availability ofcellular radiotelephones to the public by a decade after at&t had thetechnology available.at at&t we are still experiencing a regulatory environment that restrictsinformation flow within our business and favors competitors who have notcontributed to the technology and have trivial r&d capabilities. suchregulation places us in an environment that is insensitive to the funding of r&dthat can make a contribution not only to our business, but to the nation at large.as hard as we try to offset these handicaps, they remain a factor in our ability tomaintain the flow of innovation.technical standardstechnical standards are vital to the evolution of the information age. newproducts must not only be compatible with each other, but also with olderproducts. and the standards must be firm enough to ensure compatibility, andprompt enough to ensure rapid introduction of new technology. indeed, rapidprogress seems to depend on prompt standards or no standards. almostathandstandards encourage developers to wait and discourage researchers working onalternative options.the evolution of information technologies27information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the past, key industry leaders developed the technology and brought itpromptly to the marketplace. at&t technology rapidly became the standard forthe telecommunications industry, and ibm set powerful standards in thecomputing field. in today's new environment, no single enterprise can pioneerthe standards. for example, at&t's unix operating system grew out oftelecommunications, but it is rapidly becoming a worldwide computing standard.furthermore, telecommunications has "shrunk" the globe, so standardsmust increasingly be global. in working to set global standards, the technologisthas encountered severe political issues, such as "one nation, one vote."attention to the global marketplace has created an increasing tendency to set uptechnical standards before new products emerge. that approach has greatimpact on technology selection and is sure to delay the flow of new technologybecause of the substantial risk in introducing products in parallel with thestandards deliberations. unfortunately, these frustrations, which have plaguedthe international standards scene for years, are now characterizing the domesticscene. the political motivations in domestic standard setting are greatlyenhanced in the new environment, and the ability of domestic standards bodiesto handle the issues is yet to be proven. a major challenge is to try to separatethe political and technical issues, with the hope that the technical issues can beresolved promptly.the embedded technology basethree examples illustrate the force of the embedded base: silicon circuits,lightwave systems, and magnetic bubbles.the world's investment in silicon circuit fabrication facilities is estimatedto be $15 billion. most electronic products in the field are based on silicon, andthe popular "direction" of the past decade has been, "if it can be done in silicon,it will." until recently, almost 100 percent of the integrated circuit r&d wassilicon based, partly due to the momentum of the embedded base, and partlydue to the power of that technology.lightwave is a counterexample. although there was no embedded base,enormous r&d resources have been devoted to that technology. themarketplace views lightwave as a killer technology, and tends to favor it overthe embedded base.magnetic bubble technology was a potential killer that has been forced, atleast for the present, to a relatively minor role. the power of the embedded baseof magnetic disks and silicon random access memories drove cost reductions inthese technologies as steep as thethe evolution of information technologies28information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.learning curve for bubbles. as a result, r&d in bubble technology diminishedover the years and its learning curve slowed. so it will be a long time, if ever,before magnetic bubbles displace the embedded base. josephson junction andother cryogenic devices appear to suffer the same fate, though they have nevergotten as close to the competition as did magnetic bubbles. both bubbles andcryogenics appear to be niche technologies at best.the information agelet me conclude by looking ahead. considering the informationtechnologies and their limits, pending new technologies, and forces controllingselection and pace, we can construct a pretty good picture of the technology oftomorrow. whether this technology comes fast or slow, from our traditionalr&d laboratories or from japan or elsewhere, it is clearly leading us quicklyinto the information age.what does this mean to society? this section considers some of theexpected changes when information technologies will assist the mind much asthe industrial revolution's technology assists the muscle.computers everywherethe industrial revolution produced the now mature age of motorsšwhichwe take for granted. all of us are surrounded by motors, from the large ones inour cars and boats to the small ones scattered about our households. as theinformation age matures, we will increasingly be surrounded by computers,from large ones handling major home or business tasks to a multitude ofmicrocomputers in our cars, appliances, toys, games, entertainment centersšpotentially everywhere. and we will think no more of computers lying idle ingadgets we hardly ever use, than we worry about unused motors in our homestoday. computers are becoming so widespread and low cost that we can affordto take them for granted, too.overcoming geographythe information age has another dimensionšbridging distance orgeography. the interlinking of computers, people, machines, and data bases bythe telecommunications network adds a new dimension of excitement. theinformation age will probably not offer electronic transport of matter, but itwill do the next best thing. it will sense and transmit the remote environment toyour presence via audio, video,the evolution of information technologies29information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and data. such benefits depend in large part on the increasingly digital nature ofthe electronic world, with digital connectivity becoming universally available.independent of geography, then, machines can talk to machines, machines cantalk to people and people to machines, andšof course, as usualšpeople cantalk to people, but with expanded options such as video conferencing.it is increasingly feasible for people to conduct business from whereverthey happen to be by accessing more and more capable telecommunicationsservices and links back to their usual points of contact. one can even envision a"telepresence" using sensorequipped robots to transmit perceptions back to theuser. the user could "move" through scenes and even manipulate parts of theenvironment at long distance.new servicesinformation technology makes possible an expanding family of servicessuch as financial transactions from home and office computersšandentertainment, shopping, and accessing of data bases by video and telephonelinks. electronic mail and the ability to leave telephone messages aredeveloping, though slower than the technology allows. increasingly economicalequipment can control energy use in auto, home, and office; and it can monitorsecurity and report alarms by the automatic dialing of emergency services. awide range of directdialing, teleconferencing, and announcement services areavailable on the telecommunications network.the intelligent telecommunications network also makes it increasinglypossible for users to have designated calls forwarded to another location, tohave distinctive ringing identify calls from a specified set of telephone numbers,and to activate traces on nuisance calls. the network's intelligence also makespossible a wide variety of services such as the ability to dial one nationalnumber from anywhere in the country to be connected to the nearest emergencyauto service, hospital, or any number of important services. another potentialinnovation is to assign telephone numbers to people rather than telephones. bykeeping the computer informed of the nearest telephone, you could designatecalls to be routed automatically to youšwherever you might be, at your office,home. car, or at some hotel while on a trip. the same network intelligence is atthe heart of cellular radio technology, which makes it potentially feasible forevery car to have a telephone. this mobile phone capability is now spreadingrapidly.the evolution of information technologies30information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of course it works just as well for personal portable phones as for carphones.universal information serviceearly telephone pioneers wisely and quickly realized that achieving the fullpotential of the telephone depended on every phone being connectable withevery other one. that realization is remarkable because it came when fewpeople had phones, when phones were interconnected in small clusters to serveneighborhoods and businesses. and it came, despite the clear fact that anyindividual phone, over a lifetime of use, would actually need to connect to thetiniest fraction of the total telephone population.so it is for individual computers. the concept of universal informationservice recognizes that every computer, data base, or smart terminal must beconnectable with every other, even though most of the possible connections willnever actually be needed. today, clusters of data networks are growing inselected neighborhoods and many businesses. fortunately, the telephonenetwork is able to interconnect these clusters. but, for a variety of reasons, totalconnectivity falls far short of what is needed for universal information service.achieving this goal will be a great challenge for the information technology andservice industriesšperhaps more so than universal telephone service was in thepast.video data baseshighspeed digital transmissionšusing the everincreasing informationcarrying capacity of lightwave systemsšcould make video communicationsand pictorial data bases as widespread as today's telephone service. and thisprodigious capacity could also be used to carry highspeed data for processingby intelligent machines. these machines could search huge quantities oftransmitted data, selecting and storing only the particular informationšperhapsa news item, stock quote, message, or even a moviešthat fits their users' needsor interests.expert systemsthe combination of increasingly powerful integrated circuits, computingtechnology, and software should enhance knowledge and allow increasinglyexpert software to take over some tasks done by expertthe evolution of information technologies31information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.humans. an example is the expertise required to generate more accurateweather forecastsšranging from global forecasting to the kind of areaforecasting that would permit us to manage crops better and to accuratelypredict the landfall of hurricanes. these expanded technological capabilitieswill often be applied to create "expert" systems in services ranging from legaland financial advice to medical diagnosisšnot necessarily to replace the doctoror lawyer, but to make such services available conveniently and inexpensivelyto large numbers of people. expert systems exist today and perform specializedtasks in the telephone network.engineering perspectivefrom an engineering perspective, the electronic equipment of theinformation age all looks much the same. it is digital systems made up mostlyof integrated circuits mounted on printed wiring boards. the equipment isextremely compact in terms of number of gates per circuit board. interfaceequipment is usually a keyboard, telephone lines, cathode ray tube, and/orliquid crystal display. plasma panel and large liquid crystal displays willdisplace some of the cathode ray tubes, but not for fullmotion video for sometime. the equipment is increasingly reliable, and large systems will containextensive diagnostic subsystems for maintenance. most reconfigurations andrearrangements will be made via software rather than by manual operations.the equipment is increasingly lower in cost per function, so larger and largersystems will be of the throwaway type, much as lowfunction pocket calculatorsare today. the systems will increasingly be designed by machines through evenmore powerful computer aids to design. and, of course, the software content ofthe systems will grow, but hardware will also grow to ease software burdens.the challenge for engineers will shift toward the two ends of the spectrum ofwork: process development and computeraided design systems to supportdesign on the one end, and systems architecture and higherlevel design on theother. the fast pace of technology, the exciting systems possibilities, and theexpanding product opportunities put the information age designer in anenviable position.conclusionthe information technologies are far from exhausted, though the limits ofthe major technologies are well known. a number of new technologies areemerging, and progress should continue at a fast pacethe evolution of information technologies32information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for at least a decade or two. with the possible exception of integrated optics,during this time evolution is not likely to be dominated by new killertechnologies. more likely, the rapid pace of current developments will continueto create ever more favorable economics, and extend the known technologiesinto new domains. the forces that control the pace of innovation andtechnology selection are not likely to change substantially unless therestructuring of the telephone industry produces unexpected results or overseascompetition forces government action. good innovations will continue to berapidly pulled into the marketplace. the resulting richness of highquality, lowcost technology should help create a better societyšan information age with ahost of new computing and telecommunications services to make life morepleasant, productive, and interesting.commentsernest s. kuhprofessor of electrical engineeringuniversity of california, berkeleyi would like to begin by proposing a simpleminded model of technologyevolution for the mathematically inclined. using the statespace analogy, whichis familiar to most young electrical, mechanical, and aerospace engineers, wemay represent the interaction of the four key elements of technology evolutionthat john mayo defines: (1) technology base, (2) research and development, (3)sequencing, and (4) standards.in my proposed model, the state of the dynamic system corresponds to thetechnology base in dr. mayo's analysis; the input corresponds to r&d; thedynamics of the system correspond to sequencing; and finally, the set ofconstraints corresponds to standards. it might be possible then to use thisanalogy to introduce, for some technologies at least, a quantitative analysis ofevolution through the technology gate. models aside, the second part of dr.mayo's presentation gives a brief account of recent and prospective innovationin information processing technology. i would like to respond to that portion ofthe presentation with three comments.first, that which impresses me the most are advances in lightwavetechnology. when i worked at bell laboratories 30 years ago, i was designingrepeaters for submarine cable using vacuum tube technology. the progressmade during the last 30 years in transmission is remarkable.second, the technologies john mayo did not discuss were such mundanethings as the display technology, printers, and workstations. though thesetechnologies already play a major role in today's markets, i believe that theirimportance to scientific and engineering research and developmentšto theevolution of information technologyšwill be profound. the synergy betweenthe evolution of information technologies33information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technologies and research is immense. just imagine that many engineersand graduate students will have at their desks the immense computation power,the convenience in communication of their ideas to coworkers, perhaps acrossthe continent, and the luxury of observing threedimensional color pictures toenhance their intuition. there is no question but that research and developmentwill dramatically benefit from technological advance.third, dr. mayo did not say too much about universities. we all know thefundamental contributions made by the universities: the birth of computers, thestart of artificial intelligence, the advances in very large scale integration(vlsi), and the excellent work in computeraided design in microelectronics.universities will continue to play a major role in the evolution of informationtechnologies: the combination of expertsšsome of the best minds in the fieldšand young graduate students has proven to be a powerful force in basicresearch. as educators we have the responsibility to organize our institutions topreserve our strength in basic research and, in addition, to collaborate withindustry for creative exploratory development.it is interesting to note that in almost all areas dr. mayo touched upon,there exist physical limits, if research continues with the present mode ofoperation, strategy, or materials. that is why scientific research, and especiallybasic engineering research, is so crucial to us in order to make majorbreakthroughs. we at universities and in research centers should keep our goalshigh and far ahead in order not to fall into the trap of only working on problemsof immediate application. while working closely with industry is crucial, wemust maintain a balance, for our main aim is still to develop fundamentalknowledge that will then lead to major breakthroughs.in some areas it will be difficult for even major universities to keep aheadof industry because of the enormous cost of equipment and facilities. however,i believe there is a way out if we compare what we are facing now with physicsresearch after the second world war. major research centers were created tofill this need. engineering research centers, recently proposed by the nationalscience foundation, are only a beginning. certainly, many areas of hightechnologyšthe fifth generation of computers, the next phase ofmicroelectronics research, and the flexible manufacturing system, for examplešcould benefit from major research centers associated with universities. it is upto us, in conjunction with the government and industry, to see to it that we havethe research base we need.john mayo has laid the technological base for us by giving us a model forthinking about technological evolution and by providing an overview ofinformation technologies and where they are headed. we must, of course, beinterested in the implications of the information age on lives ofnonprofessionals and workers in general, as well as in potential harms causedby the information technology, for example, the problem of invasion of privacy.the evolution of information technologies34information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the information age: evolution orrevolution?melvin kranzbergevery time we pick up a newspaper or a journal or listen to the news welearn about new technological developments heralding major sociotechnicalchanges: ''microelectronics revolution,'' "postindustrial society," "computerrevolution," "automation age," and so on. since all of these involve theaccumulation, manipulation, and retrieval of data by computerized electronicdevices and their application to many facets of human life, it is no wonder thatthe headlines shout that computer developments are transforming industry andsociety to produce a new "information age."is this transformation evolutionary or revolutionary? after all, mosttechnologies are evolutionary in the sense that they derive from priordevelopments. the steam engine did not emerge fullblown out of james watt'sbrain, but was based upon thomas newcomen's engine, which in turn rested onstill earlier attempts. similarly, gutenberg's invention of printing derived from awhole series of previous innovationsšpaper, block printing, inks, and movabletypešwhich he put together in a new way. indeed, virtually every majortechnological innovation can be shown to have been the outcome ofevolutionary advance, in that historians can trace the elements comprising themfar back in time.computers, the basis of the information age, find their origins in earlierdevices, such as the ancient abacus, the seventeenthcentury calculators ofpascal, the work of charles babbage in the nineteenththe information age: evolution or revolution?35information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.century, and herman hollerith's development of punchedcard operations forthe u.s. census in the 1890s.1even though such technologies evolve over a long period of time, they canhave revolutionary technical and social impacts even during the process ofreaching full development and application. however, history indicates thatchanges in individual technologies do not by themselves have revolutionary,sociocultural effects. thus the medieval improvements in power sourcesštheintroduction of the windmill and the waterwheel on a wide scalešdid notproduce a "revolution" because they remained based in a smallscale agrariansociety. most people continued to live in rural villages with farming as theirchief occupation; hence there were no major changes in where and how peoplelived and worked.not until the eighteenth century did a whole series of technologicalinnovations come together to produce the classical industrial revolution.although popular opinion credits watt's steam engine with startingindustrialization, many of its elements, such as powerdriven machinery, thefactory organization of work, and specialization of labor, had already begun inthe textile industry long before watt.2 concomitant changes were occurring inmining and metallurgy, and transportation was being improved by thedevelopment of canals and roadways. furthermore, the foundation of a nationalbanking system and extension of jointstock companies helped provide thecapital and financial requirements for technical investment and commercialgrowth. the point is that a single major technical advance does not in itselfconstitute a technological revolution. there must be other and related technicaladvances plus major changes occurring in the politicaleconomicsocialculturalcontext of the times.nevertheless, scholars delight in labeling an era by its most advancedtechnology, even when that technology is at first very limited in its application.for example, even though the "age of steam" is said to have begun with jameswatt, for almost a century after watt's engine more aggregate power wasgenerated in britain by waterpower than by steam; and it took nearly 100 yearsafter fulton' s creation of the "steamboat era" before sailing vesselsdisappeared from oceanic commerce.similarly, the wright brothers at the beginning of this century began the"era of flight," but then it was postponed for another 25 years until lindbergh'sfamous solo flight from new york to paris; yet the "aviation age" really didnot take off until after world war ii. in similar fashion, the ''space age" wassaid to have dawned with sputnik, but more than a quarter of a century haselapsed since then,the information age: evolution or revolution?36information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and we have scarcely begun to exploit space. that is indeed a long day' sdawning!obviously, a single technological feat, no matter how much attention isshowered upon it, does not by itself constitute a complete technologicaltransformation. indeed, one of the characteristics of a true technologicalrevolution is that a great many innovations take place at about the same time.their coming together creates a synergistic, indeed, explosive, impact upon theproduction of goods and services.but technology does not occur in a vacuum. instead, it takes place in asocial matrix and interacts with society. thus, despite the evolutionary nature ofits individual technical components, the british industrial revolution marked atruly revolutionary transformation of society because it changed where and howpeople worked, lived, thought, played, and prayed.for millennia, agriculture had been the chief source of production. thehomeandhearth was the center of work, education, social relationships,recreation, and, indeed, all life. the industrial revolution changed all that.with the industrial revolution the factory became the workplace, and thecity became the dwelling place. family relationships changed as the father lefthome each day to earn wages in a factory while the mother stayed home withthe children; other new social patterns emerged in the crowded cities, whilesome traditional institutions, such as the church, saw their hold on people's livesweakened in the urban environment. technological and societal changesinteracted, overturning old patterns of living, thinking, and working, andcreating new institutional systems and cultural values.using the classical industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenthcenturies as our criterion, we learn that an industrial revolution consists of twochief elements: (1) a series of fundamental technical changes in the productionand distribution of goods accompanied byšsometimes caused by, sometimesreflecting, but in any event, interconnected withš(2) a series of social andcultural changes of the first magnitude. both elements must be present; a seriesof technological changes alone would not constitute an industrial revolution,nor would sociocultural changes without concomitant technologicaldevelopments produce a new industrial era.3to see if the muchheralded, incoming information age is truly arevolutionary phenomenon, let us analyze both the technological andsociocultural changes in the classical industrial revolution and see if paralleltransformations are occurring today.the information age: evolution or revolution?37information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the classical industrial revolutionlooking at the main technical features of the classical industrialrevolution, we find:use of new basic materials, chiefly iron and steel; new energy sources, deriving from new prime movers and fuels, suchas coal and the steam engine, and, later, electricity, petroleum, and theinternalcombustion engine; mechanical inventions, such as the spinning jenny, the power loom,and machine tools, which increased production with a smallerexpenditure of human energy; the centralized organization of work in the factory system, whichentailed the further division of labor and specialization of function, andthese, together with improved machines, making possibleinterchangeable parts and mass production;4 the quickening of transportation and communication through thesteamship, the steam locomotive, the automobile, and eventually theairplane; and in communications, the telegraph, telephone, and radio;anddevelopment of a science of technology.5in the nonindustrial technological sphere, agricultural improvementsembodying many of the same technical changes made possible the provision offood for a larger population. all these technological developments involvedlarger use of natural resources, increased efficiency, and the lowcost, massproduction and distribution of food, manufactured goods, and accompanyingservices.6not so incidentally, all these technical advances also involved information.after all, technology is a form of knowledgešknowledge of how to make anddo thingsšwhich is why we sometimes refer to it as "knowhow." technologyimplies hands and minds working together to produce more efficient machines,processes, products, and services. all of these require the application of newand better information or at least the bringing together of old items ofinformation in a new and different way. thus, the industrial transformation ofthe eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was based upon the application of newand better information to improve traditional methods and machines and, in theprocess, to create new products and services. and their synergistic interactionaccelerated the pace of change.while political revolutions occur rather quicklyšor at least can sometimesbe assigned definite datesšsociocultural revolutions, involving deepseatedchanges in the ways in which people work, think, and live, require somewhatmore time for their effects to manifest themselves. nevertheless, they too arerevolutionary in their impact.we can see that in the nontechnical elementsšthe economicsocialthe information age: evolution or revolution?38information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.politicalcultural transformationsšthat accompanied and became part of theclassical industrial revolution: the decline of land as the chief source of wealth in the face of theimmense wealth created by industrial production; political changes reflecting this shift in economic power, as well asnew state policies corresponding to the needs of an industrialized,rather than agrarian, society; and sweeping demographic and social changes, including the growth ofcities, the development of workingclass movements (indeed, the birthof a whole new social class, the urban factory proletariat), and theemergence of new patterns of authority within the family and at work.7there were other broad cultural transformations. workers were forced toacquire new and distinctive skills, and their relation to their work shifted;instead of being craftsmen working with hand tools, workers became machineoperators, subject to factory discipline. also, there were major psychologicalchanges in people's confidence in their power over nature, and, of course, inhedonistic satisfaction. for industrialization made possible a torrent of materialgoods, which ultimately brought about a higher standard of living. advances inagriculture, combined with progress in medical knowledge and public healthmeasures, meant that hunger began to disappear as a major threat in theindustrially advanced nations. people lived longeršand better, in terms ofmaterial goods.this was indeed a revolution, because it transformed individual lives andsociety. and it was an industrial revolution because the development ofindustrial technology provided the basis for the sociocultural changes.a current technological revolution?are the technological and the sociocultural changes occurring in relation totoday's advances in computers of sufficient magnitude to hail ours as arevolutionary "information age?"certainly the technical foundation has been built, including a change inbasic materials.8 let us remember that the introduction of new technologiesdoes not always mean the complete demise of older technologies, especially inthe case of materials. after all, wood continued to be a major material sourceeven when the age of steel developed. while today's improvements in materialsšcomposites, plastics, synthetic fibers, sophisticated ceramics, and theintroduction of new alloys and lighter metalsšdo not mean that iron and steelare outmoded any more than the coming of the age of steel meant thatthe information age: evolution or revolution?39information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wood ceased being used, these do represent a transformation in and anaugmentation of materials resources affecting many other technical changes.furthermore, the development of these new materials is roughly concomitantwith the emergence of computeraided design and manufacture. there is asynergy between technological developments as new materials find use inimproving the operating effectiveness of the computers used to controlmanufacturing of the materials and manufacturing processes that work with thenew materials.in terms of energy, with the exception of hydroelectricity, the nineteenthcentury brought almost total reliance on fossil fuels. within our own times, thefear that finite fossil fuels will eventually be exhausted has been somewhatalleviated by the possibility of almost limitless energy through exploitation ofthe power within the atomšalthough certain problems remain associatedtherewith. also, greater emphasis is being placed upon conservation, syntheticfuels, renewable sources of energy, and greater and more efficient use of solarpower. so although recurrent "energy crises" might come about throughpolitical and economic forces, we possess the requisite technical knowledge andpotential to produce an abundance of energy in different forms. this representsa truly revolutionary technological advance over the fossil fuel era.however, current changes in production mechanisms follow a somewhatdifferent, yet nevertheless revolutionary, pattern than those of the past. theindustrial revolution introduced power machinery and centralized productionby multitudes of factory workers, and the early twentieth century furtherrationalized this process with henry ford's moving assembly line and frederickw. taylor's scientific management. but nowadays, computerized informationdevices form the heartšrather, the eyes, hands, and mindšof the machine andallow for completely automated machinery, robots. instead of a machineoperator, the human worker becomes a machine supervisor, overseeing amultitude of dials while the robotized machinešthe steelcollar workeršdoesthe actual work and replaces many bluecollar workers. robots can performdangerous operations, relieving humans from tasks that pose a threat to healthand safety. they can also perform the monotonous and routine tasks which,some people claim, had made factory workers into machines.9 the oldermechanical devices had taken the burden off man's back; computerized devicesalso take the burden off man's mind.in transportation too, information devices play a major role. sophisticatedjet enginesšhighly dependent upon electronic control and monitoringšhaveenabled airplanes to grow larger and speedier,the information age: evolution or revolution?40information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.replacing longhaul railroad and steamship passenger transportation. also, wehave completed the first voyages of exploration and are beginning to utilizespace in new ways. these aerospace developments are linked with themicrominiaturization of computerized information devices and are, indeed,dependent upon them. still another example of the ubiquity of theserevolutionary information devices is their application to the workings ofautomobiles and trucks performing very earthy tasks.communications too are being transformed, with satellite transmission ofinstantaneous information from all parts of the world. but that is only the mostspectacular demonstration of how communication expertise has increasedapace. indeed, revolutionary advances in the flow, storage, manipulation, andretrieval of information, resulting from the improvements in computers, rightlyentitle the future to be known as the information age.these contemporary major technical changesšin materials, fuels andprime movers, machinery, the organization of work, transportation, andcommunicationšall involve more knowledge and more information. ourindustrial and agricultural technologies are increasingly reliant upon thenewfound and enlarged technical capacity given us by computerizedinformation devices.as long as computers relied on vacuum tubes and were bulky, balky, andexpensive, they had only a minor impact on industrial processes and structure.however, with the invention of transistors and their refinement into today'smicrochips, computers became omnipresent; their power was greatly multiplied,and they found many applications beyond computational numbercrunching. itis this application of computerized information to all facets of life andtechnology that makes it the centerpiece of the new technological revolution.10the computer has repercussions far beyond the field of information andcomputer science narrowly conceived. civil, mechanical, textile, metallurgical,chemical, ceramic, and, of course, electrical engineering also make full use ofour new informational capacity and expertise. the old slide rule hanging fromthe belt of the engineering student has given way to the pocket computer.increasingly at every engineering institution in the country, the students haveaccess to desk computers wired into larger computer systems. indeed, computerliteracy is no longer a monopoly of a small group of technical experts; instead itis being taught at the elementary school level, and it is fast becoming anecessary adjunct to liberal arts education, with personal computers becoming aubiquitous item in educated households.just as the old industrial revolution transformed agriculture as wellthe information age: evolution or revolution?41information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as industry, so today there have been revolutionary improvements inagricultural production. less than 3 percent of the american population nowlives on farms, and one american farm worker now produces enough food tofeed 84 people. this is because agriculture itself has become thoroughlyindustrialized in methods and scale of production; like industry, it is beingcomputerized in the breeding and feeding of livestock and poultry and in thegrowing of crops. furthermore, the development of genetic technology toimprove varieties of vegetables, fruit, and grain, to say nothing of livestock,rests upon biotechnological advances,11 which in turn rely upon enhancedcomputer capabilities, as do new chemical fertilizers and pesticides.agricultural technology is thus one of the chief beneficiaries of and contributorsto the new information age.the r&d laboratory, which grew out of the german chemical industry inthe latter part of the nineteenth century, helped create a science of technologyšor engineering sciencešand that is reflected in the education and practices oftoday's engineers.12 research and development, which has becomecharacteristic of all technologically advanced industry, has, of course, beenenhanced by our heightened informational capabilities. as a result our scientific/technical knowledge increases apace.in brief, the information age has indeed revolutionized the technicalelements of industrial society. but does it have similar revolutionaryimplications for nontechnical institutions, values, and society as a whole?a current societal revolution?let us look at some of the nontechnical changes that are occurring, partlyas a result of the technological changes but also causing the advance oftechnology because of the synergistic relationship between technology andsociety. we can see that revolutionary changes are occurring in the pattern ofindustrial society, just as it marked a vast transformation from the precedingagrarian society.certainly, formidable economic changes are taking place which departgreatly from nineteenthcentury industrial concentration. although financialconcentration is now occurring on an unprecedented scale, the economics andproduction technology of the older industrial revolution, which favored theconsolidation of production, are now giving way to decentralized facilitiesšand on an international scale.henry ford's river rouge plant represented the peak of the olderdevelopment: raw materials went in one end, and finished automobilesthe information age: evolution or revolution?42information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.came out the other end. it was a marvel for its time, and people came from allover the world to see the wonders of "fordismus." but no one ever built anotherriver rouge; instead, it was discovered to be more efficient and economical todisperse production facilities. today's greater reliance upon more sophisticatedmaterials and technologies reinforces the tendency toward dispersionšwith, ofcourse, profound impact upon the former centers of america's smokestackindustries.similarly, when the first electronic computers were introduced somedecades ago, their complexity, size, and expense seemed to dictate that thecomputerized information would perforce be concentrated and hence besusceptible to control by relatively few individuals. indeed, this appeared tolend substance to george orwell's vision of 1984 when all informationšandhence all thoughtšwould be controlled by "big brother." however, theintroduction of the transistor and the development of the microchip allowed forthe miniaturization of computing devices, so that today's small, handheldcomputer can rival the past giants in information capacity and activity. as theyoung hackers at caltech showed when they took over control of thescoreboard at the 1983 rose bowl game, the problem is no longer that bigbrother is watching you, but that "little brother" is messing up his program.as a result, while the dispersion of information capabilities makesimpossible the centralized control of information and the power implied therein,new problems regarding the secrecy of data, the patentability of software, and awhole host of new sociolegal problems confront us. we are still engaged in theprocess of discovering these new problems, and seeing if the old legal maximsstill apply or whether we must work out new legal mechanisms to ensure aproper balance between private rights and the needs of the public.just as microcomputers make possible the diffusion as well as thecentralization of information control, so industrialization, which had begun firston a regional, then on a national basis, is today being internationalized.advancing technologies have made feasible the creation of new productioncenters, having different resource advantages, throughout the world. partly thisis due to the geographical dispersion of natural resources: today's sophisticatedtechnology frequently requires exotic materials not available in the unitedstates, so that we are no longer a selfsufficient nation producing all we needfor our own uses and exporting to others. we even find it practical to importrelatively commonplace energy supplies such as oil. another resourceadvantage is lower labor costs, especially since some advanced manufacturingtechniques, including those of assembling electronicthe information age: evolution or revolution?43information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.devices themselves, oftentimes require only low skill levels on the part ofproductionline workers. the result is an internationalization of production ofrevolutionary dimensions, the implications of which are still not clearlydiscerned. however, it has led to a debate on "industrial policy" dealing withnew mechanisms in order to provide training and gainful employment to thosethrown out of work by automated manufacturing processes or by the transfer ofproduction abroad.13yet, while employment in traditional industries declines, the statistics onthe total number of employed people in the united states continue to mount.for, while computerized production technology allows us to produce a cascadeof material goods with fewer workers, there has been an enlargement of theservice sector of the economy. as a result, for the past 30 years more peoplehave been employed in the service trades than in factory production, and theservice sector continues to grow.one reason is the enlargement of administrative and clerical activities,many of which derive from the heightened productive capability offered byautomated devices and the consequent enhancement of service activities.information automation in the office is proceeding apace,14 and we historians,while having 20/20 hindsight, do not possess 20/20 foresight about its socialimpact.other writers, however, apparently possess a clearer vision of the future.for example, alvin toffler points out that computers will enable informationworkers to do their work at home, being tied in with central computers at theoffice.15 yes, it is indeed possible for more people to work at home. but the factis that, with very few exceptions in certain occupations, such as editing andwriting and the piecerate processing of insurance forms and the like, that issimply not happening on a wide scale. the reason is that, as the ancientphilosophers pointed out, man is a social and political animal. people like tocongregate together; they derive intellectual stimulus and social satisfactionfrom personal contacts. the workplace is not only a spot for making a living butis also the site of the social interchange that is apparently a hallmark of ourhuman species.16 so, just because computers might offer us certain capabilities,this does not mean that we would want to take advantage of them, nor does itmean that they would necessarily be advantageous for the social interchangethat, in the vast majority of cases, is essential for individual fulfillment.besides, toffler neglects the fact that new technologies do notimmediately and completely replace older forms. instead, as we can see fromthe example of the classical industrial revolution, old technologiesthe information age: evolution or revolution?44information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.do not immediately die, nor do they quickly fade away. instead, the newtechnologies are superimposed upon them and in many cases are used toaugment the older capabilities.my own guess is that we will be in the midst of the ''secondandahalfwave" for a long time before we reach toffler's "third wave," by which timethe futurist scholars will already be talking about a "fourth wave."nevertheless, we can already foresee some possible changes in politicaland economic power. the old industrial revolution shifted political andeconomic power from the landed nobility, whose ownership of the land was thekey to power and wealth in an almost totally agrarian society, to theindustrialists. in england the new factory owners allied themselves with the oldlanded nobility to control the political apparatus. yet at the same time thefactory system, by concentrating workers, enabled them to organize and obtainconsiderable economic clout, not as individuals, but as a group. then theenfranchisement of the workers in the industrially advanced states gave them ashare in political power. in brief, industrialization carried with it political andsocial democratizationšand the information age, by facilitating widespreadcommunication, might conceivably fortify democratic political control in theadvanced industrial nations.although we cannot be sure of that, we can be certain that governmentswill continue to be involved in economic policy and hence in technologicalactivities. the nineteenthcentury myth of laissezfaire blinded us to the factthat governments did in reality play a major role in developing the industrialeconomy: through tariffs to protect infant industries and by building orfinancing roads, bridges, and other elements of the transportation network andinfrastructure. indeed, the needs of a coordinated transportation system led notonly to the adoption of a standard gauge for railroads but also to standard timezones. furthermore, the increasing complexity of technology madegovernments encourage the development of measurement standards, such as forscrew threads, and then safety standards. today's sophisticated informationtechnology has required further government action, often on an internationalscale, to assign radio frequencies and thereby allow for a freer flow ofcommunications. in addition, the widespread use of more powerful chemicalsand the fears of water and atmospheric pollution require governmental policingof safety standards in many industries.added to the technological need for governmental action is a growingpublic awareness of technology's importance to society, now and in the future,and hence the desire for some measure of public control.the information age: evolution or revolution?45information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.partly this is an outgrowth of a rising level of education, itself madepossible through previous technological advance. as the industrial revolutionbegan producing enough goods so that young children no longer had to be in thework force, they could be sent to school. besides, the increasingly complexnature of technological devices required an educated work force.as a result, we can trace the democratization of education throughout thenineteenth and twentieth centuries in the industrially advanced nations as afunction of technological growth and complexity. at first elementary educationbecame compulsory, then secondary education, and in the twentieth centuryamerica pledged itself to give equal access to higher education to all its citizens(sometimes irrespective of their ability to take advantage of it).the new information age requires even more complex and sophisticatedtechnology, so there is need for a still higher degree of specialized technicalskillsšincluding social skills as well as manipulative ones. educationalresponses to the needs of the information age are already being discussed andfought over throughout the educational establishmentšincluding, and perhapsespecially, among engineering educators.still another revolutionary social change has been abetted by the newinformation age: the entrance of women into the work force in unparallelednumbers. before the onset of industrialization, women worked alongside themenfolk in the fields and in the home handcraft production of the times. withthe rise of the factory system and its regimen of disciplined work and hours,men became the breadwinners, while the women remained at home and wereresponsible for homemaking and child rearing.however, machine technology has advanced to the point that brutestrength is no longer a special asset, so women no longer labor under anyphysical disability. machines do not know or care whether the hands that guidethem are those of a man or a womanšor, for that matter, whether they arewhite, black, blue, purple, or green. as a result, advancing technology meansthat racial and gender distinctions scarcely matter in the actual productionprocessšalthough, for social and cultural reasons such distinctionsunfortunately persist in many parts of the world.women possess the physical stamina, intellectual qualities, and moralvirtues that make them the equals of men in an information society whereburdensome physical work has been taken over by machines. hence, we are inthe midst of a social revolutionšsome call it a sexual revolutionšthat isclosely linked with the technicalthe information age: evolution or revolution?46information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advances which have given women technical equality with men, even thoughthey may not yet have acquired the social and political power that goes withtheir technical equality, to say nothing of wage equality.office automation will not only affect the clerical work that was thedomain of women for almost the entire past century. rather, it will extend to allaspects of production and distribution, since it allows for close monitoring ofproduction processes as well as clerical tasks of billing and the like.furthermore, it can give top managers fingertip access to information formerlysupplied them by the middle managerial group. here again, we cannot foretellwith exactitude what will happen, but there will undoubtedly be furtherrationalization in the office procedures inherited from an earlier age, while theinformation user in the office will have more direct contact with the productionprocess itself.what is equally interesting to social historians and cultural anthropologistsis that many of the revolutionary information devices will be incorporated intothe mechanisms of our daily lives without our being aware of them. alreadymicrochips are being used in the thermostats for our home heating and airconditioning systems and in the ignition and carburetion systems of ourautomobiles. but we will still set our thermostat at 70° without awareness thatthe microchip is increasing the energy efficiency of our heating and airconditioning systems; and we will step on the gas or on the brakes withoutrealizing that the microchip enables us to achieve better control of theautomobile.of much greater significance than simply catering to our creature comfortsare those major social changes occurring as an outgrowth of advancinginformation technology which will have a powerful effect upon our country'sand the world's future. among the most important are demographic changesresulting from public health, medical, and nutritional advances deriving fromsophisticated computerized research in health technologies. as a result, peopleare living longeršand this is already changing the character of americansociety.but there is a reverse side to this demographic coin, namely, rapidlyexploding populations in the developing nations, where more than half thepeople are under 15 years of age. as a result, there are demands fortechnological development to meet the material needs of the world's growingpopulation. at the same time there are apparently conflicting demands that thisbe done without plundering the earth of its resources or damaging theenvironment. in other words, the information age must stimulate technologicalgrowth to meet these demands and do so by new kinds of technical applicationsthat will maintain the productivity and salubrity of our planet for futuregenerations.the information age: evolution or revolution?47information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finally, we come to the psychological changes, both social and individual,effected by technological changes. until the industrial revolution people hadalways been fearful that the vagaries of nature would deprive them of life'snecessities. with the plethora of material goods and foods made availablethrough the technological advances of the nineteenth century, people were ableto keep hunger at bay, and indeed overcome many of the hardships inflicted bynature through centralized heating and air conditioning systems, electricallighting, and the like.not surprisingly, the world's fairs of the past century emphasized the greataccomplishments of science and technology. the notion that human technicalabilities would enable us to accomplish anything we attempted was givenfurther credence some 15 years ago when man first set foot on the moon. herewas the culmination of the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century andthe industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the actualfulfillment of one of man's most ancient myths and dreams. it is no wonder thatwe could be accused of the old greek sin of hubris, inordinate pride.paradoxically, however, at almost the very same time, we begandiscovering that many of our previous technological triumphs were despoilingthe environment and that our military technology posed a threat to thecontinuation of life on our planet.as a result, the new information age has brought with it a somewhat moreequivocal view of the human relationship to nature. instead of man's being themaster of nature, it is now realized that man is a part of nature and that ourfuture depends upon a fuller recognition of both nature's and humanity'scapabilities and limitations.but, that does not necessarily mean that doomsday is forthcoming, norneed it deprive us of hope. unlike earlier ages when human technical capacitieswere prescribed by the availability of certain natural resources, limited in theforms of energy that might be applied, and constrained to do and to make thingsin the same way as their ancestors had done, our new technology provides uswith many different ways of attacking problems. we now have many andgrowing options in regard to the materials that we wish to employ, the energysources that we intend to utilize, and the ways in which we go about producingand distributing food, goods, and services. because the scientific technology ofthe incoming information age offers us manifold choices, we can makedecisions about the future course of society with due concern for conservationof natural resources, the preservation of the environment, and the wellbeing ofour fellowman now and in the future.the information age: evolution or revolution?48information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and cultural laghowever, just because we have the ability to do new and wonderful thingswith our technology does not necessarily mean that we will actually do so.many years ago the great sociologist william fielding ogburn postulated theconcept of ''cultural lag" in terms of human response to technical capabilities.17he pointed out that the technologies developed in the preceding century gavemankind the opportunity to bring about a new and better social system,allowing the vast quantity of material goods being turned out by an advancingtechnology to redound to the benefit to all of mankind, rather than beingconfined to a narrow few. however, he also stated that cultural systems andhuman institutionsšgovernmental, legal, and the likeštend to lag inresponding to new opportunities offered by these technical innovations.lewis mumford's analysis, some 50 years ago, of the relations betweentechnology and culture seemed to reinforce ogburn's thesis.18 he claimed thatthe latest technical innovations were still being employed to further the aimsand goals of the earlier industrial transformation based upon the exploitation ofnature and of human beings. in other words, while our technology might enableus to make a better world for all, it was being employed in the service ofinstitutions and values belonging to an older and more selfish age, one thatconsidered neither humanity nor the natural world.the analyses of both ogburn and mumford were provocative wheninitially stated, but they appear simplistic in light of what actually happened.true, our new technology gives us capabilities to do many wonderful things,but we often continue to employ them in the service of institutions and valuesbelonging to an older age. mumford hoped our bright new technologies wouldpoint the way to a brave new world founded upon social justice and a concernfor nature. ogburn too felt that technology could better humanity's lot, and hedeplored the "cultural lag" that prevented it from doing so. both men impliedthat technology could do wonderful things for mankind, but things went wrongwhen we did not allow it to do so.true, but what they forgot is that technology is a quintessential humanactivity, so it bears the contradictionsšthe "goods" and "bads"što be found inall complex human activities. it is designed for human use, but that means it isalso subject to human misuse and abuse. if technology were the soledeterminant of human actions, our current world might be a much betteršandcertainly a differentšplace.here is an example of how an advance made possible by technologyšthe information age: evolution or revolution?49information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international goodwill through better communications and more contact amongdifferent peoples throughout the worldšbogs down under the "cultural lag"afforded by nontechnical factors that take precedence over technicalcapabilities. electronic messages can flow across the globe in a fraction of asecond, irrespective of the political boundaries; hence the technical element ofmodern communication is indifferent to national boundaries. similarly, thereare no technical barriers to prevent airplanes from transcending nationalborders. in other words, modern communication and transportation have madenationalism technologically obsolete; however, any glance at the headlinesconvinces us that while nationalism might be technically obsolete, it stillremains one of the most powerful forces affecting the future of mankind.evolution and revolutionacknowledgment of this and similar facts has led me to reformulate theconcepts of my predecessors who pioneered in analyzing the interactionsbetween technical and sociocultural elements and has led me to formulate"kranzberg's first law." kranzberg's first law reads as follows: technology isneither good nor bad, nor is it neutral.by that i mean that technology's interactions with both the social andcultural milieus sometimes lead to developments that are far removed from theoriginal goals of the technical elements themselves. for example, henry fordthought of his motorcar as a means to cheapen transportation and makepersonalized transport available to the masses. it did that of course, but it alsodid much more than that, transforming where and how we work, play, live,shop, eat, sleep, andšfor those of you who remember rumble seatsševenwhere we made love.in accordance with kranzberg's first law, the information age will havesimilar and unanticipated impacts, as the computer goes far beyond the task ofnumbercrunching and instantaneous communication of data. the variety offunctions that computers serve suggests that their consequences will be mixed,unevenly distributed, and diffused, assimilated, and modified at uneven rates.hence, we still cannot foresee exactly what some of the consequences will be,any more than the prophets at the turn of this century could foretell that theautomobile would lead to the suburbanization of american society, provide theprototype for the mass production of all kinds of material goods, do away withthe old distinction between city and country dweller, and, with its relatedindustries, help produce the richest society in the world's history.the information age: evolution or revolution?50information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.furthermore, as a corollary to kranzberg's first law, the same technologycan have quite different results when introduced into a different cultural setting.thus, some technologies developed in advanced industrial countries have quitedifferent effects when introduced into some developing nations. becausetechnology functions in a sociocultural matrix and depends upon aninfrastructure that includes the educational level of the population, its politicaland economic institutions, and its value system (including religious beliefs), itcan produce markedly different results when it interacts with a culture thatdiffers from our western industrial society.the point i am trying to make is that this new information age presentsmankind with many different possibilities. but because people differhistorically in their cultural and social institutions throughout the world, thenew technology can have quite different results when applied in differingsociocultural settings. besides, the technology itself is still evolving, and hencemight interact with our values, institutions, and attitudes along quite differentlines than expected.even so, the historical record gives us some cause for optimism. thetechnical advances of the information age, if they follow the pattern ofprevious technical changes, could provide us with more goods and services,increase material wellbeing, and help do away with poverty and miserythroughout the globe. and by giving us greater knowledge of the human, social,and environmental consequences of our technical options through the newinformational tools available for technology assessment and impact analysis, theinformation age might help us avoid catastrophic assaults upon nature andupon our fellow human beings. for computer technologyšalong with itsassociated cluster of increasingly sophisticated analytic software, simulationmodels, and data basesšpermits more complex analyses than have beenpreviously possible in the social sciences. indeed, the more information peoplehave about nature, technology, and society, the more it might not only enablethem to improve their living standards but also to do away with hatred andfanaticismšalthough we cannot be sure of that.one thing we do know. despite the many defects we can find in highlyindustrialized societies, including our own, the fact is that the mosttechnologically advanced nations are the ones that have abandoned cruel andunusual punishments; have provided social welfare and medical services for allsegments of society; have allowed for the greatest measure of racial, religious,and sexual equality; and have, in large measure, provided for freedom and ahumane life for all.the information age promises to carry those hopes for the goodthe information age: evolution or revolution?51information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.life even further. while it might be evolutionary, in the sense that all thechanges and benefits will not appear overnight, it will be revolutionary in itseffects upon our society.notes1. although it was written before some recent, major developments, jeremy bernstein, theanalytical engine: computersšpast, present, and future (new york: random house, 1964)provides a good popular account of computer history. see also nancy stern and robert stern,computers in society (englewood cliffs, n.j.: prentice hall, 1983). the annals of the historyof computing, published by the american federation of information processing societies,contains articles about the recent as well as the "ancient history" of computers.2. terry s. reynolds, "medieval roots of the industrial revolution," scientific american, vol.251, no. 1 (july 1984):122œ30.3. melvin kranzberg, "prerequisites for industrialization," in kranzberg and carol w. pursell,technology in western civilization, 2 vols. (new york: oxford university press, 1967), vol. 1,chap. 13.4. although britain was the birthplace of the industrial revolution, these developments werecarried further in the "american system of manufactures." see otto mayr and robert c. post,eds., yankee enterprise: the rise of the american system of manufactures (washington, d.c.:smithsonian press, 1981); and david a. hounshell, from the american system to massproduction, 1800œ1932: the development of manufacturing technology in the united states(baltimore: johns hopkins university press, 1984).5. a major article on this topic is edwin t. layton, "mirrorimage twins: the communities ofscience and technology in 19thcentury america," technology and culture, vol. 12 (oct.1971):562œ80.6. standard accounts of the industrial revolution include david landes, the unboundpromotheus: technical change and industrial development in western europe from 1750 tothe present (london: cambridge university press, 1969); and t. s. ashton, the industrialrevolution, 1760œ1970 (oxford: oxford university press, 1943).7. see e. p. thompson, the making of the english working class (new york: random housepantheon books, 1963); and raymond williams, the long revolution (new york: columbiauniversity press, 1961).8. melvin kranzberg and cyril stanley smith, "materials in history and society," materialsscience and engineering, vol. 37, no. 1 (jan. 1979):1œ39; national academy of engineering,cutting edge technologies (washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1983), part iii; philiph. abelson, "materials science and engineering," science, vol. 225, no. 4675 (nov. 9,1984):613.9. larry hirschhorn, beyond modernization: work and technology in a postindustrial age(cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1984).10. see tom forester, ed., the microelectronics revolution: the complete guide to the newtechnology and its impact on society (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1981).11. charles j. arntzen, "biotechnology and agricultural research for crop improvement,"nae, cutting edge technologies, pp. 52œ61.12. melvin kranzberg, "the wedding of science and technology: a very modern marriage,"in john nicholas burnett, ed., technology and science: important the information age: evolution or revolution?52information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distinctions for liberal arts colleges (davidson, n.c.: davidson college, 1984), pp. 27œ37.13. a good summation of the issues involved is provided in bruce babbitt, "the states and thereindustrialization of america," issues in science and technology, vol. 1, no. 1 (fall1984):84œ93. works featured in the debate include lester c. thurow, the zerosum society:distribution and the possibilities for economic change (new york: basic books, 1980);bennett harrison and barry bluestone, the deindustrialization of america: plant closings,community abandonment, and the dismantling of basic industry (new york: basic books,1982); and robert b. reich, the next american frontier (new york: times books, 1983).14. j. david roessner et al., impact of office automation on office workers, 4 vols., u.s.department of labor r&e grant/contract no. 21138213 (atlanta: georgia tech researchinstitute, 1983); vincent e. giuliano, "the mechanization of office work," scientificamerican, vol. 247, no. 3 (sept. 1982):148œ64.15. alvin toffler, the third wave (new york: morrow, 1980). similar optimism about thefuture role of information technology is to be found in john diebold, making the future work:unleashing our powers of innovation for the decades ahead (new york: simon and schuster,1984).16. sherry turkle, the second self: computers and the human spirit (new york: simon andschuster, 1984) provides an interesting discussion of this point.17. william fielding ogburn, on culture and social change: selected papers, edited by otisdudley duncan (chicago: university of chicago press, 1964).18. lewis mumford, technics and civilization (new york: harcourt, brace and world, 1934).commentsgunnar hambraeuschairmanroyal swedish academy of engineering sciencesit is my firm conviction that we are only at the beginning of a tremendousdevelopment which, in its effect on the individual and on society, will be morefarreaching than anything that we have witnessed until now.the following three facts support my belief. first, we cannot yet discernany slackening of the pace in hardware development, as illustrated in dr.mayo's paper. this pace is in speed of operations, storage capacity, andreduction in price. possibly we have not yet passed the point of inflection on thetraditional growth curve.second, we still only utilize a small fraction of the capabilities of ourhardware. the reason is, of course, the lag in software production and systemsarchitecture. ultimately software improvements will increase the productivityof present existing computers at least 10fold. the combined effects of machineand program development will indeed be dramatic.third, the computer in combination with instant communications willmultiply research and development productivity in all fields of science andtechnology. already, data logging systems make possible the harvesting andinterpretation of primary experimental data on a scale that we did not dare tothe information age: evolution or revolution?53information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dream of 20 years ago. in these vast collections of data, software can now traceconnections and interdependences in a multidimensional space hithertoinaccessible to even the greatest giants of science. hypotheses, theories, andconclusions can then be instantly conveyed to other research centers to bediscussed, analyzed, and tested within days of the original new idea.also, computer modeling can, to a certain extent, substitute for realexperiments, thus further increasing the speed of discovery. the samemechanisms also influence the application of knowledge in industry. alreadywe have a set of tools for development, design, production planning, andtechnology management that do for the engineers what numerical control andautomation have already done for the worker on the factory floor. here again,most of the opportunities are still before us.the social consequences of this evolution will be farreaching, to say theleast. the important social consequences are not only in the various aspects of acashless, paperless, and robotized future. there is the eternal struggle, politicaland social, over powerful tools. if you doubt my words, just witness the soviets'frantic efforts to put their hands on information hardware. there are alsoimportant social implications for the rights of the individual visàvis society,the questions of the integrity of the individual and the manipulation of peopleby misuse of information technology.information technologies carry both enormous benefits and grave dangers.we can have freedom or slavery, and a disturbing fact is that these options arepoorly understood by laymen, the public, mass media, and decision makers.these issues are seldom the topic of serious discussion. i noticed with wonderthe total lack of discussion on these issues in the 1984 u.s. presidential electionrace, and i find the same lack of interest in my own country. there is no moreimportant task for an academy of engineering than to bring these issues into theopen.the information age: evolution or revolution?54information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the twilight of hierarchy speculations onthe global information societyharland clevelandthe informatization of societyit is still shocking, forty years later, to remember that the manhattanproject, the huge secret organization that produced the atom bomb duringworld war ii, did not employ on its staff a single person whose fulltimeassignment was to think hard about the policy implications of the project if itshould succeed. thus no one was working on nuclear arms controlšthough i. i.rabi says he and robert oppenheimer used to discuss it earnestly over lunch.we have been playing catch up, not too successfully, ever since.the manhattan project was not an exception; it was the rule. for 300 yearsuntil the 1970s science and technology were quite generally regarded as havinga life of their own, an inner logic, an autonomous sense of direction. their selfjustifying ethic was change and growth. but in the 1970s society started to takechargešnot of scientific discovery but of its technological fallout. the decisionnot to build the sst or deploy an abm system even though we knew how tomake them, the dramatic change in national environmental policy, and thesouring of the nuclear power industry bear witness.the most prominent and pervasive consequence of the people's concernabout the impacts and implications of new technologies is what the french calll'informatisatioqn de la société. the made up* copyright 1985 by harlan cleveland.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety55information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.word, which we will americanize to informatization, will serve as well as anyto describe what is happening to some of our key concepts and conceptions asinformation becomes the dominant resource in postindustrial society. the newword is certainly better than postindustrial, which describes the future by sayingit comes after the past.the revolutions that began with charles babbage's analytical engine (lessthan 150 years ago) and guglielmo marconi's wireless telegraphy (not yet acentury old) started on quite different tracks. but a quarter of a century ago,computers and telecommunications began to converge to produce a combinedcomplexity, one interlocked industry that is transforming our personal lives, ournational politics, and our international relations.the industrial era was characterized by the influence of humankind overthings, including nature as well as the artifacts of man. the information erafeatures a sudden increase in humanity's power to think, and therefore toorganize.the information society does not replace, it overlaps, the growing,extracting, processing, manufacturing, recycling, distribution, and consumptionof tangible things. agriculture and industry continue to progress by doing morewith less through better knowledge, leaving plenty of room for a knowledgeeconomy that, in statistics now widely accepted, accounts for more than half ofour work force, our national product, and our global reach.a dominant resource, a different resourcethe size and scope of the information society are now familiar even in thepopular literature. we can take it as read that information is the dominantresource in the united states, and coming to be so in other advanced ordeveloped countries. to take only one cross section of this startling shift, theactual production, extraction, and growing of things now soak up a good dealless than a quarter of our human resources. of all the rest, which used to belumped together as services, more than twothirds are information workers. bythe end of the century, something like twothirds of all work will be informationwork. table 1 shows one effort at describing the sweep of change.1it is not only in the united states that the informatization of society hasproceeded so far so fast. a study by the organization for economiccooperation and development (the club of richer nations, with headthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety56information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.quarters in paris) puts the average information labor force of several of itsmembers' countries at more than onethird of the total during the earlytomid1970s, and rising: the information component of labor increased its shareof the total by 2.8 percent for each fiveyear period since world war ii.2table 1 u.s. work force distribution18801920195519752000 (est.)agriculture & extractive50%28%14%4%2%manufacturing, commerce, industry3653372922other services1210201710information, knowledge, education29295066source: © 1984 new jersey bell. reprinted, with permission, from the spring 1984 issue of newjersey bell journal.farming, which in some people's vocabularies is the most primitive ofpursuits, is probably farther ahead than most industries in the embedding ofinformation in physical processes. says agricultural economist g. edwardschuh: ''all of the increase in agricultural output from the mid1920s throughthe mid1970s came about with no increase in the capital stock of physicalresources. it was all due to new knowledge or information. that makes clear theextent to which knowledge is an output or resource."3if information (organized data, refined into knowledge and combined intowisdom) is now our "crucial resource," as peter drucker describes it,4 whatdoes that portend for the future? thinking about the inherent characteristics ofinformation provides some clues to the vigorous rethinking that lies ahead forall of us:information is expandable. in 1972, the same year the limits to growthwas published, john mchale came out with a book called the changinginformation environment,5 which argued that information expands as it is used.whole industries have grown up to exploit this characteristic of information:scientific research, technology transfer, computer software (which alreadymakes a contribution to the u.s. economy that is three times the contribution ofcomputer hardware), and agencies for publishing, advertising, public relations,and government propaganda to spread the word (and thus to enhance the word'svalue).the ultimate limits to growth of knowledge and wisdom are time (timeavailable to human minds for reflecting, analyzing, and integratingthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety57information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the information that will be brought to life by being used) and the capacity ofpeoplešindividually and in groupsšto analyze and think integratively. thereare obvious limits to the time each of us can devote to the production andrefinement of knowledge and wisdom. but the capacity of humanity to integrateits collective experience through relevant individual thinking is certainlyexpandablešnot without limits, to be sure, but within limits we cannot nowmeasure or imagine.information is not resourcehungry. compared to the processes of the steelandautomobile economy, the production and distribution of information areremarkably sparing in their requirements for energy and other physical andbiological resources.investments, price policies, and power relationships which assume that themore developed countries will gobble up disproportionate shares of realresources are overdue for wholesale revision.information is substitutable. it can and increasingly does replace capital,labor, and physical materials. robotics and automation in factories and officesare displacing workers and thus requiring a transformation of the labor force.any machine that can be accessed by computerized telecommunications doesnot have to be in your own inventory. and dieter altenpohl, an executive ofalusuisse, has calculations and charts to prove that, as he says, "the smarter themetal, the less it weighs."6information is transportable. in modern communication systemsinformation travels at close to the speed of light. as a result, remoteness is nowmore choice than geography. you can sit in auckland, new zealand, and playthe new york stock markets in real timešif you do not mind keeping slightlypeculiar hours. and the same is true, without the big gap in time zones, ofpeople in any rural hamlet in the united states. in the world of informationrichness, you will be able to be remote if you want to, but you will have to workat it.information is diffusive. it tends to leakšand the more it leaks the morewe have. it is not the inherent tendency of natural resources to leak: jewels maybe stolen; a lump or two of coal may fall off the coal car on its way east frommontana; and there is an occasional spillage of oil in the ocean. but the leakageof information is wholesale, pervasive, and continuous. in the era of theinstitutionalized leak, monopolizing information is very nearly a contradictionin terms. information monopolies will exist, as time passes, only in more andmore specialized fields, for shorter and shorter periods of time.information is shareable. shortly before his death, colin cherry wrote thatinformation by nature cannot give rise to exchange transthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety58information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.actions, only to sharing transactions.7 things are exchanged if i give you aflower or sell you my automobile. when our exchange transaction is done, youhave it and i do not. if i sell you an idea, however, or give you a fact, we bothhave it. an informationrich environment is thus a sharing environment. thatneed not mean an environment without standards, rules, conventions, andethical codes. it does mean that the standards, rules, conventions, and codes aregoing to be different from those created to manage the zerosum bargains ofmarket trading and traditional international relations.the erosion of hierarchiesi am not a scholar of information/communication theory, but in mylistening and reading as a practicing generalist i am struck with three seminalideas as containing the most nourishment for our purpose, which is to thinkabout how the new information environment is likely to modify our inheritedassumptions about rule, power, and authority.one is that information (in its generic sense) is not like other resources,nor, as some would have it, merely another form of energy. it is not subject tothe laws of thermodynamics, and efforts to explain the new informationenvironment by using metaphors from physics will just get in our way.a second idea i find nourishing is that the ultimate purpose of allknowledge is to organize things or people, arrange them in ways that makethem different from the way they were before. this is true of rearranging thegenes in a chromosome, and it is equally true of rearranging people's ideas tocreate a movement. there is no such thing as useless knowledge, only peoplewho have not yet learned how to use it. this was the powerful message cardedin a 1979 article in science by lewis branscomb, chief scientist of ibm. hewrote that information is so far from being scarce that it is in ''chronic surplus."there is still plenty for scientists to find out, but "the yawning chasm is betweenwhat is already known by some but not yet put to use by others."8a third insight, from the late british communications theorist colincherry, is the distinction between the information ("message") itself and theservice of delivering it. you may own the paper you hold in your hand, but youdo not own its contents, the facts and ideas in the paper. neither, now that ihave written them down and you and i are sharing them, do i.9the historically sudden dominance of the information resource has, itseems, produced a kind of theory crisis, a sudden sense of havingthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety59information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.run out of basic assumptions. this is only partially the product of informationand communication technologies and their fusion in the new systems that aresprouting daily. other dramatic extensions of scientific rationalism andengineering genius such as nuclear fission and gene splicingšall with anindispensable assist from the new information technologiesšhave also madetheir contribution to the bouleversement of longheld social and politicalconvictions.but somewhere near the center of the confusion is the trouble we make forourselves by carrying over into our thinking about information (which is to saysymbols) concepts developed for the management of thingsšconcepts such asproperty, depletion, depreciation, monopoly, unfairnesses in distribution,geopolitics, the class struggle, and topdown leadership.the assumptions we have inherited are not producing satisfactory growthwith acceptable equity either in the capitalist west or in the socialist east. assimon nora and alain minc wrote in their landmark report to the president offrance: "the liberal and marxist approaches, contemporaries of the productionbased society, are rendered questionable by its demise."10the most troublesome concepts are those that were created to deal with themain problems presented by the management of thingsšproblems such as theirscarcity, their bulk, their limited substitutability for each other, the expense andtrouble in transporting them, the paucity of information about them (whichmade them comparatively easy to hide), and the fact that, being tangible, theycould be hoarded. it was in the nature of things that the few had access toresources and the many did not.thus, the inherent characteristics of physical resources (both natural andmanmade) made possible the development of hierarchies of power based oncontrol (of new weapons, of energy sources, of trade routes, of markets, andespecially of knowledge), hierarchies of influence based on secrecy, hierarchiesof class based on ownership, hierarchies of privilege based on early access tovaluable resources, and hierarchies of politics based on geography.each of these five bases for discrimination and unfairness is crumblingtodayšbecause the old means of control are of dwindling efficacy; secrets areharder and harder to keep; and ownership, early arrival, and geography are ofdwindling significance in getting access to the knowledge and wisdom whichare the really valuable legal tender of our time.out of dozens of assumptions requiring a newly skeptical stare in the newknowledge environment, these five seem to me to bear mostthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety60information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.directly on leadership and management, because they are likely to affect mostprofoundly the ways in which, and the purposes for which, people will in futurecome together in organizations to make something different happen.power based on control: power andparticipationknowledge is power, as francis bacon wrote in 1597. so the wider thespread of knowledge, the more power gets diffused. for the most partindividuals, corporations, and governments do not have a choice about this; it isthe ineluctable consequence of creatingšthrough educationšsocieties withmillions of knowledgeable people.we see the results all around us, and around the world. more and morework gets done by horizontal processšor it does not get done. more and moredecisions are made with wider and wider consultationšor they do not stick. ifthe census bureau counted each year the number of committees per thousandpopulation, we would have a rough quantitative measure of the bundle ofchanges called the information society. a revolution in the technology oforganizationšthe twilight of hierarchyšis already well under way.once information could be spread fast and widešrapidly collected andanalyzed, instantly communicated, readily understood by millionsšthe powermonopolies that closely held knowledge used to make possible were subject toaccelerating erosion.in the old days when only a few people were well educated andknowledgeable, leadership of the uninformed was likely to be organized invertical structures of command and control. leadership of the informed isdifferent: it results in the necessary action only if exercised mainly bypersuasion, bringing into consultation those who are going to have to dosomething to make the decision a decision. where people are educated and arenot treated this way, they either balk at the decisions made or have to bedragooned by organized misinformation backed by brute force. recentexamples of both results have been on display in poland.this is the rationale for chester barnard's durable theory of the executivefunction: that authority is delegated upward. as director of an organization, youhave no power that is not granted to you by your subordinates. eliciting theircontinuous (and, if possible, cheerful) cooperation is your main job as director;without it, you cannot get accomplished the most routine tasks (for which othersare holding you, not your staff, responsible).11 indeed, nowadays in manyoffices orders that used to be routinely accepted are now resisted or refused.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety61information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the modern american office, if you want a cup of coffee you do not takethat coworker, your secretary, off her or his own work to get it for you.in an informationrich polity, the very definition of control changes. verylarge numbers of people empowered by knowledgešcoming together inparties, unions, factions, lobbies, interest groups, neighborhoods, families, andhundreds of other structuresšassert the right or feel the obligation to makepolicy.decision making proceeds not by the flow of recommendations up andorders down, but by development of a shared sense of direction among thosewho must form the parade if there is going to be a parade. collegial notcommand structures become the more natural basis for organization. notcommand and control, but conferring and networking become the mandatorymodes for getting things done. planning cannot be done by a few leaders, or byeven the brightest whiz kids immured in a systems analysis unit or a planningstaff. reallife planning is the dynamic improvisation by the many on a generalsense of directionšannounced by the few, but only after genuine consultationwith those who will have to improvise on it. more participatory decisionmaking implies a need for much information, widely spread, and muchfeedback, seriously attendedšas in biological processes. participation andpublic feedback become conditions precedent to decisions that stick.that means more openness, less secrecyšnot as an ideological preferencebut as a technological imperative. secrecy goes out of fashion anyway, becausesecrets are so hard to keep. and policy widens out to become what paulappleby, that farseeing philosopher of public administration, called it ageneration ago. "policy," he said, "is the decisions that are made at your leveland higher."12 but note that his vertical language is already obsolescent.most of the history we learn in school is so narrowly focused on visibleleaders that it may give us the wrong impression about leadership processeseven in earlier times. we learn that genghis khan or louis xiv or ibnsaud orthe emperor of japan or george washington said this and did thatšas thoughhe thought it up by himself, consulted with nobody, and wrote it without thehelp of a ghostwriter. but even in ancient, traditional societies i suspect thateffective leadership consisted in being closely in touch with where the relevantpublics were ready to be told to go.consensus is a prominent feature of many cultures now dismissed asprimitive. the polynesians in the pacific islands with their circular villagecouncils and the american indians around their campfires madethe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety62information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(and in some degree still make) decisions by fluid procedures which may inducemore genuine participation than a modern meeting run by parliamentaryprocedure. in the agora of athens and the roman "senate and public" (thespqr), there seems to have been lively participation by those (wellborn malecitizens) qualified to take part.the difference in the current scene is the sheer scale of the relevantpublics. in democratic athens slaves, women, tradesmen, and other noncitizensdid not presume to play in the decision games. the notion that all men, let alonewhole peoples, had inalienable rights came in only with the enlightenment, ascant three centuries agošand has been made effective, still in a minority of theworld's nations, only in the twentieth century. in switzerland women stillcannot vote.participatory fever is contagious. public policy used to mean what thegovernment does. now it includes corporate policies, collective bargainingagreements, the cost of health care, the recruitment of university presidents,lobbying practices, equal employment opportunity, environmental protection,tax shelters, waste disposal, private contributions to political candidates, the sexhabits of employees, or just about any other insider activities that outsidersthink are important enough to engage their time and attention.the biggest issues so far have to do with the quality of publicresponsibility that shows forth in the actions of corporations, universities,hospitals, and the thousands of other structures in which executives make thedecisions that serve people, cost them, anger or please them.the rising tide of participation is reflected in dramatic organizationalchanges. big corporations now usually have a vicepresident for keeping thecorporation out of trouble with nosy outsiders, or even with their ownstockholders and employees, who raise questions about what the companyought to produce, who it ought to employ, and how it ought to invest its money.should my company, or any american company, make and market nervegas, even if the government does want to buy some? should my company, orany american company, promote nuclear proliferation by selling to developingcountries nuclear power plants that make plutonium, the fuel for nuclearweapons, as a byproduct of generating electricity? shouldn't my company havemore women, and blacks, and american indians in its employšand especiallyin its board and top management? should a company whose stock i own investmy money in south africa? should my company, or any american company,pass the social costs of its profit seekingšovercrowding, the paving of greenspace, radioactive risk, dirt, noise, toxic waste,the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety63information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acid rain, or whateveršto the general public? should our community hospitalperform abortions, splice genes, change people's sex, and invest in expensiveequipment that can help only a few affluent patients? should our stateuniversity do secret work for the defense department? should the cia recruitour students for whoknowswhat clandestine wars in other people's countries?such questions cannot be brushed aside without raising their decibel level.there are ways to deal with all of them: shifts of policy, or consultativeprocesses, diversionary moves, or public explanationsšin descending order ofprobable effectiveness. but the visibly responsible leaders increasingly have tobuild into their organizations, not as a public relations frill but as an essentialingredient in bottomline budgeting, staff members competent to help developstrategy on such issues as these. and the visible executive now has to bepersonally competent to defend the organization's public posture in publicdebate.these public responsibility issues can make or break companies, products,and executive reputations. if you do not believe that, take a nestle executive tolunch and ask him about marketing baby formula in the third world.influence based on secrecy: dilemmas ofopennessthe push for participation by all kinds of people and the inherent leakinessof the information resource combine to produce the modern executive's mostpuzzling dilemma. the dilemma must have been familiar to the first cavepeople who tried to bring other cave people together to get something done. butfor us moderns, the scale of the perplexity is without precedent. the dilemmacan be summarized in one question: how do you get everybody in on the actand still get some action?the contemporary clamor to be in on the act is certainly impressive. inbusiness, customers are feistier, more likely to complain; stockholders are morenumerous and less passive; policyholders are more inclined to follow throughon their insurance claims; union members and other citizens give advice onwhat is wrong with the steel and automobile industries; employees assert theright to judge whether their employers should make fragmentation bombs;maritime unions decide whether shipments should go to the soviet union;advocacy agencies excluded from the united way organize their owncompeting drive for community funds; ethnic groups keep a watchful eye oninvestments in south africa and business with the arabs. more and moreparents have a world population policy; teachers organize to tellthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety64information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.school systems what ought to be taught; students want tailormade courses ofstudy. environmental groups, carefully avoiding questions about whom theyrepresent, are articulate (and effective) beyond the wildest dreams of giffordpinchot and teddy roosevelt. new kinds and colors of people are breakingthrough the oligopoly of influence long controlled by businessmen and malelawyers from earlyarriving ethnic groups. even those deadly predictablecircuses, our national political conventions, become increasingly interesting asminorities and women fill more delegate slots and live tv coverage enhancesthe risk that a delegate will be seen making a deal, picking his nose, adjustingher shoulder strap, or falling asleepšin millions of living rooms at once.openness, then, is the buzzword of modernization. in its firmament thedieties are the public hearing, the news conference, the investigative reporter,"60 minutes" and "20/20," ted koppel, phil donahue, and the nationalenquirer. its devils are also well known: smokefilled rooms, secret invasions,hidden or edited tapes, and expense account luncheons at which theestablishment decides what to do next.in consequence, compared with a generation ago most public officialsšand a rapidly growing number of private executives conscious of their ultimatepublic responsibilityšare much more inclined to ask themselves, before acting,how their actions would look on the front page of the washington post or thewall street journal or on the evening telecast. even former vicepresidentagnew has conceded that taking cash from contractors in his government officemight be wrong if judged by what he called postwatergate moral standards. noone doubts that raising the risk of public exposure will improve the privatebehavior of executive leaders as they ask themselves, "how would i feel aboutthis action if everyone was able to see me take it?" the moral of watergate isplain enough: if the validity of your action depends on its secrecy, better decideto do something else.but the yen for wider knowledge and broader participation has gone wellbeyond this sensitivity training for visible leaders and has raised new questionsabout the costbenefit calculation of more openness. a generation of experiencesuggests that it is high time we faced the next question: how much openness isenough?since this is not a mystery story, i will reveal at the outset the conclusionof the next few paragraphs. experience teaches that the procedures of opennessare well designed to stop bad things from happening and ill designed to getgood things movingšunless the consensus for action has been builtin privateahead of time.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety65information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a practical benefit of openness is simply that complex social systems workbadly if they are too centralized. in managing their agriculture the soviets haveput this proposition on public exhibit for more than half a century. the oppositeof centralization is of course not decentralization, which is simply an effort topreserve hierarchical workways when your organization gets too large forgrandpa to know everything. the opposite of centralization is what charleslindblom calls mutual adjustment: in a generally understood environment ofmoral rules, norms, conventions, and mores, very large numbers of people areadjusting their behavior by watching each other and modifying their behaviorjust enough to accommodate the differing purposes of others, but not so muchthat the mutual adjusters lose sight of where they themselves want to go.13what makes mutual adjustment work is the wide availability of relevantinformation, so each mutual adjuster can figure out what the others may dounder varied conditions and give forth useful signals about his or her ownbehavior. the market principle does not guarantee smoothly working systems,of course; perfect competition among buyers and sellers with full information isto be found only in textbooks for sophomores. yet very large systems, many ofthem global in scale, based on massive information outputs and feedbacksystems, have been developed in this century. in recent years systemsunimaginable before the marriage of computers and telecommunications areaccepted now as routine (currency and commodity markets, worldwide airlineand hotel reservation systems, global public health controls and weatherforecasting systems come readily to mind).in other writings i have addressed the growing costs of openness. the verygreat benefits of openness and wide participation are flawed byoversimplification and confrontation, by apathy and nonparticipation, bymusclebinding legalisms, by too many meaningless public hearings, by anexcess of voting and parliamentary process, by the naysaying power ofprocedural objection, by the protection of mediocrity, by the inhibition ofexcellence in recruitment and the absence of candor in evaluationšand by onething more. mythology has it the other way around, but it seems clear now thatwide consultation early in a policy process tends to discourage innovation andfavor standpattism.more openness in decision making is a radical litany, yet the multiplicationof those consulted tends to water down radical reform. during the vietnam war,i used to conduct seminars on this subject (among others) during the long hoursspent with student leaders on the barricades. why, i asked them, do youadvocate openness with such passion when the reforms you want would bevoted down if youthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety66information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.put them to a big public meeting? they were regularly nonplussed by thequestion; evangelists, in david riesman's phrase, often ''mistake therighteousness of their cause for its marketability."14an action proposal, especially if it is new and unfamiliar, will seemthreatening, or at least postponable, to most of the experts who have not alreadybeen involved. it is no accident that so many memorable u.s. public policyinitiatives (much of the new deal and the lendlease idea in the 1930s, themarshall plan and harry truman's point four in the 1940s, the open skiesproposal in the 1950s, the peace corps and food for peace and the war onpoverty in the 1960s, the nixon doctrine and the carter human rights initiativein the 1970s) began as the products of leadership hunch and thinkingoutloudrhetoric, with most of the professional staff work and the needed consultationsat home and abroad following after. in each case the executive leaders weresensing a trend the american people would buy if a credible salesman cameforward to peddle it. but if all the relevant experts had been asked for theiropinions before launching them, some or all of these great ideas might wellhave shriveled in the womb. too many people, in washington and abroad,would have said, "let's study it some more."bold initiatives for change can thus be killed by premature exposure to therough winds of public debate. yet let us again remember that this cuts bothways: timely openness is also well designed to stop foolish change. earlier andwider consultation would almost certainly have killed the illfated bay of pigsoperation, drastically modified the vietnam escalation, and illuminated thegrotesquerie at watergate for the foolish scheme everyone, including presidentnixon, later judged it to have been.whatever the costs and benefits of openness in particular cases, it is clearenough that in every kind of hierarchy the winds of openness and participationby new kinds of people are whistling through the cracks, blowing in thewindows, and knocking down the doors. the result in each case cannot be soclearly judged in advance; it depends on how well those involved have analyzedand balanced the openness equation. openness, like technology, is not properlyan ideology. the answer to whether it helps or hurts basic human purposes isthe same as the answer to most of the interesting questions in the study ofsociety: it depends.class based on ownership: the obsolescence ofownershipthe openness which the informatization of society brings in its train wasbound to raise fundamental questions about the idea that knowledgethe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety67information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.belongs to a person or an organizationšor a nation. the propensity of thissharing resource to leak is eroding the doctrine that knowledge can be owned,exchanged, and monopolized the way other resources can.that you or i can own a fact or an idea, that a message of any kind belongsto a person or a corporation or a government, is (for reasons already cited fromcolin cherry's work) rather a peculiar notion to begin with. the person fromwhom you got the message did not lose it; any right you acquire by receiving itis at best shared with the sender, the carrier, and often a good many other nosypeople who are privy to it. even if you paid to get the message (if, for example,it was a piece of research you hired someone to do), or if someone paid to get itto you (a friend who sent you a cable, a company that sent you a commercial), itwas the assembly or delivery service, not the information contained in themessage, that was paid for. the researcher could not own the facts and ideasthat she or he strung together for your use, and neither can you, even if you usethem as your own.the new tide of information technologies makes the ownership ofintellectual property more detached from reality with every new invention.dynamic high technology keeps developing better and faster techniques of piracyšxerography, videotape, the backyard dish for picking up signals fromsatellites. the knowledge explosion also produces new kinds of works(computer software), new means of delivery (microfiche, videocassettes,computerized videotext over a telephone line), and new ways to assemble greatcomplexities of facts and ideas in more readily accessible form (computerizeddata bases, inventory controls, energy use data, online reservation systems forairlines and car rentals).in this environment, laws written to protect books and phonograph recordsand broadcasts, the products of the past, are getting harder and harder to apply.laws that address technologies not yet invented are hard to write. the nervousbreakdown of copyright protection is now an open scandal. it may be retardedin degree by technological fixes. satellite broadcasters can scramble theirsignals to prevent pirating. elaborate codes have been devised by the creators ofsome computer programs, though teenage computer hackers have been showinghow inherently porous they are.when i first acquired a home computer, i found the ethical dilemma rightup front: in the instruction manual. on its cover sheet i was threatened withlitigious mayhem if i copied any of the software. on the very first page of themanual i was told that before i did anything else i should make at least twocopies of the floppy diskette provided with the manual.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety68information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the makers of software keep up their pitiful efforts to maintain aproprietary interest in their products, but the happygolucky free distribution ofcopies of copyrighted diskettes has already become one of the friendly gesturesthat makes the owners of personal computers feel like members of a new kindof guild. the leakiness of the information resource seems destined tooverwhelm the backward looking efforts to imprison it. the history of armscontrol, and the success of computer pirates, teach us that there is always atechnological fix for a technological fix.is the doctrine that information is owned by its originator (or compiler)necessary to make sure that americans remain intellectually creative? in mostother countries creative work is overwhelmingly controlled by organizationsand carried out by salaried people. in japan even the most inventive employeeis likely to have a lifetime job and receive salary raises in lockstep with his agecohort, his morale sustained not by personal ownership of his ideas but bytogetherness in an organizational family.most u.s. patents are held by organizations (corporations, universities,government agencies), not by the inventors. many copyrights, perhaps most, areheld by publishers and promoters, not by the authors and songwriters thefounding fathers may have had in mind when they sewed informationasproperty into the u.s. constitution.an author or songwriter who helps a publisher make money shouldcertainly participate in the proceeds. but direct agreements about profit sharingor joint venture arrangements (the movie industry is already full of relevantexamples) seem a less fragile basis for such cooperation than the frayingfictions that the author owns the words in a book and that shared information isbeing exchanged.in u.s. universities and research institutes, creative work is alreadyrewarded mostly by promotion, tenure, and tolerant traditions about teachingloads and outside consulting. we generate a respectably innovative r&d effortin publicsector fields such as military technology, space exploration, weatherforecasting, environmental protection, and the control of infectious diseaseswithout the scientists and inventors having to own the ideas they contribute tothe process. in the private sector, the leaders of industries on the hightechfrontier are already saying out loud that their protection from overseas copyistsdoes not lie in trade secrets but in healthy r&d budgets.the notion of informationasproperty is built deep into our laws, oureconomy, and our political psychešand into the expectations and tax returnsand balance sheets of writers and artists and the companies, agencies, andacademies that pay them to be creative. but we had better continue to developour own ways, compatible with our ownthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety69information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.traditions, of rewarding intellectual labor without depending on laws andprohibitions that are disintegrating fastšas the volstead act did in our earliereffort to enforce an unenforceable prohibition.in international politics the notion that knowledge is owned by sovereignstates is in maximum disarray. every newly miniaturized recording ormicrographic device and every new satellite launched for communication orphotography or remote sensing makes it more difficult to sustain the doctrinethat national governments can own, or even control, their information resources.in 1979 the u.s. government sent two delegations to two world meetingsabout the control of information. at a unesco conference in paris, thedelegates righteously advocated the free flow of information, meaninginformation furnished by u.s. news agencies, u.s. television producers, andu.s. movie studios. a few weeks later, at the un conference on science andtechnology for development in vienna, an equally righteous group ofamericans came out against the free flow of information, meaning informationas a technology we were anxious to hoard. both principles are authenticallyamerican: the right to choose and the right to own. in the internationaldiscourse, we will hardly be able to have it both ways. yet there is no evidencethat the two groups of delegates, and the government that instructed them both,perceived the irony or the contradiction.the u.s. state department, which instructed both delegations, seemedunusually disoriented by the new information environment when it ruled lastyear that western european owners of ibm computers could not move themfrom, say, birmingham to manchester without first seeking u.s. permission.this assertion of extraterritoriality, over equipment produced by a multinationalcompany with headquarters in the united states, was designed to preventstrategic equipment from flowing indirectly to communist countries.regardless of the merits of the case, the edict is simply unenforceable. in theglobal information society, the long arms of ownership and control areshrinking fast.if information is inherently hard to bottle up, policies based on a longterminformation monopoly are likely to have a short halflife. for the 1980s andbeyond, the principle is clear: if the validity of your action depends on itscontinuing secrecy, do not depend on it.in our generationlong arms race with the soviet union, successive u.s.administrations have managed to persuade themselves that each new u.s.weapons system (its madeinamerica technology a continuing mystery to ouradversaries) would enable us to stay ahead. in one of the most damaging ofthese actions, in the early 1970s, thethe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety70information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.united states decided to stuff multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles(mirvs) into single missiles. despite elaborate secrecy on our part, the sovietssoon figured out how to do likewise. but since they (for other reasons) had builtmuch bigger missiles boosted by more powerful rockets, they were able to stuffmore mirvs into their canisters than we could. thus did we outsmart ourselvesby taking an action that depended for its validity on technological secrecy, andcreate the famous window of vulnerability instead.in the management of mutual deterrence the overclassification ofinformation about what we could do, if we had to, may actually increase thedanger of war by miscalculation. the core of the nuclear deterrent, thatremarkably stable if unattractive substitute for peace, is the soviet leaders'uncertainty about what the u.s. president would do in the event of sovietmoves against our allies or ourselves combined with their certainty that we havethe means to retaliate no matter what. keeping our intentions credibly uncertainis easy: we cannot know what we would do in a situation until we know whatthe situation is. but keeping from our adversaries full knowledge of ourcapabilities merely adds another element of madness to the nuclear arms race.our own government has for three decades engaged in halfhearted anddemonstrably ineffective efforts to control strategic u.s. science and keepforeign nationals out of sensitive university research. in our mostly opensociety, it never worked very well. americans have no corner on the market forbrains; scientists talk quite freely across frontiers to each other; our europeanand japanese allies never had much enthusiasm for controlling transborderinformation flows (because sales of equipment mean jobs for europeans andjapanese); and soviet technological espionage, like our own, has long been athriving industry.keeping our r&d to ourselves is a policy that depends for its validity onsecrecy. as informatization intensifies in the postindustrial world, strategicsecrecy can be expected to work less and less well.similar government behavior used to work better for dictators andtotalitarian bureaucracies in societies where keeping information fromspreading is honored by doctrine and practiced ad absurdum. the last time ilooked, xerox machines still had to be licensed by the government in the sovietunion; in bulgaria, even typewriters are closely controlled. ideas are harder tolicense: russian youngsters readily learn about jeans and hard rock, andscientists on both sides of the porous curtain seem to know how far along theirpeers are in unraveling (for example) the puzzlements of rocketry and spacetravel.the good news is that information is leaky, that sharing is the naturalthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety71information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mode of scientific discovery and technological innovation. the new informationenvironment seems bound to undermine the knowledge monopolies whichtotalitarian governments convert into monopolies of power. in the horoscope ofthe ussr and the soviet bloc, a future looms where nobody is in charge.privilege based on early access: equality ofaccess and fairnessthe informatization of society may destabilize more than the soviet bloc.it may help undermine the systems that keep 2 billion people in relative povertyand more than a third of them in absolute poverty. in many ways the mostexciting, and puzzling, question about the new knowledge environment iswhether it will be good news or bad news for the global fairness revolutionšand for that revolution's u.s. precinct, the upward mobility of women,minorities, and the poor.the most arresting trait of the information resource is that it is inherentlymore accessible than other resourcesšand that, once accessed, it unlocks theother resources. what does that imply for access to the power and affluence thatknowledge brings in its wake? theoretically at least, compared to thingsasresource, informationasresource should encourage: the spreading of benefits rather than the concentration of wealth(information can be more equitably shared than petroleum or gold orland or even water), and the maximization of choice rather than the suppression of diversity (theinformed are harder to regiment than the uninformed).in the industrial era, poverty was explained and justified by shortages ofthings; there just were not enough minerals, food, fibers, and manufactures togo around. looked at this way, the shortages were merely aggravated by thetendency of the poor to have babies.in the postindustrial era, the physical resources are joined at center stageby information, the resource that is harder for the rich and powerful to hoard.each baby, poor or not, is born with a brain. the collective capacity of all thebrains in each society to convert information into knowledge and wisdom is themeasure of that society's potential.but whether the informatization of the globe will actually mean a fairershake for those who have been the victims of discrimination depends mostly onwhat they do. most of the fairness achieved in world history has not been theconsequence of charity, goodheartedness, and noblesse oblige on the part ofthose in power. always inthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety72information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.history, it seems, fairness has been granted, legislated, or seized when there wasno alternative. and usually the reason there was no alternative was that thoseout of power were determined (or at least perceived by those in power to bedetermined) to cast off their shackles and take the law into their own hands.societies flexible enough to adapt to the pressure from groups out of power(as the united states has been doing, not without conflict and coercion, onschool integration, voter fights, sex discrimination, and equal employmentopportunity) manage to keep change comparatively peaceful.societies that try to maintain rigid hierarchies (and especially those which,like the shah's iran, at the same time encourage education for most of theirpeople) get blown out of the water. the shah of iran was brought down by themarriage of convenience between two groups who harbored powerfulresentments: mullahs who had been bypassed and downgraded bymodernization were angered by the lack of respect for tradition, and iranianstudents, at home and abroad, were angered by lack of fairness. afterwards thetradition defenders and the fairness advocates went after each other, and thefairness people lost.in other countries the mix is different, but part of the stew of resentmentsis always the complaint we learn from infancy to make: ''it isn't fair."there will be less excuse in the future than in the past for depriving wholepopulations of the benefits of development. there will also be less excuse forthe disadvantaged to blame their condition on the barons and bosses when theaccessible knowledge to even the score is already floating out there in thenoöspherešthe sphere of human consciousness and mental activity.the noösphere is an accessible resource that has many of thecharacteristics of a commons. in considering the implications for fairness ofinformation as a resource, it is an intriguingly fresh thought, worth a moment ofspeculation.in earlier times sharing arrangements for a common resource werecustomary, for example in tribal ownership and nomadic practices. vestiges ofthe idea survive in the boston commons, the national park system, and in theway many major waterways in europe and north america are managed. forpeople in old england the commons, as ivan illich defines it, was "that part ofthe environment which lay beyond their own thresholds and outside of theirpossessions, to which, however, they had recognized claims of usage [not toproduce commodities but to provide for the subsistence of their households]."the commons "was necessary for the community's survival, necessary forthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety73information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.different groups in different ways, but ... in a strictly economic sense, was notperceived as scarce."15the older commons, such as those for sheep and cattle, have disappearedthrough enclosure. but the commons idea has now been revived in a big way, asthe basis for worldwide cooperation in the environments that by commonconsent belong to no one or everyone (which seems to be about the same thing):the deep ocean and its seabed, antarctica, outer space and celestial bodies, andthe weather.the mediterranean sea, the arena of bloody ancient feuds and lethalmodern rivalries, has recently been formally recognized by all the coastal states(including the arab states and israel) as so precious a shared commons thatreversing its degradation must be a matter for cooperation even among swornenemies. the resulting international agreement, intermediated by the unenvironment programme, is selfenforcing: violating its terms would be in aliteral sense selfdefeating.for the management of an information commons, a sharing environment,these exotic precedents suddenly seem not so exotic. illich, in a tokyo speechcalled "silence is a commons," argued that electronic devices (from themicrophone to the computer) are a form of enclosure, reserving to the few theprivilege of breaking the silence otherwise available to the many.16 i do notknow about silence; i have not had much experience with it. but on thecomputer as a form of enclosure, i demur. in its general impact the forcedmarch of information technology, personal computers combined with globaltelecommunications, seems to me to be taking us away from the idea ofenclosure. my hunch is that the fusion of computers and communications willfurther empower the many to participate in making policy in domains to whichthe few, with their motheaten monopolies of knowledge, will have to yieldmore and more access.neighborhood organizations are furnishing themselves with personalcomputers to deal more effectively with the banks, developers, and governmentagencies that will otherwise make the neighborhoods' decisions for them.american indian tribes might set up a computer teleconference to concert theirpolitical clout on fastmoving legislation. a single individual with a personalcomputer can even now get access to so much useful and timely informationthat she or he can, with a week's homework and without leaving home,intervene as an unusually knowledgeable citizen in almost any public policyissue on the national agenda.to chart these potentials is not to fulfill them. the trends in informationtechnology would make it possible to organize as a commons (with free thoughnot necessarily costless access thereto)the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety74information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most of the world's useful knowledge. that is not to say it will happen. it justhelps remake the point that those who think "it isn't fair" will have plenty ofopportunity to get access to almost any information that is being withheld fromthem to their disadvantage. but they will have to want to work at it, they willhave to prepare their brains for the task. in the information society as in itspredecessors, there is still no free lunch.politics based on geography: the passing ofremotenessi have argued the mindblowing implications of the informatization ofsociety for four of the old hierarchiesšbased on control, secrecy, ownership,and structural unfairness. let's look at what is happening to the fifth of the oldhierarchies, those based on location.the inherited idea is that the political importance of communities is basedon their geography. cities usually developed because they were seaports or oncritical inland waterways, or (earlier) on important overland caravan routes and(later) on important railway lines. it made a difference whether you were in thecity or in the country; if you lived in a rural area, you were remote. there wasno choice about it, you were just remote.the importance of countries was often based on the natural resources theyhad discovered, and developed, on their territory. the spices of the orient, therubber and tin of southeast asia, the coal and iron of central europe, thediamonds (and later, uranium) of south africa, the fruit of central america, thepetroleum reserves of indonesia and mexico and venezuela and north africaand the persian (or arabian) gulf and the north sea, the soil that producedthose "waving fields of grain" in north americašthese crucial resources left anindelible mark on the national sovereignties which happened to find them intheir backyards.then there was the sense of place in military strategy, summed up in theoncepopular word geopolitics. this was the idea that a nation's powerdepended largely on its geographyšhow vulnerable its land mass, howdefensible its frontiers, how rich its mineral deposits, how fertile its soil, howplentiful its water, how extensive its coastline.but communications satellites and fast computers are gradually erasingdistance, eroding the idea that some places are world centers because they arenear other places or near obsolescent natural resources or near oldfashionedmeans of transportation, while other areas are bound to be peripheral becausethey are remote from these centers.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety75information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.octavio paz, a poet, caught onto what was happening well before most ofthe systems analysts and political pundits. "we mexicans," he wrote in the1970s, "have always lived on the periphery of history. now the center ornucleus of world society has disintegrated and everyonešincluding theeuropean and the north americanšis a peripheral being. we are living on themargin ... because there is no longer any center.... world history has becomeeveryone's task and our own labyrinth is the labyrinth of all mankind."the passing of remoteness is one of the great unheralded macrotrends ofour extraordinary time. once you can plug in through television to un votes orto a bombing in beirut or a wimbledon final; once you can sit in auckland, orsingapore, or bahrein and play the new york stock markets in real time; onceyou can participate in rule, power, and authority according to the relevance ofyour opinion rather than the mileage to the decision making venuešthen thepower centers are wherever the brightest people are using the latest informationin the most creative ways.distant farmsteads can, if they will, be connected to the central cortex oftheir commodity exchanges, their political authorities, their global markets. thefusion of rapid microprocessing and global telecommunications presents nearlyall of us with a choice (and an obligation to choose) between relevance andremoteness. there will be costs and benefits to either choicešbut the necessityto choose is new, and inescapable.there is, of course, an alternative to geography as a principle oforganization. the revised proposition was recently formulated by futuristmagda mchale: in the new knowledge environment, civilization will be builtmore around communities of people, and less around communities of place.17that this trend is well advanced can be seen in a quick review of what ishappening to the great geographic hierarchies which in this last couple ofcenturies have been dividing, and governing, the world.the state is not withering away, as with their different motives karl marxand the advocates of world government would have desired. but power isleaking out of sovereign national governments in three directions at once. thestate is leaking at the top, as more international functions require the pooling ofsovereignty in alliances, in a world weather watch, in geophysical research, ineradicating contagious diseases, in satellite communication, in facing up toglobal environmental risks. the state is leaking sideways, as multinationalcorporationsšprivate, pseudoprivate, and publicšconduct more and more ofthe world's commerce, and operate across political frontiers so much better thancommittees of sovereign states seem able to do. the the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety76information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.state is also leaking from the bottom, as minorities, singleissue constituencies,specialpurpose communities, and neighborhoods take control of their owndestinies, legislating their own growth policies, their own population policies,their own environmental policies.and what has nation come to mean? increasingly it means not a hierarchyof power but ethnicityšthe frenchness of quebec, the tribal loyalties of the iboin biafra, the separatism of the scots, the rhetorical brotherhood of the arabs,the world's many diasporas, ranging from the overseas chinese to the zionistand nonzionist jews outside israel.and organized religion? all of the great religious traditions have had tosettle, so far in world history, for hegemony in one or another part of the world.but in a world of peoplecommunities, not placecommunities, the parishcannot be mostly geographybased. now, even established religions are tryingto break free from their national and regional parishes. the roman catholicpope's extensive travels and the terrorist outreach of ayatollah khomeini'sshiites form a grotesque correlation: both are breaking loose from historicgeographic bounds to appeal to wider religiousšand therefore politicalšconstituencies.the prospect of people rather than place as a basis for community hasinteresting implications for universities trying to serve a local clientele, forcorporations that have bet heavily on regional organization, and for politicalsystems that have bet heavily on geographybased constituencies. it implies thatthose institutions which exploit the electronic answers to remoteness may becatching a wave in the twilight of hierarchy.summary and conclusionsin sum, the informatization of society will force dramatic changes in somelongstanding hierarchic forms of social organization. the process of change,the slow accumulation of small changes in the way various social functions areperformed, is far harder to discern than the ultimate result. informationtechnology pervades our lives and institutions in the same way that termitesinhabit a house. as unseen termites consume the structural supports of abuilding, so may information technology challenge the rules, norms, andconventions that, in an earlier time, served to organize society by vestingeconomic and social power in centralized leadership, secrecy, ownership,resource control, and propitious geography. as with termite damage, we can becaught unawares at the collapse of those structures we thought sturdy, with thefirst visible sign of change serving also asthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety77information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proof positive that it is too late for stopgap solutions. therefore, if we are toavoid catastrophe, or a least avoid fighting the last war, we must both broadenand lengthen our vision of the future.information technologies will be assimilated without turmoil only ifscholars recognize the need to rethink their disciplines in light of the erosion ofsocieties based on material resources and industrial production. citizens willhave to get used to the responsibility that goes with the influence and poweralmost casually available to them through access to information. generalistleaders will find themselves rethinking the nature of leadership. they more thanothers will have to widen their angle of vision to take in an informed andconsulting public, and extend their focal length to take in the full implicationsof the twilight of hierarchy, not in the next 100 years but in their own life andwork. we will need to changešwe are already changingšthe negligentprocedures that left the bomb unconstrained by hard thinking about causes andeffects. the informatization of society holds great promise, but will need to behoused in a new intellectual home. the termites are at work on the old one, andwe had best not wait until we lean on its wall and it caves in without notice.notes1. the statistics on the redistribution, between 1880 and 2000, of the u.s. work force wereculled from the research of g. molitor, public policy forecasting, inc., by henry m. boettinger,who headed at&t's corporate planning before he joined e. f. hutton as head of its office ofinformation strategy and technology. ''information industry challenges to management andeconomics," new jersey bell journal, vol. 7, no. 1 (spring 1984), pp. 12œ21.2. the oecd report, information activities, electronics and telecommunicationstechnologies: impact on employment, growth. and trade (paris: oecd, 1981), was one of aseries of reports oecd has conducted as it tries to trace the impacts of the information age on,and its implications for, member countries.3. g. edward schuh's comments were made in a note to the author.4. p. drucker, managing in turbulent times (new york: harper & row, 1980).5. the first report to the club of rome, which sold more than 3 million copies in manylanguages, is available in book form as the limits to growth, by donella h. meadows et al.(new york: universe books, 1972). john mchale's book, the changing informationenvironment (boulder, colo.: westview press, 1976; first published in the united kingdom in1972) covers the changes in communications. resource use, education, business andmanagement, and political process that derive from the impact of information upon society.6. dieter altenpohl discussed the role of materials development and their social, economic, andecological impacts (thus illuminating the role that information plays in materials substitution) inhis book materials in world perspective (heidelberg, germany; berlin: springerverlag,1980). his chart relating the weight of materials to their degree of sophistication, can be foundon p. 201.7. in his book manuscript entitled "a second industrial revolution?," professor colin cherry ofthe university of london explained the "sharing" nature of messagesšthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety78information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.while making clear that meaning is not necessarily or even usually shared. the discussion hereis based on that manuscript and on talks with professor cherry about that draft in aspen,colorado, the summer before he died.8. lewis branscomb, "information: the ultimate frontier," science, january 12, 1979, pp. 143œ147.9. c. cherry, "a second industrial revolution?" (unpublished manuscript).10. comments about the obsolescence of both liberal and marxist approaches are found in theinfluential examination of the effects of the new communication and computer technologies onsociety by simon nora and alain minc in l'informatisation de la société. originally producedas a commissioned report from the two civil servants to president giscard d'estaing, it quicklybecame a best seller in france and influenced the thinking of giscard's successor, presidentfrançois mitterand. the book was eventually translated into english as the computerization ofsociety (cambridge: the mit press, 1981), with an introduction by daniel bell. the englishversion of the title misses the point that nora and minc were making in their bookšwhich isthat the marriage of computer and telecommunication technologies is the new dimension ofsociety.11. chester barnard's theory of executive process is spelled out in the functions of theexecutive (cambridge: harvard university press, 1938).12. paul appleby, policy and administration (university, ala.: university of alabama press,1949), p. 21.13. charles lindblom's book, the intelligence of democracy (new york: free press, 1965),introduced the concept of "mutual adjustment" in the management of both public and privateorganizations and institutions. he updated his thoughts in a lecture at the university ofminnesota's center for strategic management research, "incremental strategy: still muddlingthrough," on may 13, 1983.14. the comment by david riesman comes from my extensive correspondence with him on thesubject of openness in university governance.15. ivan illich argued that computers are doing to communication what fences did to pastures,in "silence is a commons," the coevolution quarterly, winter 1983, pp. 5œ9.16. see note 15.17. magda cordell mchale, "the feminist model," center for integrative studies, stateuniversity of new york at buffalo, 1984.commentsalexander h. flaxpresident emeritusinstitute for defense analysesharlan cleveland's paper, as befits the subject of this symposium, is trulyglobal in scope, not only geographically, but in its full sweep, in itscontemplation of human affairs, and in treating civilization as an integratedwhole. its insights into the nature of changes in society being wrought by therapid pace of progress in information technology are profound and thoughtprovoking.it would be very difficult indeed to do justice to this paper in a briefdiscussion, but i think it would not be amiss to talk about a few things fromthe twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety79information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the standpoint of an engineer, this. after all, being a symposium of the nationalacademy of engineering.it is heartening that ambassador cleveland sees the portents of the newinformation technology for society as predominantly benign. there are somedoubts expressed, but mainly his is an upbeat appraisal, and thisšfor engineerswho have lived through the traumas of the 1960s and early 1970sšis awelcome change. we all heard the dire predictions of unemployment thatnorbert weiner made and that many others picked upšyou may recall thehuman use of human beings. we are once burned, twice shy.we should not assume that society will naturally accept the benefits of newtechnologies without our doing anything about it. we must remain aware ofthose other voices saying that this new information technology may underminecivil rights in the united states through invasions of privacy and that the veryopenness of the information could result in pervasive data banks which could beused for repressive and harmful activities. we need a countervailing logic andthis paper helps provide it, but i don't think it solves the problem for all time. infact, there are some real problems that engineering can help solve in thehandling of data to help prevent some of these abuses. we should always keepthose in mind.let me also comment on the fact that ambassador cleveland hasaddressed, for the most part, the benign role of leaking information, or morepervasive information if you like. he has talked about information leakingprimarily in the context of democratic societies. there are others who fear thatin a totalitarian or police state some of the new information technology can beused to make repression more effective, much along the lines of orwell's 1984or huxley's brave new world or b. f. skinner's walden 2, and we must beaware of that dimension of the problem.the other area that is of special interest to engineers is what the famousstructural engineer hardy cross called the third member of the trilogy ofengineering. the trilogy was, to paraphrase, science and technology,economics, and social dynamics. this was long before the protest movements,but nevertheless cross counted the interaction of technology with society asvery important. we cannot ignore the role of economics in striking anequilibrium. that is, any one of the elements of the trilogy cannot run wildbecause another one will check it, and that is as true for social wants, needs, anddesires as it is for technology. we have seen that new information technology issubject to the inexorable laws of economics in the marketplace. you only haveto recall the picturephone or the premature attempts to put computerbasedinstruction in the schools in the early 1960s. neither took hold. i assure you thatthere will be more things that will not be accepted. that is how we discoverwhat things work: we try them. economics is going to put bounds and limits onhow far we can go in any of these directions, although i think that we will go along way and very much along the line that ambassador cleveland hasdescribed. certainly this timely, wideranging, farsighted overview of where weare going with this new information technology deserves careful study byengineers.the twilight of hierarchy speculations on the global informationsociety80information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.property rights in informationanne wells branscombthe subject of this paperšthe laws of the information age and, morespecifically, property fights in informationšis a difficult one, but it isabsolutely essential to pursue if we are to enter the information ageknowledgeably and with an understanding of the consequences.after an introductory section which presents definitions of property andhistorical background on information protection, the paper reviews recentdevelopments with respect to property fights in information, analyzes several ofthe major areas of concern, and develops some general principles to guide us inthe application of the law to the new technologies. for almost every fight in thisarea there is an opposing claim or an adversarial relationship. therefore, in eachindividual case it is a matter of balancing equities and sensibilities that oftendefy codification. as discussed in individual sections below, the rights include:1. the right to know information about ourselves and the world welive in2. the right to collect informationšthe investigative function3. the right to acquire informationšarchived by others4. the right to withhold informationšabout ourselves, personal,corporate, or national5. the right to control the release of information6. the right to receive compensation for information7. the right to protect informationšthe security function8. the right to destroy or expunge information9. the right to correct or alter informationproperty rights in information81information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10. the right to publish or disseminate informationšaccess to themarketplace of ideasintroductionmany scholars, including colin cherry,1 fritz machlup,2 and harlancleveland,3 rightfully argue that information has characteristics different fromthose of natural resources and manufactured goods upon the exchange of whichour economic system rests. however, if we are to transform our economy intoone that relies primarily upon the economic value of gathering, storing,processing, and distributing information, we must develop principles fromwhich we can derive economic value for such activities. therefore, it is not veryhelpful to the public debate to insist that information must by its nature beshared or that it is naturally leaky or uncontainable.in civilized societies, especially in information societies that are firmlyrooted in an educated citizenry and intellectual prowess, we will not tolerate theunnecessary spilling of proprietary information any more than we will tolerateoil spills polluting our oceans. neither will we tolerate exclusivity with respectto information upon which our livelihood as a nation depends. inevitably wemust turn to our legal system to develop and to sustain those rights that weconsider inalienable and equitable and to delineate the boundaries between whatis considered public and what is to be protected by the law as private.definitions of propertyproperty is a legal concept that dates back to the earliest history ofcivilization and that is central to the efficient functioning of market economies.the word deals with the boundary line between what is yours and what is mine,or between what belongs to everybody and what belongs to nobody.property, according to black's law dictionary, is "that which is peculiar orproper to any person: that which belongs exclusively to one; in the strict legalsense, an aggregate of rights which are guaranteed and protected by thegovernment." the word is derived from the latin word proprio meaning to"own." the verb appropriate means "to make a thing one's own; to make athing the subject of property, to exercise dominion over an object to the extent,and for the purpose, of making it subserve one's own proper use or pleasure.''according to webster's, the word property means, for tangible objects,"something to which a person has legal title," and for intangible rights, that "inwhich a person has a right protected by law." theproperty rights in information82information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.word proper itself is the root from which property is derived. webster's definesproper as that ''which is socially appropriate: according with establishedtraditions and feelings of rightness and appropriateness," or that which is"sanctioned as according with equity, justice, ethics, or rationale," or that whichis "marked by rightness, correctness, or rectitude ... entirely in accordance withauthority, observed facts, or other sanction."our founding fathers followed john locke's definition of property asincluding "that property which men have in their persons as well as goods," andjames madison concluded: "in a word, as a man is said to have a right to hisproperty, he may be equally said to have a property in his rights."4in spanish law the propios or proprios were certain plots of land reservedas the unalienable property of the town, for the purpose of erecting publicbuildings, markets, and so forth, or to be used in any other way, under thedirection of the municipality, for the advancement of the revenues or theprosperity of the place.in recent years international lawyers have become enmeshed in definingthe ownership of international public spaces. antarctica is the world's onlylandmass not territorially designated by proprietary ownership. however, theocean seabed and outer space have been subject to much debate over whatconstitutes the "common heritage of mankind" or "the province of all mankind."5information is neither naturally proprietary nor naturally shared any morethan the earth, or ocean seabed, or space is naturally the province of mankind orthe property of individuals, nationstates, or other legal entities.although we have lagged behind the japanese in our research and study ofthe social impacts of the johoka shakai (the japanese term for informationsociety,6 we have led the world in litigation, legislation, and judicialinterpretation of legal rights and obligations with respect to information. publicdiscourse for many years to come will concentrate on defining property rights ininformation that are marked by rightness and in accord with equity, justice,ethics, or reason, and will focus especially on defining those rights that aresubject to an effective sanction.history of information protectionthe conflict between public and private information is as deeply rooted inour historical documents as is the protection of both private and public realestate. new england villages were built around aproperty rights in information83information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved."common," or public area, in which villagers gathered on public occasions,much as the spaniards promenaded around their central parks in the cool ofevenings. in both cases the open spaces were essential to the exchange ofinformation in communities that depended upon facetoface voicecommunications. counterparts of such places include the ancient greek agora,or marketplace, and london's hyde park comer.we have protected our seacoasts for public access up to the highwatermark and have developed a great national park system for the protection ofanimals and for recreational activities. the concept of public ownership ofairwaves arose at the time of teapot dome scandals when the public wasoutraged about the private exploitation of our great natural resources. there wasno natural obligation to make the airwaves a public asset, as lawyers could mapout private rights in spectrum resources just as easily as they have in landmasses. it was considered the right and proper way of handling the tower ofbabel that existed on the airwaves and prohibited anyone from using thatresource efficiently.the constitution provides for congress to protect patents and copyrights,whereas the bill of rights in the first amendment establishes an unregulatedmarketplace of ideas. thus the founding fathers pursued the contradictorygoals of protecting the work products of inventors and writers while at the sametime preserving the public interest in the availability of information. we havetried to walk a tightrope between providing too much or too little protection forinformation. cases abound in the law with regard to what constitutes "fair use"of information generated by another without his or her permission. the basicphilosophy was that facts and ideas could not be protected, but only thecomposition (in the case of authors) and the embodiment of an idea in a productor process (in the case of patents).7 consequently, we have preserved the openaccess to laws of nature and to mathematical formulas that can be easilyreplicated. at the same time we have attempted to provide authors andinventors with legal protection for their expertise in order to compensate themfor their efforts, to encourage greater productivity, and to increase the body ofknowledge upon which human progress depends.this concept of protection of intellectual property is not shared by all thenations of the world, nor is it derived from any natural law. other cultures havetheir own concepts of propriety with respect to intellectual output. there isnothing universal about copyright, patents, or trade secrets. these are devicesfor reconciling the interests of society with those of the individual and oflinking intellectual producproperty rights in information84information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tivity with commercial gain. their origins are in western cultural history andare deeply rooted in the development of the printing press and industrialmanufacturing societies. these are legal concepts designed to encourage apositive attitude toward innovation and social change. these concepts began todevelop in the late middle ages; they have no logical counterpart in earlycivilizations where the products of intellectual expertise belonged to thecommunity and not to their creators.8all societies have developed an information policy, the most stringent ofwhich is exemplified by the burning of books in china in 213 b.c. and theburying alive of some 460 scholars who were thought to be able to teach theircontents from memory. throughout history knowledge has been closelyguarded, usually by a priesthood whose continuity depended on themaintenance of secrecy concerning rituals, herbs, hieroglyphs, or, in the case ofamerican indians, secrecy of the sand paintings used to heal the sick and blessnewlyweds.thus we can consider computer hackers a new breed of priests, whoseprimary motive has been to disseminate information about new computersoftware as widely as possible rather than to keep their expertise closelyguarded. it is a startlingly new concept, thereforešthat of consideringinformation as a natural resource which in its natural state will tend to permeatethe society. such dissemination has always depended upon skills that must beacquired, nurtured, and supported by social sanctions.knowledge can only be acquired by developing one's intellectual skills.thus, the protection of intellectual activity developed alongside the rise of aclass of individuals who had the leisure to produce artistic, literary, or usefulinventions. there is substantial evidence that early greeks recognized the rightsof artists to be identified with their works and to have them performed orpresented as created.9 the first adjudication of a copyright issue seems to havetaken place in the middle ages when a zealous clergyman visited his formerteacher long enough to make a hurried copy of his book of psalms, the copyingof which was not sanctioned by the king.10 the elaborate rules that we areattempting to follow today awaited the advent of the printing press in 1436 andthe rapid industrialization of western europe.11the constitution of the united states12 endows the federal governmentwith the power to regulate copyrights and patents as a device to "promote theprogress of science and useful arts by securing for limited times to authorsand inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries."thereby authors and inventors were encouraged to share their output with thenation. surprisingly,property rights in information85information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there was little debate concerning this clause. the federalist papers merelyreflect that "the utility of this power will scarcely be questioned. the copyrightof authors has been solemnly adjudged in great britain to be a right of commonlaw. the right to useful inventions seems with equal reason to belong to theinventors. the public good fully coincides in both cases with the claims ofindividuals...."13in both cases it was assumed that it was in the public interest to encouragethe widespread dissemination of knowledge and to nurture native intellect.interestingly enough, the copyright law that was enacted gave protection only toamerican authors, denying any protection to imported works, which led towidespread copying of english publications.14 this had the opposite effect fromthat of encouraging native talent allegedly intended by the legislation. as thepiracy and copying of english information products were far cheaper thanacquiring the original works of american authors, a flourishing publishingindustry developed primarily for textbooks copied from english sources. thusthe copyright act of 1790, a high priority on the calendar of the first congress,was a cornerstone in the philosophy of the new nation to encourage literacy andwidespread dissemination of useful knowledgešan early development oftechnology transfer. it took another century to amend the act to recognizeinternational copyright arrangements that gave mutual protection to americanauthors from unauthorized reprints by foreign publishers.15despite the long and complex historical experience with copyrights andpatents developing protection for the production of information, it was only latein the last century that we began to build a body of law limiting the use ofpersonal information.16 in the last 90 years we have made great progress inaccommodating ourselves to the intrusion into our personal and political livesof an independent press, both print and electronic media, and we are beginningto forge a new law with respect to computer communications as well.the right to knowthe right to know can involve either simple or complex matters, e.g., thesimple matter of the right of individuals to know of their origins and who theirtrue parents are, or the more complicated matter of the fight of the public toinformation that provides the basis for public decisions. however, no such rightis absolute. for example, with the advent of amniocentesis, which permitsidentification of the sex of an unborn child during periods of pregnancy whenan abortion can still be legally performed, it has become a controversial issueproperty rights in information86information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.whether or not the couple should be told the sex of the child. relatives anddoctors withhold the information that a patient has a terminal disease where, intheir judgment, it would be psychologically damaging to the patient.geraldine ferraro and her husband confronted a difficult decision withrespect to the release of information that mr. zaccaro considered would bedamaging to his business interests. his tax returns were not legally required bythe strictest interpretation of the campaign disclosure laws, but the publicbelieved it had a right to know the facts in order to pass judgment on ms.ferraro's qualifications to be vicepresident.17"anatomy of a libel suit," an excellent twohour program produced forpublic television by the columbia school of journalism, dramatized thedilemma between the public's right to know and the private right to controlpersonal information. it contrasted the role of the press in acting as surrogate forthe public with the right of individuals to maintain secrecy about their personalaffairs and the right of corporations to protect internal memoranda anddocuments that may prove embarrassing or damaging to their business. the ruleof law that has evolved, as enunciated in times v. sullivan18 two decades ago, isthat the public's right to know takes precedence over the personal right toprivacy. if one is a "public figure" (e.g., a public officialševen a policeman onthe beat) or a quasi or limited public figure (e.g., one who is well known in thepress already with respect to the controversy in question), then the press can beheld liable for misstating facts only where malice (e.g., intentional lying orflagrant disregard for the facts) can be shown.19the right to collect informationthe fight to collect information is vested primarily in the government andis differentiated from the right of journalists to investigate the facts. manybusinesses and institutions collect informationšbanks, insurance companies,credit institutions, hospitals, universitiesšbut there is no legal fight to do so.most of the information is freely given or exchanged for services. in most casesthere is a quid pro quo for the disclosure of the information based upon eitheran explicit or an implied contract. having delivered sufficient consideration tolegitimize a contract, the institutions consider the information proprietary andare loathe to release it even to the subjects of the information, be they patient,customer, or student. it has taken federal and state laws as well as court ordersto require universities to make their recordsproperty rights in information87information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.available to students and their parents,20 and universities are still troubled aboutthe consequences of having what they consider sensitive records open toinspection because it will inhibit professors and other staff from being candidabout their observations. also, a recent case holding that individuals have noinherent legal interest in records concerning themselves held by others is quitetroubling.21states as well as the federal government have been forging a newframework for privacy over the past several decades, and the effort has becomemore intense since the 1960s. the primary federal privacy legislation now ineffect controls access of the public to government data banks in whichinformation is collected and aggregated.22 however, the fight of the governmentto collect information is fundamental to the survival of the nation. its economichealth as well as its physical and political health is at stake. the census, whichwas started in 1890, is a fundamental function of the federal government. inorder to collect demographic data and aggregate it for analysis, the governmentmust have the power to compel citizens to respond. this is a very sensitive area,and many citizens do not agree that they should be compelled to release thenecessary data. however, allocation of public funds is based upon percentagesof identifiable groups, for example, children of the military living within aschool district. also, market informationšimportant to a healthy private sectoršis gleaned from the economic statistics that are collected by the bureau ofeconomic affairs in the department of commerce.stringent legislation exists to protect individuals from disclosure ofinformation that is identifiable as specific to an individual or corporation.however, the access laws have made it extremely complicated to protect suchanonymity for large enterprises, and many corporations feel that their tradesecrets may be jeopardized even though one of the exceptions to the law is thatsuch disclosure may occur.a very disturbing decision was handed down recently by the new yorkstate court of appeals. under new york law domestic insurance companiesare required to keep certain books and records, including minutes of theircorporate board of directors' meetings. such records have been voluntarily sentto the state insurance department under a promise of confidentiality. however,the court ruled that the agency must disclose the minutes of the directors'meetings to the washington post under new york's freedom of informationlaw, which defined "records" as "any information kept, held, filed, produced orreproduced by, with or for any agency ..." and that an amendment to the act hadeliminated any reference to an exemption for records "confidentially disclosed."23property rights in information88information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the right to acquire informationthe right to acquire information is a public access issue that goes beyondthe right of the press to investigate and/or the right of the government to collectinformation. it involves the right of citizens to acquire information alreadycollected by others. james madison observed that "a popular governmentwithout popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to afarce or a tragedy, or perhaps both." based upon that verity, the united stateshas built its information policy upon a broad base of public education, publiclibraries, public subsidies for newspapers and other printed materials, and agovernment printing office that publishes the information gathered andprocessed by the federal government. strictly speaking, public access may bedifficult to conceive of as a property right. however, it is basically a legalentitlement to use public property, e.g., that information which is gathered andprocessed and published with federal funds and/or has become generallyavailable to the public.patents and copyrights are the legal means by which authors and inventorsare encouraged to share their creative endeavors with the public in exchange forthe legally protected right to control the use of their intellectual products.24however, there has been considerable concern that many of these patentsbecome buried in government archives and are never turned to productive use.this concern is especially pertinent for patents owned by the government,where private enterprises have no incentive to develop the technology. only 4percent of the government's 30,000 patents have been developed andmarketed.25 in response to this concern, congress amended the patent andtrademark laws in 1980 to permit universities, small business firms, andnonprofit institutions to apply for patents on federally funded research and toretain exclusive licenses on these patents for as long as eight years.26 althoughthis legislation has offered a cure for one problemšthe loss of productivityfrom development of government patentsšit has created anotheršthe concernthat the basic purposes of universities will be altered. in particular, there isconcern that university efforts to sponsor research jointly with industry, inresponse to diminishing public funding of research, may change the publicavailability of information produced in universities.27for the general purpose of making information available to the public,aside from the government printing office (gpo), there are extensive federallibraries including the library of congress (lc), the national library ofmedicine (nlm), and the national technicalproperty rights in information89information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information service (ntis). these organizations collect and disseminateinformation developed with federal funds (as in the case of ntis), registeredwith the copyright office (as in the case of the lc), or collected because it ispertinent to basic research being conducted by scientists and physicians both infederal employment and around the country (as in the case of nlm).in recent years there has been much turmoil about the dissemination ofinformation that has been processed by federally owned computers and isavailable in machinereadable form. the most recent policy enunciated by thepresent administration is that such information will be offered to privatecontractors for electronic dissemination. users will pay for the direct cost ofaccessing the data from computerbased systems, but the federal governmentwill exercise no influence over the fees that contractors or subcontractors maycharge the public to access such online data.28 another pioneering project hasbeen undertaken by the trademark office, which has entered into barterarrangements with private companies to exchange government data for servicesin designing the computer graphics software and entering the data to accesstrademark registrations online through an electronic data base. the ultimategoal is to produce the paperless office in which manual files will no longer bemaintained.29 this is a far cry from the previous practice of agricultural databeing distributed freely and without charge by congressmen to their constituentsand from that of county agents offering their consulting services to localfarmers. congressman byron rogers from colorado's first congressionaldistrict used to send baby books to all new parents with his compliments, andmany useful publications are offered at a modest cost by the governmentprinting office.public libraries agonize over the high costs of distributing information online, as charges are not imposed on the the use of books unless they areoverdue.30 there is, of course, no natural rationale that requires public librariesto permit readers to read books in their collections without charge. indeed, informer times libraries were very carefully guarded assets, access to which wasstrictly regulated. neither is there a natural rationale which requires that accessto computerbased information be subject to usagesensitive charges. the maindifference is that it is more convenient to measure and collect the marginal costof computer access than it is for manual systems.the right to withhold informationthe personal right to privacy is basically a right to withhold informationfrom public dissemination or disclosure. it is quite limitedproperty rights in information90information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in a society that believes in the free flow of information. in the united states thepress is encouraged to serve as a watchdog and to seek out wrongdoing inpublic and private institutions.as the press has become more and more diligent in its role and the meansof surveillance and investigation have become more sophisticated, it is notsurprising that public agitation with respect to the advent of new informationtechnologies has sparked an interest in privacy laws. the most basic propertyright is the protection and integrity of one's own personšthe right to withholdinformation about oneself that one considers to be one's own, the right todisclose information about oneself at such time and place and under suchconditions as one chooses, and the complementary right to know of and tocorrect information about oneself that is inaccurate and damaging to one's prideor reputation.scholars of privacy insist that privacy is a natural instinct that has roots inthe earliest of civilizations. however, when one visits the pueblos and cliffdwellings of the southwest indians it is difficult to believe that our earlyforebears on this continent enjoyed very much privacy. and those of us whogrew up in smalltown america also have serious doubts that privacy is sodeeply rooted historically. indeed, it seems a newly won privilege of urbancivilization where the sheer numbers of citizens living together make it virtuallyimpossible for everyone to keep track of everyone else. therefore, it comes assomething of a surprise that there is such commotion about informationtechnologies that have the capability to reimpose the surveillance that wascharacteristic of small, tightly knit communities.nonetheless, it is a characteristic of our evolving civilization that we aredeveloping an increasing respect for the individuality and privacy of everyhuman being in addition to a recognition of proprietary rights in real estate andother material possessions. therefore, it follows logically that we will alsoevolve a body of law to protect information about ourselves as well asinformation concerning our corporate enterprises and public institutions.some rights have become universally accepted and require no legalsanction. for example, many women in our society prefer not to tell their age,and that preference is usually respected. the privacy of other information, suchas that about sexual behavior, is less universally accepted; e.g., we are onlyrecently beginning to accept overt homosexuality among those in positions ofpower and influence such as the teaching profession and the judiciary.consequently, there has been a strong incentive to protect such informationfrom disclosure. criminal activity, physical illness, psychiatric treatment, credithistory, andproperty rights in information91information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sources of income are all areas in which we have developed concerns aboutdisclosure if disclosure would be damaging to personal interests or if suchinformation would be damaging to the public interest. a case in point wasdisclosure of the information concerning the psychiatric treatment of senatoreagleton, which affected his viability as a candidate for the vicepresidency ofthe united states in 1972.trade secrets are protected under a very extensive body of law developedthrough state legislation and the common law. however, trade secrets law is fullof contradictions and inconsistencies with the laws of copyrights and patents,particularly with respect to the protection of proprietary interests in computersoftware. the basic philosophy of both copyright and patents is to discloseinformation in order to expedite the public dissemination of information but toprovide compensation to the authors or inventors, whereas trade secrets lawrests upon nondisclosure to the public. attorneys for computer softwarecompanies are in a great dilemma about whether to withhold, disclose, license,release, or rely upon royalties. to cover all bases is very difficult, since relianceupon one theory of law may foreclose use of another.31use of the social security number as a universal identifier has met withgreat opposition from proponents of privacy. thus, many people refuse todisclose their social security number because they fear that the government willmisuse the personal information referenced by social security number in manydata banks. nonetheless, social security numbers as identifiers have becomewidely used by both the government and private organizations. the majority ofcitizens seem to have no qualms about disclosing the number, and many feelthat the advantages of crossreferencing data bases far outweigh the dangers.another area of the law that is very controversial and rapidly developing isthe asserted right of journalists to withhold the identity of their sources. herethe right of the public to know is in conflict with the right of those accused ofwrongdoing to know the source of the accusation. investigative reporters claimthat they will be unable to obtain information from those with knowledge,especially where their source's future may be jeopardized (e.g., by dischargefrom employment for ''whistleblowing" or by retribution at the hands ofcriminals for "squealing"). this area of the law is still very much in a state offlux.32the supreme court, when reviewing a journalist's plea for a specialprivilege,33 noted that congress might elect to legislate a special privilege forthose who inform the public, but it failed to restrict the category to journalists.the court included lecturers, pollsters, novproperty rights in information92information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.elists, academic researchers, and dramatists among those who might seek ormerit the right to protect the confidentiality of their sources.this right is greatly desired by most scientists, despite the seemingcontradiction between the philosophical basis of an open exchange ofinformation in the pursuit of knowledge and the closed system of individualsovereignty of the researcher over the management of the data, subject to a peergroup review.34 in 1971 professor samuel popkin of harvard university wentto jail for a week for refusing to disclose the sources of his research related toissues in the pentagon papers litigation.35the only two areas in which scientific researchers can obtain protectiveorders to protect their sources are in cases of psychiatric illnesses or drugabuse.36 efforts to persuade congress to enact the protection alleged to berequired by scientific researchers in other areas have been unsuccessful.37the right to control the release ofinformationthe corollary to the right to withhold information is the right to releaseinformation at a time or place of one's own choosing. this right is recognizedfor corporate products, and corporations carefully guard the release ofinformation about new products. similarly, news releases are dated, andpublishers usually respect the embargo both as a matter of common practice andin order to preserve the relationship with the source of the information forfuture publication.the right to control the release of information is particularly important tothose engaged in scientific research. traditionally (until recently), basicresearchers neither sought nor received much financial reward for theirdiscoveries, but they jealously guarded their rights of paternity. dorothy nelkinsummarized their position as follows:scientists resist external control as a threat to the quality and integrity ofresearch and as an infringement on their right to control the production anddissemination of their work. from this perspective, the question of ownershipis unambiguous: the concept of individual sovereignty guides scientificbehavior.38there is nothing more zealously guarded by scientists than the peer grouprecognition that comes from first publication of research results that may lead toan esteemed professorship or even a nobel prize. in his study of scientists, r.k. merton concluded that a scientist's claim to intellectual property rights waslimited to such recognition and esteem.39 however, with the changing economicenvironment in which academic research is being conducted and with largeprofits to beproperty rights in information93information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.claimed, especially in the field of genetic engineering, all this may be changing.the incentive to claim property rights in scientific research that extend beyondpaternity is becoming more compelling.nelkin has astutely observed:this assumption [that scientific sovereignty is in the public interest] leads to afundamental contradiction: the use of secrecy to maintain sovereignty within acommunity whose work is based on open communication of research findings.40interestingly enough, at the same time that the incentive to control researchfindings more efficiently has increased, the technological imperative is in thedirection of making it easier and easier to share scientific research. computernetworking among scientists has become widespread, facilitating thecooperative efforts of scientists from many parts of the world in joint researchprojects. such simultaneous and sequential exchanges in a dynamic electronicenvironment often make it difficult to determine paternity with any kind of legalvalidity,41 and the bits and bytes flowing freely via satellite from laboratory tolaboratory may make it difficult to trace what librarians call an ''intellectualaudit trail." thus, the dilemma arises for scientists that the economicenvironment in which they now work impedes the optimum use of a technologythat has the greatest promise for sharing their intellectual output with the rest ofthe world.an additional problem has arisen with the public outcry to be able to seethe information upon which the scientist's judgment is based rather than to relyupon the expert opinion of the research scientist as reviewed and validated by apeer group. this is the primary reason for controlling the release of scientificdata. research scientists check and recheck their data until there is reasonableassurance that it is reliable before sharing it with the court of peers who willjudge its authenticity and validate it for public distribution. however, the data ina university computer may not be as easily protected from premature release asthe research notebooks of a precomputer period.there are many other types of data bases where release of informationprovided by individuals is routinely made available to the public or even soldfor profit by both private and public institutions. have you noticed, forexample, how quickly you receive solicitations from boating magazines andcommercial houses after you have purchased a new boat and registered it withthe state authorities or documented it with the coast guard? direct mailers arenotorious for the speed with which they sell your name to their colleagues afteryou purchaseproperty rights in information94information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an item. all of this is expedited by the use of computers for recording anddistributing addresses.in most jurisdictions there is at present no legal right to require entities towhich you disclose your name and address to protect that information.however, there seems to be a groundswell of increasing concern about suchuse.42 a few states have acted to prohibit the use of motor vehicle registrationlists for direct marketing without the consent of the registrant,43 and a numberof others have enacted legislation restricting the distribution of cable televisionsubscription lists.44 most companies are able to acquire such information quiteeasily. several companies specialize in the distribution of motor vehicleregistration lists, which are considered to be the most valuable and uptodateaddress lists. some institutions, such as american express, voluntarily inquirewhether you wish to have your name distributed to other commercialenterprises, and the direct marketing association promises to have your nameremoved from all mailing lists if you so request. however, a trial run of thissystem by the author merely precipitated a deluge of catalogs from many directmail houses that had not previously known the address.perhaps in an open society whose economy rests upon commercialenterprise, some of us do not cherish the protection of our own names fromdisclosure to third parties without our permission. indeed, the telephonecompany requires those who cherish privacy to pay extra for the privilege of anunlisted telephone number. however, it should be a prime tenet of the right toprivacy that government agencies should not disclose personal information forcommercial purposes without prior consent of the person.credit agencies freely exchange information about one's reliability. thelegal status of such information within the care and within the files of another isnot entirely clear. however, some recent cases are troubling. a bank was heldlegal owner of the information about a depositor, who had no right to enjoinrelease of that information.45 medical doctors are usually held to be the ownerof their own files about patients, and attorneys are the custodian and rightfulowner of their own files about their clients. the attorneyclient privilegeprotects disclosure by the attorney of client information to third parties, anddoctors operate under an ethical mandate not to disclose medical informationabout the contents of their files to outsiders. however, the ease with whichelectronic files are being invaded today suggests that the law is not yet in placethat will protect such files in the information age and/or that neither public norcommercial enterprises are willing to pay the price of data protection byencryption.property rights in information95information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the case of material obtained illegally is another instance in which theright to control release of information is important. where criminal liability ispredicated upon such information, it has been a longstanding principle of u.s.law that information obtained by illegal search and seizure is not permitted tobe used to convict.46 however, recent supreme court cases suggests that thisrule may be weakened.47in the case of publication of illegally obtained information, the law is notso protective of the source, and the government was unable to obtain aninjunction against the new york times to prevent publication of the pentagonpapers.48 however, the formeršthe case of material obtained illegallyšrestsupon a basic principle of fairness to defendants and the latteršthat ofpublication of illegally obtained informationšupon the overriding right of thepublic to know. consequently, in each case there is a balancing of publicagainst private interests in release of information. there is an implicit conflictbetween the interests of the first amendment in open and uninhibitedcirculation of information and the rights of interested parties (whetherindividuals, corporations, or governments) to prevent the disclosure ofinformation that they consider may be damaging to them.the most interesting case to date in this area has been the elizabeth tayloraction to enjoin abc from televising a docudrama about her life in which shehad enjoyed no participation nor had had any opportunity to review thecontents. it was miss taylor's argument that the story of her life was hers todistribute.49 as she was an actress of note whose family fortune rested upon herabilities as an actress and her resultant fame, it was a reasonable argument thatshe had not merely a personal right of privacy not to be invaded by publicationof information about herself but that she had a commercial interest to beprotected from exploitation by an unauthorized commercial enterprise.usually the legal claims in such cases are based upon libel, privacy, orfalse light, but miss taylor's claim was a more novel claim of misappropriationof information rightfully belonging to her. she based her claim upon statutoryrights and the common law "right of publicity."50libel cases against producers of historical documentaries have beendismissed on the grounds that certain events are of such historical significancethat the first amendment confers "leeway" to permit the public to view thereconstructed portrayal.51 the problem is more critical with living subjects,especially those like miss taylor whose livelihood is based upon the electronicpresentation that is also the vehicle being used for the historical representation.courts have held that the right to file suit for invasion of privacy would not beavailableproperty rights in information96information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to descendants, although "merchandising rights" have been held to be passed tosubsequent generations.52 inevitably, in such cases there is a conflict of manyinterests: those of the authors to the integrity of their creative freedom, those ofthe public to view historical events in perspective and in the latest informationtechnology, and those of the subject or the subject's heirs either to protect theintegrity of information or to retain the right to receive compensation fordistribution of information that was generated through the efforts of the subject.rights of paternity and integrity have not traditionally been covered by u.s.copyright law, but are established by contract.53the right to profit from informationthere are many mechanisms for supporting the creation of intellectualproducts, such as the maintenance of monasteries, public universities, andventurecapital firms or the patronage of wealthy families, for example, in italyduring the renaissance. yet copyright and patent laws have been the mainstayof public policy in market economies since the statute of anne was enacted in1709.54 basically, this first copyright law protected the right of authors todispose of their works in return for financial remuneration rather than for publicacclaim.55as this system was designed for the print media and primarily for theprotection of the financial interests of publishers rather than of authors, it hasbeen the subject of much controversy in the electronic age. the law had greatdifficulty in accommodating itself to machines. even as early as the days of theplayer piano, the courts had difficulty in finding that the instructions to thepiano were a "copy" of the underlying work that could be perceived by thehuman mind rather than a machine.56 the author john hersey, a commissioneron the commission on new technological uses of copyrighted works(contu), which advised the congress on the applicability of copyrightprinciples to computer software, wrote an anguished dissent to the conturecommendation that software be so considered:works of authorship have always been intended to be circulated to humanbeings and to be used by themšto be read, heard, or seen, for eitherpleasurable or practical ends. computer programs, in their mature phase, areaddressed to machines.... the computer program communicates, if at all, onlywith a machine.57hersey's colleagues on contu did not have as much difficulty copingwith computers as he did, and recommended to the congress that computersoftware be absorbed within the rubric of copyright protection.58 indeed, evenwith doubts about the statutory protection,property rights in information97information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lawyers have shown great ingenuity in devising methods to protect the interestsof their clients through licensing agreements, centralized royalty exchangeprograms, and contractual arrangements.computer softwarešapple v. franklinthe arguments over legal protection for computer software have beenextensive and have only temporarily been resolved with the enactment of aspecial amendment in 1980 to the copyright act of 1976. the amendment wasspecifically intended to authorize copyright law to cover computer programs,59although the copyright office had been accepting computer software forcopyright registration since 1964.60 the copyright office had, in fact,registered more than 2,000 such programs prior to the investigative hearings ofcontu, primarily offered by ibm and burroughs, two of the largestdevelopers of computer software.61much of the success of apple in introducing the personal computer to themarketplace rested upon its successful efforts to encourage the free exchange ofsoftware programs by its users and the offer to facilitate the opportunity forcirculation. however, when the franklin computer company copied itsoperating program in order to facilitate the running of software designed forapple computers on franklin hardware, apple went to court to enjoin thepractice. there was no question about the source of the software, as thefranklin version even contained references to applesoft. the basic legalargument was that object code, in which the apple operating system waswritten, was not copyrightable. the lower court, in the spirit of john hersey,was unable to cope with this "baffling" new technology and found noinfringement. where were the original "works of authorship" in this electronicgibberish? what was "fixed in a tangible medium of expression''?the defendant also suggested that for the copyright laws to cover thesituation there must be some representation of irreparable financial harm.rather than harm to the plaintiff, the defendant argued that the irreparable harmwould ensue upon issue of an injunction against franklin, a fledgling personalcomputer manufacturer with only 1,000 machines sold, compared with apple,the then leader in the field, with 440,000 computers sold and sales of over $335million in 1981. franklin argued that equities and public interest were on itsside to foster competition in the industry and to keep a balance betweencompetition and protection. however, the appellate court disagreed. althoughfinding that the underlying interest of the copyright law required aproperty rights in information98information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.presumption of irreparable harm to the plaintiff, the court said the copyright lawrequired no such actual showing. the court had no difficulty in finding that the$740,000 invested by apple in developing its operating system softwarerepresented a substantial investment in jeopardy, which would satisfy theunderlying public policy considerations. it also found no difficulty in obviatingthe necessity of discriminating between object and source code,62 since one isused to more readily get access to the other. in effect the two satisfy the samefunctional purposesšto tell the computer what routines it is to perform. thesupreme court agreed, or at least refused to enter the argument.63however, the debate about the appropriate protection for softwarecontinues.64 some software firms, such as freeware, offer their programs for acontribution on the theory that wide dissemination is desirable and, at least intheir judgment, profitable. other software houses, while attempting to protecttheir intellectual efforts through licensing agreements to control unauthorizedcopying, nonetheless admit that staying ahead of the competition in innovativeprograms is what protects their financial investment. it remains doubtfulwhether or not this will be true in the more stable economic environment whensoftware programs have matured and found their natural niches in themarketplace. indeed, some of the young geniuses who started their careers ascomputer hackers have admitted to being devastated by the piracy of their workproduct after hours and hours of labor expended in its creation. how publicpolicy addresses this issue will remain of high priority in the information age,as economic interests become more and more tied directly to informationproducts and services.videotape piracyšsony corp. v. universal city studiosan even more difficult copyright issue, one that is no nearer resolution, isthat of videotaping television programs off the air through the use ofvideocassette recorders (vcrs). as recently as the early 1970s, networkprograms did not carry a copyright notice, because the law presumed thatbroadcasting a program on television was not a "publication" but a privateperformance to be governed by the contract negotiations and agreementsreached between the two partiesšthe network originator and the broadcastingstation that aired the program. at the time there was no conceivable way a usercould record and resell the performance. consequently, there was no "copy"that could be the subject of copyright registration.all that has changed with videotaping, which is flourishing. some 4 to 5million vcrs are now purchased annually65 (13 percent of theproperty rights in information99information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.american public already owns vcrs66 ), and more than 14,000 videotapeleasing outlets have cropped up all across america.67 however, the receipt ofroyalties from the rentals of such recordings is prohibited by law under thedoctrine of "first sale," which grants a copyright owner the right to transfer theownership but not to control the secondary uses thereafter.68 as a consequence,no royalties are collected on the millions of rentals of videotapes of popularmotion pictures. the sale of such tapes has not been large, but the market isgrowing steadily. the release of raiders of the lost ark just before christmasin 1983 precipitated a record of 500,000 purchases in less than a month.69 therentals now reach close to a billion dollars annually and run about nine to oneover purchases.70most of the litigation has involved the taping off the air of televisiondistributed programming. the time to resolve the issue has taken almost adecade, as the initial suit was filed in 1976. although the lower court did notsee a violation of the copyright act in the athome taping of televisionprograms, the ninth circuit court of appeals agreed with the complainants thattheir rights had been infringed and that they deserved relief. the supreme courtdisagreed, admonishing the appellate court for enlarging the scope of "an articleof commerce" that is not the subject of copyright protection and beyond thepower authorized by congress. in addition, the court found that the widespreadprimary use of vcrs was for "timeshifting" or otherwise viewing a programthat could not be seen at the time it was first televised. thus, the respondent wasunable to "show that the practice has impaired the value of their copyrights orhas created any likelihood of future harm." also, the court determined thatvcrs were used for other, quite legitimate purposes in addition to that ofrecording plaintiff's intellectual products.71taping of television programs for personal use appears to have becomeaccepted as a fair use of copyrighted material. this is not in accord with thehistorical interpretation of fair use, since the programs are taped in theirentirety. the use of the doctrine in the past has usually been restricted tocopying portions of the work "for purposes such as criticism, comment, newsreporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship,or research."72 the rationale of the court must have been the unlikely efficacyof trying to put pandora back into the box and the fact that no commercial useof the tapes was either alleged or documented. the case might go quitedifferently for the resale of programs taped off the air.the holding was consistent with the photocopying case,73 which had toreckon with the efficacy of trying to hold back a technology thatproperty rights in information100information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.had produced countless streetcorner copying houses all over the countryšadevelopment that makes it possible for any citizen to become an informationprovider. furthermore, the williams & wilkins case involved the photocopyingby the national library of medicine and national institutes of health (nih) ofscientific articles (many of which were taken from the plaintiff's 37 professionaljournals) in single copies for distribution to the nih staff of 12,000 piussatisfying thousands of requests from cooperating libraries around the country.in each case the court was concerned about dealing with a new technologyin a judicial context rather than leaving the legislative function to congress, butin both cases the justices were divided in their opinions.the motion picture producers are now taking their case to congress andseeking repeal of the firstsale doctrine. they are also pursuing their legal rightsin the courts against all potential defendants in the videotaping industry butwithout any redress being sought against users whose only videotaping is fortheir personal use in the home.74insider informationšsec v. winansanother concern of the public is that insiders not be permitted wrongfulfinancial gain from the use of information prior to its disclosure to the public.the securities and exchange commission (sec) regulates the buying andtrading of stock by the executives and owners of businesses who have availableto them information that could affect the stock market price.75 historically,financial information has carried monetary value second only to that of militaryinformation. indeed, the rothschilds are supposed to have based their fortuneupon advance information of the defeat of napoleon at waterloo brought tothem by their fleet of carrier pigeons.in an open society such as ours, there has been considerable ferment aboutmanipulation of the stock market by those with sensitive jobs. the most recentcase and the most innovative one is the indictment of r. foster winans, aformer employee of the wall street journal and columnist of "heard on thestreet," for using the advance information that he controlled for personal profitin stock market trading.76 indicted along with winans were two others, anotherformer journal employee and a former stockbroker from kidder, peabody, &company. also expected to be indicted is an attorney who allegedly used theinformation and profited therefrom. over a million dollars in profits werereputed to be gained by the four in the alleged conspiracyproperty rights in information101information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to defraud the readers of the journal through a failure to disclose the financialinterest of the writer in the outcome of his articles.although the indictment contains allegations of securities, mail, and wirefraud, it is this novel legal theory of a fiduciary obligation to his readers that hasprecipitated much speculation among legal scholars. proponents of the firstamendment and defenders of the press such as floyd abrams deplore suchdisclosure of financial interest as a forced speech that is inherently abhorrent tothe constitutional right of free speech. however, investors in the stock marketwho rely upon such reputable sources as the wall street journal for theirfinancial information must necessarily be concerned about the opportunity formanipulation of the data and the stock market. this case presents an interestingdichotomy for those who prefer an unregulated marketplace, since the integrityof the information must necessarily rely upon either the ethics of the professionor the rule of law. certainly the dispatch with which winans was released fromhis employment by the journal underlines the concern of the paper for itsreputation.clearly the sec insider rules were not originally intended to anticipatesuch a situation. a basic sense of fairness to the stocktrading public suggestswhere the equities lie. however, the legal situation is not so clear. while thetheory of a legally enforceable fiduciary duty has appeal to those concernedwith fairness in the marketplace, it may not technically lie within the supremecourt's restrictive definition of insider trading. winans was not an officer of anyof the companies in which he traded. he was in the position of gatheringinformation about them and/or disclosing it at a time and place convenient tohis trading posture. the most solid legal argument may be that he embezzledthe information about the time of publication of his column from his employerand released it to his coconspirators, who became thereby participants in thealleged theft.the most expansive exposition of the legal position of the courts wasexpressed in a 1968 case: "anyonešcorporate insider or notšwho regularlyreceives material nonpublic information may not use that information to trade insecurities without incurring an affirmative duty to disclose.... [federal securitieslaws] created a system providing equal access to information necessary forreasoned and intelligent investment decisions."77 prior decisions haveconcluded that the fiduciary relationship necessary to bring the sec rules intoaction required direct responsibilities to the stockholders.78 consequently, thegovernment may lose the case on technical points. nonetheless, the indictmentitself is a major step forward in focusing public attention upon the problem ofauthenticating sources of inforproperty rights in information102information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mation and protecting the integrity of information upon which the public mustmake decisions. certainly. there will be amicus curiae briefs filed byrepresentatives of the working press, and publishers will argue that governmentintrusion upon the selfregulation of the industry will do more harm than good.however, where financial interests affecting the buying public are concerned, isuspect that the scales will fall more heavily upon the side of regulation if thecourts fail to protect the integrity of financial information. one caveat,however: when the state of alabama enacted legislation requiting reporterscovering state government to disclose their economic interests that mightconstitute a conflict, the reporters succeeded in obtaining an injunction againstits use.79 there was no presumption of wrongdoing as in the winans case, sincethe dangers were prospective rather than retrospective. certainly, this is one ofthe areas in which the divergent thrusts of the first amendment draw a clearline of battle.other casesanother area for concern in the future is that of public officialscommercializing their memoirs or using information from their officialexperiences for profit. however, public servants may argue that their "stock intrade" is their intellectual output during their incumbencies much as elizabethtaylor claimed a commercial interest in her professional persona and the rightto exploit her name, image, and reputation. the difference, of course, is thatpublic officials receive their financial support from public coffers, whereasperformers are dependent upon commercial exploitation of their performancesas the economic basis of their livelihood. the public policy question is whethernews gatherers are derelict in their duties to the public when they pay their newssources for disclosure of information.a more serious problem occurs in cases such as that of watergatedefendants haldeman and ehrlichman, who were paid for their appearances ontelevision. since watergate, there is growing concern about the right of publicservants to financial gain from their public service, or especially for their publicdisservice. however, there is very little case law on the subject. this is probablybecause there is no one to represent the public interestšno injured party tolitigate the issue. several decades ago litigation arose over the right of admiralrickover to claim a copyright in his speeches delivered during governmentservice.80 in another case, richard nixon was not permitted to claim executiveprivilege to block the subpoena of the special prosecutor for the famousincriminatory tape recordings.81 moreproperty rights in information103information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recently, the ford memoirs became the subject of litigation when the nationpublished excerpts or paraphrasings of some of gerald ford's observationsabout watergate and its aftermath prior to the publication date scheduled andprecipitating the cancellation of a contract with time magazine to publishportions of the manuscript.82 the court held that the nation's articlešonly2,250 words, of which at most approximately 300 were copiedšwas a fair useof facts contained in the 200,000word manuscript and were ''the very essenceof news and of history." after reviewing cases holding that neither news events,historical facts, nor biographical facts are copyrightable, the court summarizedits view that public events cannot be monopolized by participants in them.83we have been asked to examine complex questions concerning the copyrightact and the memoirs of a public official. throughout our consideration, wehave been guided by the conviction that the statute was not meant to obstructthe citizens' access to vital facts and historical observations about our nation'slife. by far the greatest part of the article in the nation was no more than thereporting of information concerning political decisions at the highest level ofgovernment. these facts were sown in and gathered from the shared ground ofour country's history. they are the "property of all"....84inroads are also being made into the quite disreputable practice of somecriminals committing their crimes for the purpose of gaining notoriety. giventhe enthusiasm with which publishers pursue the right to publish such stories, itis not surprising that we have begun to think twice about the consequences ofpromoting financial gain from antisocial acts as we become more dependentupon information products for our economic health. a prudent and wise rule, itcould be argued, would not permit a criminal to profit from his or her ownwrongdoing. proceeds should more equitably be allocated to the victims or theirfamilies or be used to reimburse the government for the cost of incarceration.the former has been addressed in the enactment of what are called the son ofsam laws. these were precipitated by the chain of murders committed by davidberkowitz in new york several years ago.85the right to protect informationthere are many areas in which we have recognized a right to protectsensitive information that has already been gathered, processed, and archived.for example, the dockets of juvenile offenders are not available for publicinspection in many jurisdictions. medical recordsproperty rights in information104information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are not open to the public. government documents are sometimes stamped topsecret, sensitive, or eyes only. yet all of these protected areas aresuspect under the opposing theory of the public's right to know and the fear thatactivities that take place in secret and that are not recorded in publicly availabledocuments will cover up actions that are not in the public interest or that reflectnegligence or incompetence.sunshine laws and freedom of information lawssunshine laws and freedom of information laws86 have wreaked havocwith the traditional practices of organizations to conduct their business inprivate and to disclose actions to the public after debate is over. universities aswell as industry smart under pressure to open up their inner circles to greaterrepresentation from the public. seats on college and university governingboards now include student members as well as faculty and staff, andcorporations seek board members with public constituencies.all of this is a very healthy and inevitable trend in an open and vitalinformation society. it may encumber decision making and render it morecostly, but democratic governance demands broad participation in makingpublic policy. such participation necessarily requires widespread disseminationof information upon which public decisions are predicated.strategic informationhowever, sunshine laws and freedom of information laws also present newobstacles to security agencies. gathering of strategic intelligence by tradition isassumed to operate in seclusion beyond the reach of public surveillance. manypeople are concerned that the new technologies make it even more difficult toprotect information of a sensitive nature because of the ease with whichinvaders can break into the system. the movie war games is a good exampleof the fear that has been engendered concerning the potential for harm byunauthorized entry into computerized defense systems. yet advances incomputer cryptography have swung to the side of those who encrypt, if they usesound methods. we are assured that breaking into the data bases of thedepartment of defense and the central intelligence agency and nationalsecurity agency is far more difficult than is represented by hollywood. still, itis a worrisome problem both from a technical and from a legal standpoint.recently officials wereproperty rights in information105information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.astonished to discover that wiretapping a voice line was prohibited by statute,yet tapping into a digital transmission was not.87 the law lags far behind thetechnology.other countries are more concerned than ours is about the vulnerability ofinformation that is gathered, processed, and/or maintained in data bases outsidetheir own boundaries. this is not entirely a specious argument, as the assets ofiran were impounded during the iranian hostage crisis. also, the billions ofdollars whirling daily through the swift computerized network from bank tobank internationally are a good example of information of high value thatcannot by its nature be controlled physically within the confines of a singlenation. a country that tried to do so would become isolated from theinternational economy and would have to fall back upon its own resources.this has not inhibited countries such as sweden from elevating thequestion of national vulnerability to a high level of public anxiety.88 in the caseof sweden the concern was prompted initially by discovery that the malmö firedepartment processed its data in a computer timesharing service in the unitedstates. to be invaded by aliens and to discover that your strategic data werestored in an enemy computer would certainly put an end to a war prematurely.as a result of such fear, nationstates purchase and maintain computers for theirown essential information rather than use the more expeditious and less costlyroute of timesharing with other countries. however, this is the price ofmaintaining national sovereignty over critical information in the absence of anyinternational protocols for such protection outside their own geographicalboundaries, within which they are presumed to have absolute jurisdiction.export control of technical datathe current argument over new legislation to replace the old exportadministration act,89 which has now expired, highlights the problems thatensue when technical data are treated as a controlled commodity. despite thelongstanding existence of the restrictive clauses contained in the earlierversions of the act, it has only recently come to the attention of scientists thatmuch of their existing open practice concerning the exchange of unpublishedscientific data, in person, by mail, by conference, and by computer, is permittedonly by the notion of a general license by the department of commerce.the bucy report of the defense science board90 recommended that theexport control system should reduce the number of controlledproperty rights in information106information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.items on the controlled commodities list and concentrate on the transfer ofapplied technologies, the mastery of which would permit hostile nations toreplicate u.s. military manufacturing capability. thus, they recommendedrestricting only "arrays of design and manufacturing knowledge," and"keystone" manufacturing equipment. however, although the congressincorporated the board's definitions into the 1979 act, it had left no guidelinesconcerning how such determinations were to be made. the extensive proposalsof the department of defense, such as the highly controversial and secretmilitarily critical technologies list, have not yet been approved by congress.because the proposed new legislation permits u.s. law to reach out andcontrol companies in other friendly countries to which technology has beentransferred, the european economic community (eec) has filed formalcomplaints through diplomatic channels deploring this intrusion upon nationalsovereignty and noting that the economic sanctions of the u.s. government overthe soviet pipeline had led to considerable "political and commercial damage."91transborder televisionšprotection of cultural identityanother example of protective policies has been initiated in canada, whichis concerned more about cultural identity and its own economic independencethan about strategic security, since the main threat it suffers from the unitedstates is to its cultural and economic integrity. in certain respects canada hasbeen ahead of the united states in entering the information age. marconi's firsttransatlantic radio transmission was from nova scotia rather than from truro,italy. morse's telegraphy found uses in canada before it came into use in theunited states, and canada orbited domestic communications satellites twoyears before the united states was able to "get off the ground." furthermore,canada has been years ahead of the united states in its anticipation of the socialimpact of the new technologies and in integrating public policy towards the useof new technologies into national priorities.one of the primary concerns of the canadian department ofcommunications has been the spillover of u.s. television stations across thecanadian border and the widespread development of cable television to pick upsuch stations.92 as a consequence of these nearby sources of primetimeentertainment, canada is one of the most heavily cabled countries in the world.the first reaction of the canadian authorities was to propose not licensing cablesystems that undertookproperty rights in information107information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to retransmit foreign broadcasts.93 however, the public response to thisproposal was so overwhelming that it was never put into action. the next effortwas intended to stop advertising dollars (estimated at $20 million to $25 millionannually) from going to u.s. television stations rather than their going to thecanadian broadcasting system. canadian authorities in 1971 determined thatcanadian cable systems should delete the u.s. advertising from theirretransmissions of u.s.originated television programs and substitute canadianadvertising instead.94this brought an uproar from border broadcasters who took their fight intocanadian courts and began to agitate in the united states for retaliation. thecanadian radiotelevision commission (crtc) suspended furtherimplementation of the commercial deletion policy, but initiated as an alternativea rule that canadian companies could not deduct the cost of advertising on noncanadian communications facilities.95 this added fuel to the longstandingcontroversy between u.s. and canadian authorities that has yet to be resolved.variously, the u.s. congress has tried to implement retaliatory measures thatwould prompt the canadian authorities to relent. an effort has been made toenact reciprocal legislation, although there are no genuine economic sanctionsthat would be comparable. efforts have been made to restrict the deductibilityof u.s. attendance at conventions in canada and to restrict the marketing of thetelidon videotex system in the united states. a complaint filed with thespecial trade representative96 resulted in a finding that the canadian practicewas unreasonable, burdensome, and restrictive to u.s. commerce. althoughboth presidents carter and reagan have called for mirrorimage legislation, nopractical solution has yet been reached.this canadian border spillover problem is a good example of a nationstate's determination to protect information that it considers proprietary and toexclude information that it finds objectionable. however, it is also evident thatthe two countries have widely divergent philosophies underpinning theirinformation policiesšthe united states is dedicated to a free marketplace forinformation as protected by the first amendment and best achieved through anunregulated economy, whereas the canadians look upon information policy as ameans to an endšthe promotion and protection of their own cultural identityand economic viability.the right to destroy or expunge informationjust as the chinese more than 2,000 years ago resorted to book burning toremove the collective memory of prior social systems,property rights in information108information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governments today use less stringent but similar methods of changing thecourse of history. it is usual to call attention to the soviet practice of rewritinghistory with a marxist interpretation, but we are not as aware of efforts withinour own society to do the same thing. frances fitzgerald reports her findingsthat textbooks used in american schools have changed their views of history onthe average every five years since the 1930s.97 little black sambo is no longerblack, and the 1930s version of king kong with its fearful monster finallyovercome has turned into a 1970s version with the multinational oil companyexploiting the beast and destroying the island culture by depriving the natives oftheir religious symbol. each reflects the social concerns of its own generation,and such reinterpretation of fiction is accepted as literary license. aside from avery real ethical concern about accuracy, objectivity, and reliability ofinformation, every society will accommodate its information policy to its ownpolitical circumstances.there are sound reasons for destroying some records when they haveserved their purposes. shredding machines would not sell so well were it not so.in a society where the printed word is pervasive and copies abound, it is not soeasy to destroy all copies. however, within a centralized data base where it maybe more efficient to keep the source material on file and merely make copies atthe convenience of the user, we may need to worry about what is to beexpunged and when in order to avoid information overload or overspill and/orto get rid of redundancy. with computerized archives being so roomy and socheap, it may become uneconomic to clean out the files. in addition, with somany coauthors and coinventors, it may be difficult to determine who has theright to expunge or delete.the right to correct or alter informationpublic recordsas important as the right to acquire public information is the right ofindividual access to personal information. this was the consensus of dataprotection leaders from nine european countries attending a 1984 conference inbellagio. the mere existence of such right, they concluded, is likely to have asalutary effect upon keepers of records.98 although many european countrieshave centralized governmental authorities who license data bases and act asombudsmen to enforce the rights of citizens, the united states has nocounterpart. such rights as are available are left to the courts to enforce. theseinclude the right to compel the correction of inaccurate or untrue data ingovernment files.99property rights in information109information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.broadcastingthe broadcasting counterpart of the right of the individual to accesspersonal information in public records is the personal attack doctrine, whichpermits the subject of an attack to obtain a copy of the offensive audio or videobroadcast and to reply.100newspapersthere is no right in the print media, comparable to the personal attackdoctrine, that permits an individual to reply to material already published. inorder not to chill the freedom of speech that the first amendment seeks toprotect, the appropriate recourse to an inaccurate or untrue statement is a libelaction after the fact for money damages. however, in california, where manylibel actions are filed by prominent entertainers, the libel action may not bepursued if the publication voluntarily published a retraction of the allegedinaccurate information.101 also under the rubric of privacy protection (acompeting first amendment right), an injunction may be obtained to preventpublication of material that will place the plaintiff in a ''false light."102efforts to establish news councils to serve as watchdogs on such abusesand to urge offenders to publish replies have not been very successful, as someof the major news companies refuse to participate. the effort of the floridalegislature to enact a right of reply for newspapers was struck down by thesupreme court as intrusive upon the editorial judgment of the news media.103consequently, the new technologies of both broadcast and computer havecome under more stringent rules than the old media. however, it must beremembered that the abuses to be corrected at the time of the first amendmentwere strong government intrusions into news content, whereas today the greaterfear is the danger of private corporate control over the means of distributinginformation.many of the major newspapers and magazines regularly publishcorrections of items from previous editions. they should continue to do so intheir own interest and that of the public. as they enter the age of electronicpublishing (and many, such as gannett, time, inc., and dow jones, are alreadydelivering their content via satellite or engaging in the delivery of videotex),they may become subject to the laws governing the electronic media. however,they may find that the public is more sympathetic with the later evolution of thelaw as a more equitable and workable solution to balancing property rights ininformation in the sophisticated technological environment. the firstamendment shield, with which they so vociferously assert their rightproperty rights in information110information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to be protected from public accountability, may not serve them well unless theyhave themselves conformed to the tenets of its underlying philosophy.the right to disseminate informationnone of the other rights would be very meaningful if there were no right tosend forth the information into the marketplace of ideas. however, suchdissemination carries an economic cost when any technology other than thehuman voice is employed. every community has some place that operates as apublic forum. in smalltown america it was around the steps of the countycourthouse. portuguese sailors who settled new bedford met on street corners,and some new england villages meet at the town dump. most societies havelarge squares in which great numbers of citizens can assemble for publicfestivals and pronouncements of policyšthe mall in washington, d.c., redsquare next to the kremlin in moscow, st. peter's square in the vatican, redsquare next to the forbidden city in beijing, and marcos square in manila.lafayette square in washington, d.c., may have once served that purpose, butit has long since been landscaped with gardens and walks that discourageprotestors from marching near the white house.however, the technologies of print, broadcast, and computer have madethis method of disseminating information obsolete except as a backdrop fortelevision versions that can be disseminated to many millions more than couldever be accommodated in one place.in the united states we accommodated our policies very rapidly to theprint media by establishing a system of post roads over which the mails and thenewspapers could travel. we have provided preferential rates to books,newspapers, and magazines, and even to merchants' catalogsšand a specialfranking privilege to congressmen for expediting messages to their constituents.a nationwide penny postcard made it possible for the constituents to reply withlow cost, and even to send their messages to each other.the applicability of this principle of a public forum carries over into aconcept of common carriage for voice messages on telephone and telegraph.the law has had great difficulty, however, in coping with the broadcastingindustry because content decisions and carriage media are both under thecontrol of a regulated broadcaster. nonetheless, there is a limited public forumresponsibility in the fairness doctrine which requires that broadcasters devotetime to opposing viewpoints when issues of public importance are aired.104numerous efforts haveproperty rights in information111information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.failed to establish a right to communicate over the broadcast media for thepurpose of responding to commercials on the basis that they were really"infomercials"105 or to obtain a right of access to the electronic media for theinitiation of public issues.106the courts have been very protective of broadcasters and only recentlyreaffirmed the longheld view that television is not a public forum even if it iscontrolled by a public agency.107 viewers have no right to compel anyparticular kind of expression over the public airwaves. the constitutionrequires content neutrality only with respect to an activity that has traditionallyfunctioned as an open marketplace of ideas. however, the supreme court didnot view public television as assuming this role.in renouncing the federal communications commission's (fcc's) abortedattempt to establish publicaccess channels on cable television, the supremecourt concluded that the fcc was attempting, without legislative authorization,to create a public right that did not exist, and it commented that the right tospeak does not include a right to an audience in a nonpublic forum such asnewspapers, magazines, or on the senate floor.108however, the power of the press, as a surrogate of the people, is apowerful tool for reform. as the movie gandhi so vividly portrayed, thepresence of the new york times reporter and that paper's publication ofgandhi's fight for india's independence gave international credibility to theseparation movement, increasing its influence internally.for the protection of human rights the exposure of violations to publicview may be the only way to impose sanctions upon the wrongdoers. thestudent demonstrators and ghetto youth of the late 1960s understood this betterthan did public authorities. as arthur clarke so eloquently expoundedconcerning his brainchild, the geostationary orbital communications satellite:the very existence of the myriads of new information channels, operating inrealtime, will be a powerful influence for civilized behavior. if you arearranging a massacre, it will be useless to shoot the cameraman who has soconveniently appeared on the scene. his pictures will already be safe in thestudio five thousand kilometres away; and his final image may hang you.109certainly, both the access of the news gatherer or researcher to the subjectmatter and the availability of a means of distributing the information areessential to the health of the public enterprise in a democratic society. how toassure this access in an economy that puts high priority both on using privatebusinesses to provide theproperty rights in information112information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological means of access and on noninterference with freedom of speech isa quandary of utmost importance to the legal profession and the public.some observations on practical precedents andphilosophical principlesthe newer information technologies have created some options andopportunities that transform the environment for interactive communications.they have also precipitated much soulsearching concerning basic principlesthat should apply to their use. however, these technologies do not come to us ina legal vacuum. as a nation we have many legal theorems and practicalprecedents gleaned from a rich heritage of concern about basic rights ininformation in other media to guide us.we can, with some assurance, make several observations:1. we are reluctant to reward wrongdoers for their wrongdoing.2. we prefer to encourage and reward innovation even through novellegal theories based upon notions of common sense, commercialfairness, and human justice.3. the courts will not do a useless thing like trying to curtail thevideotaping of broadcast material in private homes or to prohibitthe photocopying of published copyright materials for personal use.4. the courts will not try to expand a legal theory that is ridiculous inits application, e.g., attempting to differentiate between source andobject code as a means for determining copyrightability ofcomputer software.5. the courts are reluctant to apply novel legal theories that have notreceived the sanction of the administrative agency which hasjurisdiction over the subject matter, e.g., enunciate a judicial firstamendment right of access to the broadcast media.6. the law must conform to public acceptance of what is right andequitable.7. the concept of property rights, whether applied to material goodsor to intangible information, is neither simple nor absolute. itreflects the values of a society that equally cherishes individualfreedom of action and the sharing of information for the commongood.it is also possible to derive some basic principles that underpin ourphilosophy of property rights in information.1. we must have a public medium through which information may beexchanged freely between information providers and informationusers. this may be a commoncarrier channel (for telephone,telegraph, or electronic mail), a publicaccess channel for cabletelevision, an oped page in newspapers, or a public bulletin boardsuch as the democracy wall in the people's republic of china. thevillage green or publicproperty rights in information113information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.auditorium simply will not suffice in the age of electronicinformation highways.2. liability for content should rest upon the originators and producersof information, not on the careers, unless they are one and the same.3. the sources of information and the nature of their economicinterest must be appropriately identified and authenticated in orderto establish credibility and to permit those harmed by a message toseek redress, unless there is some overriding public interest inprotecting the identity of the source who may be personally harmedor put in jeopardy by the disclosure.4. proprietary rights in information generated for commercialpurposes should be recognized, legally protected, andcompensation provided through justiciable means.5. the piracy, embezzlement, misappropriation, or misuse ofinformation should be punished.6. freedom of speech should not be impaired except in circumstancesin which there is a clear and present danger that the health andsafety of the nation is in question or that the health and safety of anindividual is in serious jeopardy. this should be true whether or notthe person in question is a public figure or private person.conclusionsthe basic principles outlined above need not be circumvented in anelectronic age any more than they have been in the past.110 they are derivedfrom a long legal history of concern about the integrity and independence of theindividual in a free society. what is needed is a commitment to preserve theprinciples we hold dear in a digital environment no less than in a voice circuitor on a printed page. the late ithiel de sola pool, who devoted his lastintellectual effort to the preservation of first amendment principles in theinformation age, wrote:the mystery is how the clear intent of the constitution, so well and strictlyenforced in the domain of print, has been so neglected in the electronicrevolution. the answer lies partly in changes in the prevailing concerns andhistorical circumstances from the time of the founding fathers to the world oftoday; but it lies at least as much in the failure of congress and the courts tounderstand the character of the new technologies. judges and legislators havetried to fit technological innovations under conventional legal concepts. theerrors of understanding by these scientific laymen, though honest, have beenmammoth. they have sought to guide toward good purposes technologies theydid not understand.111these good and wellintentioned public servants need the sound judgmentand sage guidance of scientists and engineers if the law is toproperty rights in information114information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.make reasonable sense in the information age. it is important that there bemutual understanding among those involved in both legal and technologicalinnovations as these developments clash at the crossroads of change.notes1. c. cherry, a second industrial revolution? (unpublished manuscript).2. f. machlup, the production and distribution of knowledge in the united states, princetonuniversity press, princeton, n.j.. 1962.3. h. cleveland, ''information as a resource," the futurist, pp. 34œ39, december 1982.4. "legal lore," new york state bar journal, pp. 49œ50, may 1984.5. compare art. i of the treaty on principles governing the activities of states in theexploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, 18 u.s.t.2410, t.i.a.s. 6347, 610 u.n.t.x. 205, signed at washington. london, and moscow onjanuary 27, 1967, and entered into force on october 10, 1967, with the preamble of theinformation composite negotiating text of the united national third conference on the law ofthe sea, a/conf. 62/wp, 10 rev. 2, done at caracas on april 1, 1980, not yet in force and asyet unsigned by the united states.6. y. ito and k. ogawa, "recent trends in johoka shakai and johoka policy studies,"keiocommunication rev. 5:15ff, march 1984.7. a. r. miller and m. h. davis, intellectual property: patents, trademarks and copyright, pp.18œ19, west publishing co., st. paul, 1983.8. e. w. ploman and l. c. hamilton, copyright: intellectual property in the information age,pp. 4œ9, routledge & kegan paul, london, 1980.9. these rights can be traced down to the socalled moral rights of "paternity" and "integrity"contained in art. 6 of the paris convention of 1971 (the latest version of the berne convention).u.s. copyright does not protect these rights, and the opposition of hollywood producers to themmay explain the failure of the united states to ratify the berne convention. see generally r.brown, kaplan and brown's copyright , p. 656, foundation press, mineola, n.y., 1978.10. ploman and hamilton, op. cit., supra note 8, at 8.11. ibid., at 9.12. art. i, sec. 8, cl. 8.13. b. ringer, "two hundred years of american copyright law," in twenty years of english& american patent, trademark & copyright law, p. 117, american bar association, chicago,ill., 1977.14. ibid.15. copyright act of march 3, 1891. 26 shat. 1106. see generally ringer, op. cit., supra note13, at 127.16. s. warren and l. brandeis, "the right to privacy," harvard l. rev. 4:193, 1890.17. dow jones news service documents 120827œ0219, august 24, 1984; 120822œ0348,august 21, 1984; 120821œ0312, august 20, 1984.18. 376 u.s. 254 (1964).19. b. w. sanford, "twenty years of actual malice," 2 communications lawyer 1, summer1984. the definition of "public figure" has been greatly expanded beyond that of publicofficials by the recent reversal of the $2.05œmillion judgment awardedproperty rights in information115information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.by a jury in the libel suit of william tavouleareas, president of mobil corporation.tavouleareas unsuccessfully argued that if he had become a "public figure" it was because ofnotoriety brought about by the libel and was not due to any inherent public function of hisposition. in announcing his intent to appeal his case to the supreme court, he said, "i amappealing because i believe the law must not accord one institution in our society theunrestrained power to so damage our leaders that it jeopardizes our society's ability tofunction." communications lawyer 1(3):10, summer 1983.20. see, e.g., the family educational rights and privacy act of 1974, p.l. 98œ380 sec. 513, 20u.s.c.a. sec. 1231g, and the texas open records act, sec. 7 of art. 6252œ17a, v.t.c.s., andoffice of the attorney general of texas, open records decision nop. 229, october 26, 1979.21. u.s. v. miller, 425 u.s. 435 (1976).22. the privacy act of 1974, p.l. 93œ579, december 31, 1974, 88 stat. 1896, title 5 u.s.c.sec. 552a, as amended p.l. 94œ394, september 3, 1976, 90 stat. 1198, p.o. 95œ38, june 1,1977, 91 stat. 179.23. in the matter of the washington post company v. state insurance department et al. no. 73,state of new york, court of appeals, march 29, 1984.24. in the case of copyrights for a period of the lifetime of the author plus 50 years, 17 u.s.c.sec. 302(a); in the case of patents for a period of 17 years, 35 u.s.c. sec. 154.25. "new patent bill gathers congressional support," bioscience 29 :281, may 1979.26. the patent and trademark amendment act, p.l. 96œ517, december 12, 1980.27. see generally, d. nelkin, "proprietary secrecy versus open communication in science,"science as intellectual property: who controls scientific research?, pp. 9œ30, macmillan,london and new york, 1984.28. department of agriculture rfp 8400r06, march 15, 1984. according to remarksreported in commerce business daily, february 28, 1984, the office of management andbudget considers this rfp a prototype for distribution of electronic data by the federalgovernment. examples include market news reports from the agricultural marketing serviceand situations reports from the economic research service.29. the authorization for this project contained in p.l. 96œ517, sec. 9, requiring development ofa comprehensive plan for transferring the files to an electronic data base, and p.l. 96œ247, title35 u.s.c. sec. 6, authorizing "cooperative exchange ventures," are being challenged by the"cottage industry" of trademark searchers who use the hardcopy files without paying fees foraccess.30. this was not always the case. the first public library in the united states was started bybenjamin franklin in philadelphia in 1731 as a subscription library. there were 50 originalmembers, who paid 40 shillings to join and 10 shillings per annum. subscribers paid double forbooks not returned. it was not until 1800 that the library of congress was started, and the newyork public library opened in 1837. m. c. tyler, "the historic evolution of the free publiclibrary in america and its true function in the community," in b. taylor and r. j. munro,eds., american law publishing 1860œ1900 , glanville, dobbs ferry, n.y.. 1984.31. d. m. davidson, "protecting computer software: a comprehensive analysis," jurimetricsjournal 23(4):339 at 400f, summer 1983.32. the leading supreme court case in this area is branzburg v. hayes, 408 u.s. 665 (1972),which recognized the necessity to compel disclosure to a grand jury whenproperty rights in information116information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.criminal behavior is involved. see also 99 a.l.r. 3d 37 and p. l. glenchur, hastings l. j.33:623œ652. courts will not countenance tortious behavior in the gathering of news. see galellav. onassis, 487 fed. 986 (2d cir. 1973) where defendant was enjoined from approaching theplaintiff closer than 25 feet.33. branzburg v. hayes, supra note 32.34. for an excellent discussion of this issue, see d. nelkin, chap. 4, "rights of access versusobligations of confidentiality," in science as intellectual property: who controls scientificresearch? macmillan, new york and london, 1984.35. united states v. doe (in re popkin), 460 f. 2d 328 (1st cir. 1972), cert. denied, sub nom.popkin v. united states, 411 u.s. 909, 1973.36. public health service act, as amended 1974, 42 u.s.c. sec. 242(a) and the comprehensivedrug abuse, prevention, and control act of 1970, p.l. 95œ633, 21 u.s.c. sec. 242a(b) and sec.872(d).37. e.g., privacy of research records bill, s. 867 (april 4, 1979) and h.r. 3409 (april 3,1979), 96th cong. 1st sess.38. nelkin, op. cit., supra note 27.39. r. k. merton, ed., the sociology of science, p. 273. university of chicago press, chicago,ill., 1973.40. nelkin, op. cit., supra note 27.41. pool & solomon, "intellectual property and transborder data flows," stan. j. int'l. l.16:113, 1980.42. the direct marketing association has been monitoring some 80 pieces of proposedlegislation during the last several years.43. e.g., new jersey, pennsylvania, nevada, and virginia.44. e.g., illinois, california, connecticut, and wisconsin.45. op. cit., supra note 21.46. miranda v. arizona, 384 u.s. 436 (1966); see generally 30 a.l.r. fed. 824. for casesconcerning illegal beepers, bugging, and wiretapping, see 57 a.l.r. fed. 646, 59 a.l.r. fed.959, and 97 l. ed. 237. see also m. goldey, "aspects of international voice communicationsto and from the united states," jurimetrics j. 24(1):8œ12, fall 1983, regarding electronicsurveillance of international mrs calls outside the united states and the admissibility of suchevidence in courts.47. minnesota v. marshall, ššu.s.šš, 79 l. ed. 2d 409 (1984); new york v. quarles,ššu.s.šš, 81 l. ed. 2d 550 (1984): berkemer v. mccarty, 468 u.s.šš, 82 l. ed. 2d 317(1984); massachusetts v. sheppard, 468 u.s.šš, 82 l. ed. 2d 737 (1984).48. u.s. v. new york times, 403 u.s. 713 (1971).49. elizabeth taylor v. american broadcasting companies, inc., 82 civ. 6977 (s.d.n.y. 1982).50. new york civil rights law, sec. 50œ51; the lanham act for damage to protectable serviceand trademarks, and unfair competition under new york general business law, sec. 368(d).51. see street v. nbc, 645 f. 2d 1227 (1981), settled and cert. dismissed , 70 l. ed. 2d 636(1981).52. compare hicks v. casablanca records. 464 f. supp. 426 (s.d.n.y. 1978) and maritote v.desilu productions, inc., 345 f. 2d. 418 (7th cir. 1965) with lugosi v. universal pictures co.,inc., 172 u.s.p.q. 541 (cal. super. 1972) and price v. hal roach studios, inc., 400 f. supp.836 (s.d.n.y.).property rights in information117information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.53. see, e.g., gilliam v. american broadcasting companies, inc., 538 f. 2d 14 (2d cir. 1976).54. 8 anne, c. 19, republished in r. s. brown, copyright, p. 851, foundation press, mineola,n.y., 1978.55. ploman and hamilton, op. cit., supra note 8. at 30.56. whitesmith music publishing co. v. apollo co., 209 u.s. 1 (1908). this inadequacy hasbeen cured by the 1976 act, which defines a "copy" as anything tangible from which theauthor's work can be replicated. 17 u.s.c. sec. 102(a).57. final report of the national commission on new technological uses of copyrightedworks, 27œ31, library of congress, washington, d.c., 1979.58. ibid., at 12; subsequently enacted 17 u.s.c. sec. 101, 117, as amended p.l. 96œ517, sec. 10,94 stat. 3028.59. computer software copyright act of 1980: act of december 12, 1980; l. no. 96œ517, sec.10; 94 star. 3015, 3028; 17 u.s.c. sec. 101, 117.60. office of the register of copyrights, announcement sml47 (may 1964); copyrightoffice circular 31d (january 1965).61. contu final report, op. cit., supra note 57, at 85.62. "computer programs are the ordered set of instructions which can operate a computer....source code can be written in languages which are englishlike, such as basic orfortran.... source code instructions are either directly used by a computer or are firsttranslated into the computer's machine language as 'object' code. object code is usually printedas ones and zeros, but can also be printed as octal numbers (0œ7) or hexadecimal numbers (0œ15), with af representing decimal (10œ15). object code can be directly translated into'assembly' language, in which machine instructions are represented by mnemonics.... objectcode, the direct symbolic representation of the machine language, is intelligible to trainedengineers" (e.g., like the piano player that was only readable by experts). d. m. davidson,"protecting computer software: a comprehensive analysis," jurimetrics journal 23:339, 341(summer 1983).63. apple computer, inc. v. franklin computer corp., 545 f. supp. 812 714 f. 2d 1240 (3dcir. 1983), cert. den., 104 sup. ct. 690 (1984).64. see generally the excellent article by duncan davidson, op. cit., supra note 31, whichdiscusses the various methods of protecting software and the concerns of lawyers about theviability of each.65. dow jones news service, doc. no. 120118œ0360, january 7, 1984.66. dow jones news service, doc. no. 120706œ0544, july 6, 1984.67. dow jones news service, doc. no. 110512œ1159, may 12, 1983.68. 17 u.s.c. sec. 109(a).69. dow jones news service, doc. no. 120119œ0661, january 19, 1984. until that releaseflashdance and jane fonda's workout had been the topselling videotapes, with 200,000copies each. see also "hollywood thriving on videocassette boom," new york times,monday, may 7, 1984, pp. al, c17,70. dow jones news service, doc. no. 110512œ1159, december 5, 1983.71. sony corp. v. universal city studios, ššu.s.šš(1984), 104 sup. ct. 774, at 778.72. 17 u.s.c. sec. 107.73. williams & wilkins co. v. united states, 420 u.s. 376 (1975).74. dow jones news service, doc. no. 110512œ1159, may 5, 1983.75. rule 10(b)(5).property rights in information118information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76. new york times, august 29, 1984, pp. a1, d4: new york times, sunday, may 27, 1984,pp. f1, f21.77. s.e.c. v. texas gulf sulphur co., 401 f. 2d 833 (2d cir. 1968).78. see chiarella v. united states. 455 u.s. 222 (1980), involving an employee of a financialprinting house who decoded documents about mergers and acquisitions; s.e.c. v. dirks, cert.granted, 459 u.s. 1014 (1982) involving a stockbroker: u.s. v. newman, 664 f. 2d 12 (2d cir.1981) involving employees of morgan stanley who traded shares in a takeover targetrepresented by their firm; s.e.c. v. thayer (pending) involving friends of ltv corp. ceo whomay have benefitted from passing confidential information to his personal friends: and s.e.c. v.brant (the civil case against winans and his friends). for a discussion of all of the above cases,see l. wayne, "inside trading by outsiders," new york times, may 27, 1984, pp. f1, f21.79. lewis v. baxter, 368 f. supp. 768 (d.c. ala. 1973).80. public affairs press, inc. v. rickover, 369 u.s. 111 (1962). the case raises interestingquestions about the copyrightability of the speeches, i.e., whether they were governmentdocuments that cannot be copyrighted under title 17 u.s.c. sec. 105, whether they werealready in the public domain because of their oral delivery and circulated copies, or whetherthey were the private utterances of a public official in a nonofficial capacity. on remand it wasdecided that the speeches were delivered in the admiral's "private capacity" and that the fact thatthey were typed, duplicated, and cleared by the navy was irrelevant, 268 f. supp. 444 (1967).81. nixon v. sirica, 487 f. 2d 700 (d.c. app. 1973).82. harper & row, publishers, inc. and the reader's digest association, inc., v. nationenterprises and the nation associates, inc., 723 f. 2d 195 (1983).83. time, inc. v. bernard geis associates, 293 f. supp. 130 (s.d.n.y. 1968); internationalnews service v. associated press. 248 u.s. 215 (1918); hoehling v. universal city studios,inc., 618 f. 2d 972 (2d cir.) cert. den., 449 u.s. 841 (1980); rosemont enterprises, inc. v.random house, inc., 366 f. 2d 303 (2d cir. 1966) cert. den., 385 u.s. 1009 (1967).84. 723 f. 2d 195.85. "fifteen states have passed 'son of sam' laws freezing proceeds from moneymakingventures such as book sales of those locked up for capital crimes until claims by victims of theirsurvivors are satisfied." christian science monitor, april 5, 1983, p. 1.86. the government in the sunshine act, p.l. 94œ409, september 13, 1976, 90 stat. 1241,title 19 u.s.c. sec. 420, title 5 u.s.c. sec, 551f., and the freedom of information act, p.l. 89œ487, july 4, 1966, 80 stat. 250, title 5 u.s.c. 552, as amended, p.l. 90œ23 sec. 1, june 5, 1967,81 stat. 54, p.l. 93œ502 sec. 1œ3, november 21, 1974, 88 star. 15œ61.87. 18 u.s.c. sec. 2511 arguably might not include such transmissions.88. commission on new information technology, new views: computers and new mediašanxiety and hopes (1979). see also j. freese, "the vulnerability of computerized society,"transnational data rep. 4(5) at 21 (1981).89. 50 u.s.c. sec. 2402 et seq., as amended.90. defense science board task force on export of u.s. technology, an analysis of exportcontrol of u.s. technologyša dod perspective , office of the secretary of defense,washington, d.c., 1976.91. dow jones news service, doc. no. 110325œ0319, march 24. 1984.property rights in information119information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92. for an excellent discussion of these transborder issues, see cultures in collision: acanadianu.s. conference on communications policy, praeger, 1984. esp. chaps. 3 and 6.93. crtc public announcement, the improvement and development of canadianbroadcasting and the extension of u.s. coverage in canada by catv, ottawa. december 3,1969, p. 1.94. crtc public announcement, the integration of cable television in the canadianbroadcasting system, ottawa, february 26, 1971. see also crtc policy statement, cabletelevision: canadian broadcasting: a single system, ottawa, july 16, 1971.95. canadian bill c58, an act to amend the income tax act, september 1976.96. under sec. 301 of the trade act of 1974. the complaint was filed on august 29, 1978, andhearings were held in november 1978.97. f. fitzgerald, america revised, atlantic little brown, boston, mass., 1979.98. transnational data report, vol. vii, no. 4, p. 195, juneœjuly 1984.99. privacy act of 1974, 5 u.s.c.s. sec. 552a(g) and (1) (a); see also r.r. v. department ofarmy, 482 f. sup. 770 (d.c. 1980).100. 28 u.s.c. sec. 315, (a); 47 c.f.r. sec. 73.123, 73.300, 73.598, 73.679.101. sec. 48a of the california civil code n2 provides in part: ''1. in any action for damages forthe publication of a libel in a newspaper, or of a slander by a radio broadcast, plaintiff shallrecover no more than special damages unless a correction be demanded and be not published orbroadcast, as herinafter provided...." the california court hearing the carol burnett libel suitagainst the enquirer cleared the way for the record $1.6million verdict by ruling that thepublication was a magazine not a newspaper.102. seattle times v. rhinehart, 82œ1721, is on the supreme court docket to determinewhether the washington state supreme court was correct in upholding an injunction fordefamation and invasion of privacy by the leader of a religious group who sought to suppresspublication of information obtained during preparation for trial, national law journal, october17, 1983, p. 5. injunctions are more often sought to protect socalled merchandising rights orthe right to publicity. see, e.g., haelan laboratories, inc. v. topps chewing gum, inc., 202 f.2d 866 (2d cir. 1953) cert. den. 346 u.s. 816. "this right of publicity would usually yield themno money unless it could be made the subject of an exclusive grant which barred any otheradvertiser from using their pictures."103. miami herald v. tornillo, 418 u.s. 241 (1974).104. 47 u.s.c. sec. 315 (1976), aff'd, red lion broadcasting co. v. fcc, 395 u.s. 367 (1969).105. friends of earth v. fcc, 449 f. 2d 1164 (d.c. cir. 1971).106. columbia broadcasting systems, inc. v. democratic national committee, 412 u.s. 94(1973).107. muir v. alabama educational television commission, 688 f. 2d 1033 (5th cir. 1982) cert.den., ššu.s.šš, 75 l. ed. 2d (1984).108. midwest video corp. v. fcc, 571 f. 2d 1025 (8th cir. 1978).109. "beyond the global village." address on world communications day, united nations,new york, may 17, 1983.110. which is only to say that we have sometimes been more and sometimes less successful inpreserving and protecting them.111. technologies of freedom, belknap press, cambridge and london, 1983.property rights in information120information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commentsjordan j. baruchjordan baruch associateswhat a joy it is for an engineer to have the last word after a lawyer! in thiscase, however, that joy is tempered by awe at anne branscomb's thorough andscholarly treatment of the 10 fundamental rights she associates withinformation. hesitantly, i would like to add an eleventh right that also meritsour concern even if it is not clearly a property right. i shall call it the right toaggregate and act upon information.when john mayo talked about the growing number of elements on a chip,he neglected to mention that the power of a chip is not linearly related to thenumber of those elements. that is an important characteristic of information aswell. in information, when we have one piece of information it may be worthbut little. a second piece that adds to the picture makes the total value greater,and the third piece, even greater. indeed, the last keystone bit of informationoften increases the value enormously. in other words, if we were to plot thevalue of an information collection against the number of pieces of informationin the collection we would often find a curve that grew more than linearly. ininformation collection, the whole is truly greater than the simple sum of theparts. information becomes more powerful as we aggregate it, and the authorsof these papers recognize that power of aggregation. certainly melvinkranzberg spoke about the aggregation of knowledge in connection with theformation of gutenberg's printing press.i would like to point out that since the value of information is nonlinear,many of the things being discussed here get rather fuzzy and much morecomplicated. for example, bits and pieces of information about a commercialcompany may have little value taken independently; but when they areaggregated by somebody smart enough to put them together they become veryimportant and very valuable. how do we protect the property value in theaggregate of a collection where the individual elements may each belong toothers and have little value in themselves? if, in fact, we watch a smart frienduse his computer in this process, what do we see? first of all, he gets hisinformation from a large number of places through a little digital window. heknows tools to put those pieces together and draw conclusions. he buildsmodels, examines those models, and tries to predict the nearterm future.information aggregation, model, and prediction all fuse to become a new pieceof information. its primary protection, because it is likely to be evanescent, restswith the subsequent action that it triggers. if our smart friend works well, hewill prosper by acting and by protecting the value in the model whereby he actson information aggregates.mel kranzberg took the liberty of giving us kranzberg' s first law. iwould like to suggest two other laws that have a beating on the information erabecause of the nonlinearity of information. first, power in a society will resideproperty rights in information121information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with those capable of imparting to a body of information the largest coefficientof nonlinearityšthose who can take 3 things and get 12 or 17 or 93. thesepeoplešthe manipulators and concluders rather than the ownersšwill haveenormous influence. the second law, related to the first, may make harlancleveland unhappy. in the first law i tried to state what would determine powerin our society, namely, the ability to produce a large coefficient of nonlinearity.the second law simply says that whatever determines power in our society willbe found to be nonuniformly distributed and therefore unfair. some people inour society are simply going to be better at aggregating information and atdrawing conclusions from it than others, and they will be considered to betaking unfair advantage of the new society just as those who were strongunfairly took advantage of neolithic society and those who had early accessunfairly took advantage of colonial society. whatever determines power will benonuniformly distributed, and the haves will be looked at as unfair by the havenots; i am afraid that will be as much a state of the information society as it wasof the neolithic.property rights in information122information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technologies in the homewalter s. baerintroductiondespite the frenetic lifestyles of 1984 america, most of us spend moretime at home than anywhere else. we sleep, eat, and take care of our personalneeds at home. we cook, clean, and do other household chores, take care ofchildren, pay bills, prepare taxes, and sometimes shop from home. some of usearn part or all of our living at home. we entertain, talk on the telephone, playgames, read, watch television, and otherwise relax at home. these homeactivities are all affected by the electronic technologies we have developed forcommunications, information gathering, and entertainment. which technologieswe use in the home and how we apply them to home activities are the topics ofthis paper.the television set and the telephone are today the most importantelectronic information technologies in the home. they represent two broadcategories of home information technologies that are worth distinguishing: (1)standalone, or oneway, receiving units, and (2) communicating, or networked,units. besides television receivers, the first group includes radios, audiosystems, microprocessors in appliances, videocassette recorders (vcrs) andplayers, videodisk players, videogames, cable tv converters, satellite tvreceivers, hand calculators, and standalone personal computers (pcs). thesecond category includes telephone peripheral equipment such as answeringmachines and automatic dialers, interactive cable tv terminals, and pcs withinformation technologies in the home123information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.twoway communications capabilities. the number and percentage of u.s.households with these technologies are shown in table 1.standalone units generally show higher penetrations and faster growththan those linked to networks, for obvious technical, economic, and politicalreasons. it is easier to design, make, and sell new products that can be takenhome and used independently than equipment that must interact compatiblywith a network or with units in other locations. moreover, networks areregulated by federal, state, or local governments, while standalone technologiesgenerally are not. consequently, the time needed for successful commercialintroduction of a new standalone technology is measured in years, while newnetwork technologies may require a decade or more for regulatory as well asconsumer acceptance.nevertheless, the trend is toward interconnecting traditionally standaloneunits within the home and then linking them through communications networksto the outside world. personal computers provide a good illustration. in 1983only 7 percent of home computers sold were equipped with modems forexternal communications (yankee group, 1984). only about 15 percent of the"high end" and "medium" pcs sold in 1983špcs with memories of 64k andmorešhad modems. these machines, however, are rapidly displacing ''lowend'' units in current sales (table 2). by 1988 more than half of the homecomputers sold should have communications capability, allowing them toexchange messages with other pcs and to interact with external informationservices. the trend toward networked pcs in the home thus seemstable 1 information technologies in the home, 1983itemnumber of householdswith equipment(millions)percentage of u.s.householdstelephone8398tv receiver8499color tv7589cable tv3339twoway cable tv0.3<1satellite tv receiver0.4<1videorecorder/player911videogame2125home computer89with telephone hookup ormodem0.4<1source: a. c. nielsen company, paul kagan associates, the yankee group, at&t.information technologies in the home124information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.well under way. companies such as ibm, at&t, cbs, and times mirror areall betting that networks of home pcs will present large and attractive marketsby the end of this decade.table 2 u.s. computer sales to the home (in thousands)estimated19801981198219831984high end1161451414601,470medium31551801,0802,440low end25601,9403,545685total units1443602,2615,0854,595installed base1445042,7657,85012,446source: the yankee group. 1984. yankeevision. boston, mass. may:35œ37. reprinted withpermission.table 3 perceived uses for computers in the home, 1983percentage of thoseinterested in acquiringa computerpercentage of actualpurchasershome budgeting/management5327education/learning3941entertainment/games2141run business from home198programming1235do office work at home108word processing/writing810accessing information74record keeping/cataloging65home banking52self improvement42all others714don't know/none94source: the yankee group. 1984. yankeevision. boston, mass. may:35œ37. reprinted withpermission.how will individuals and families use their home computers? table 3shows the results of a recent survey of perceived applications. home computerpurchases through 1983 were predominantly "low end" machines used primarilyfor games and for learning about computers themselves. purchasers are nowinsisting that pcs also be useful for word processing, home management, andother more sophisticated and serious applications. as a result, the number ofhome pcs sold in 1984 may fall below the 1983 level, but the mix has shifteddramaticallyinformation technologies in the home125information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.toward more expensive and capable devices including larger memories, diskdrives, printers, and modems.recent studies show growing consumer interest in and acceptance ofinformation technologies for the home (yankelovich, skelly, and white, 1984).these trends in the 1980s differ markedly from the antitechnology, awayfromhome attitudes of the late 1960s and 1970s. demographics are changing as well,with significant trends towards smaller households and more working adults perhousehold. according to the u.s. bureau of labor statistics, more than half ofall married women now work outside the home, up from about 30 percent in1960. time is thus at a premium for more americans, and household activitiesmust change accordingly. for middleclass u.s. households, time budgetchoices are at least as critical as income is in determining the purchase and useof information technologies.in addition, more americans seek individual, customized lifestyles. wewant more flexibility in our working hours and more choices among the foodswe eat, the trips we plan, the magazines we read, and the television programswe watch. a central theme of this paper is that information technologiesfacilitate these choices but do not themselves determine them. rather, howindividuals choose to spend their time largely determines the informationtechnologies they acquire and use. the sections that follow discuss foursignificant uses of time at homešworking at home, doing chores at home,learning at home, and relaxing at homešand the ways in which informationtechnologies support these activities.some limits on the paper's scope and intent deserve mention. it is notintended as a technological forecast, but is rather a discussion of howinformation technologies are being used in the home, of current trends, and ofsome expected developments. technologies that will be used in the home in thenext decade have already been invented and are in various stages ofdevelopment, field testing, or use in business, government, and othernonresidential environments.the paper deals with developments in the united states and assumes abusinessasusual scenario both internationally and domestically. this impliesthat individuals and families will continue to purchase information products andservices in commercial markets. there is little discussion of equity issues orpossible government programs such as subsidies for cable television and homecomputers.finally, the paper focuses on technologies for electronic communications,information distribution, and entertainment in the home. it largely neglects theinteresting developments under way in the print media. it is the author's strongcontention that the new electronicinformation technologies in the home126information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.media will change the old without supplanting them, just as television haschanged radio and newspapers without destroying the viability of either.newspapers, magazines, books, and other forms of print media will remainviable for the foreseeable future, but ongoing changes in technology,demographics, and lifestyle all favor the growth of electronic informationtechnologies in the home.working at homepersonal computers provide greater opportunities to earn a living at home,especially for selfemployed professionals and independent contractors such ascomputer programmers, consultants, writers, typists, and accountants.individuals in these occupations generally work independently, control theirown work pace, and have measurable output. many of them could work athome without a computer, of course, but the computer's word processing,financial modeling, and recordkeeping capabilities enhance their productivity.the "expert system" software now emerging from r&d will further supportprofessionals' work at home (hayesroth, 1984).the use of space at home need not change dramatically to support suchprofessional work. if a separate office or study is not available, most people canplace a computer and related equipment in their bedrooms. the bedroom can beused for work during nonsleeping hours, with reasonable privacy and relativelylittle interference with other home activities.teleworkmany employees in whitecollar occupations could work at home withcommunications networks linking their personal computers to company databases and to coworkers. as one illustration, a 1976 study found that theinsurance industry could decentralize much of its underwriting andadministrative operations by using workers at home or at dispersed sites nearhome (nilles et al., 1976). besides saving commuting costs, "telework" opensup employment opportunities to those who find it difficult to travel to work,such as parents with child care responsibilities and the physically handicapped(olson, 1983).salespeople could conduct more work at home if they had ready access tocustomer records, as well as means to send in their orders electronically.software programs for personal computers are available to facilitate such orderentry processes. mobile telephones using cellular radio technology also helpsalespeople work more effectively outside the office.information technologies in the home127information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.despite these technical advances, predictions from the 1970s and early1980s of significant shifts to working at home have not come to pass (harkness,1977; nilles et al., 1976; toffler, 1980; williams, 1982).* nilles now estimatesthat "today there are between 20,000 and 100,000 telecommuters of all sorts inthe u.s." (krier, 1984). some forecasts simply extrapolated too far from the1973œ1974 energy crisis and concluded that skyrocketing gasoline prices woulddramatically reduce commuting. others were based on an eitheror fallacy thatemployees would fully substitute working at home for working at an office.this is clearly not correct. most individuals want to spend a good part of theirworking time among colleagues. they like the change of scene, the workrelated interactions, the socializing, and even the distractions of an officeenvironment.however, many employees would like the freedom to work at home part ofthe time. just as facetoface contacts at the office enhance job performance, so,too, may the ability to concentrate at home, free from meetings, colleagues'visits, and business telephone calls. this paper, for example, was written largelyat home, where i can find more uninterrupted time than at my office. otheremployees prefer the added flexibility that parttime work at home offers forchild care or other activities. parttime work at home illustrates the customizedlifestyles sought by so many americans in the 1980s.the reporters at the los angeles times provide an interesting example ofhow information technologies open new opportunities for parttime work athome. in 1982, the times installed a sophisticated "front end" computer systemfor the editorial staff. more than 550 microcomputer terminals are linked to 21computers in washington, d.c., and three southern california locations. inaddition to typing and editing stories, each reporter can maintain his or her ownelectronic files, as well as send and receive electronic messages through thesystem.the times' editorial computer system was carefully designed to carryheavy peak loads, since most reporters use the system during* few quantitative data exist on the number of americans working at home, with orwithout computers and communications networks. a 1984 futurist article cites a u.s.chamber of commerce report indicating that "10 million businesses list home addressesas their place of business" (wolfgram, 1984). a wall street journal editorial states, "arecent at&t study reportedly found that 11 million americans work at home; 7 percentof the total labor force work at home full time and 6 percent pursue parttime jobs athome" (wall street journal, 1984). and a recent article in reason cites the at&testimate, as well as a figure of "5œ10 million, reported in consumer's digest" (rubins,1984).information technologies in the home128information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the same hours before deadline. the editorial staff helped design the terminalconfiguration and functions so that the system would serve the needs of its usersrather than its technical developers. although some reporters expressed initialapprehension, most adopted the computer system eagerly within a few monthsand have discarded their old typewriters. this has been the general newspaperexperience with editorial computer systems (johnston, 1984).dialup access was an important part of the system design so that reportersoutside of washington and southern california could file their stories remotely.but the design did not anticipate the local reporters' enthusiasm for using thecomputer system from home or on assignment. even during 1980œ1982 whenthe system was designed, using computers for work at home was not widelyaccepted outside the computer field itself. moreover, truly portable computerswith builtin modems and enough capacity for serious word processing were notyet available.all this has changed in the last two years. more than 100 los angelestimes reporters regularly use portable computers or pcs at home to write theirstories and then send them electronically to the central computer system. thereporters can plan their time more flexibly, spend more time on assignment, andwork closer to deadline. an increasing number of reporters now work parttimeat home.the los angeles times experience seems likely to be replicated as otherbusinesses install computer systems for their professional employees and permitthem to interact with the systems at home. financial and accounting staff willaccess corporate data bases, perform analyses, and write reports from home.managers will use electronic mail systems from home to keep in touch withtheir coworkers, as well as to substitute for some office correspondence andtelephone calls. professional and other whitecollar workers in the academic,government, and nonprofit sectors will do the same. information technologiesmake it easier for information workers to do at least some of their work at home.barriers to computerbased teleworksignificant nontechnical barriers to work at home remain, however, forthose who are not selfemployed. from the employer's viewpoint, there areseveral disadvantages: parttime work at home does not save office or administrative costs, atleast in the short run. the los angeles times reporters still want theirown desks in the office, each with a computer terminal, of course. ininformation technologies in the home129information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principle, an employer could reduce office space requirements ifemployees spent an appreciable part of their work time at home but, inpractice, office space sharing appears difficult to implement. work at home will cost employers more if they must pay for the homecomputer, communications, and other work materials. these addedcosts are usually easier to measure than the productivity gainsattributable to work done at home. employers' liability insurance costswill also increase if they must cover working at home. many employers believe that facetoface interactions in the office areessential, both for efficient functioning of the business and foreffective use of the company's human resources. they argue that highmorale, loyalty, and effective communications among employees comefrom working together in an office rather than from workingindividually at home. data security problems arise when sensitive information is available athome. processing insurance claims or conducting financial analysesrequires access to confidential data. the security problems include notjust wiretapping and unauthorized access to computer data bases, but,more importantly, physical security in the home environment. homesdo not have guards, locked files, or other physical protections thatoffices employ. establishing these safeguards in employees' homeswould impose huge costs and administrative burdens on bothemployers and employees. tolerating a lower level of data security inthe home may be acceptable at present, but not in the future if parttime work at home becomes widespread.in general, management control is more difficult in multiple homelocations than in a centralized office. except at senior managerial andprofessional levels, working at home runs counter to established controlmechanisms and policies of most corporations and government agencies.organized labor also opposes computerbased work at home. in the 1930sunions successfully fought against homework in the apparel industries, arguingthat the minimum wage and other labor standards could not be enforced forwork at home. under the authority of the fair labor standards act of 1938, theu.s. department of labor in 1943 banned homework for women's garments,knitted outerwear, glove and mitten manufacturing, embroidery, handkerchiefmanufacturing, jewelry making, and button and buckle manufacturing. thereagan administration's efforts to end these bans have so far been rejected bythe courts (taylor, 1983).unions believe that the same issues surrounding garment making willapply to computerbased homework. while agreeing that parttime work athome may be appropriate for managers and someinformation technologies in the home130information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professional employees, they contend that clerical and support workers will bepaid less than minimum wage, lose benefits, and otherwise be exploited in"electronic sweatshops" (chamot and zalusky, 1983). the 780,000memberservice employees international union has banned homework by its members(rubins, 1984). the aflcio, at its fifteenth constitutional convention inoctober 1983, formally adopted a resolution against computer homework:resolved: that the aflcio calls for an early ban on computer homeworkby the department of labor as a measure of protection for those workersentering the market for the fastestgrowing occupation in the united states.government policies affecting work at homesome government regulations and policies also discourage the use ofinformation technologies for work at home. tax policies represent a primeexample. over the last several years, the internal revenue service has tightenedits position on deductions for home offices and home computers. it is now verydifficult for an employee to deduct such costs if the employer provides workspace and equipment at the office. an employee's ability to deduct workrelatedcosts certainly influences his or her decision about whether to work parttime athome.zoning laws also affect the kind and amount of work that can beperformed in a residential area. in los angeles, for example, i may legally usea computer at home to conduct business, either for myself or for my employer.however, i may not have any employees working at my home office, nor may isee any customers or suppliers at home. chicago has a much more restrictivezoning ordinance, which prohibits professional work at home involving"installation or use of any mechanical or electrical equipment customarilyincident to the practice of any such professions." the chicago ordinance hasactually been invoked to stop a teacher and his wife from writing a textbook ordeveloping software programs on their home computer (rubins, 1984).zoning laws can, of course, be changed to suit new circumstances, butonly after many hearings, much effort, and a great deal of time. like changingcorporate policies and union rules, it takes longer to change zoning laws, taxregulations, and other government policies than to develop new informationtechnologies.in summary, technological developments, as well as changing lifestyles,favor bringing more work home from the office. but the institutional policies ofgovernment, unions, and business make theinformation technologies in the home131information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shift more difficult. businesses particularly are conservative organizations.even though more than 100 u.s. corporations have tested the telework concept,with generally positive results, most companies still appear reluctant to changeestablished practices to encourage its widespread application.doing chores at homenot everyone earns a living by working at home, but virtually all of us dohousework. in housework, i include sedentary chores such as bill paying and taxpreparation, as well as the physical tasks of cooking, cleaning, and homemaintenance. information technologies aid us in doing chores at home in threeprincipal ways: (1) by controlling the appliances we use for housework, (2) byestablishing local networks for home communications and control, and (3) bydirectly providing electronic information and transaction services from the home.controlling appliances"the technological systems that presently dominate our households werebuilt on the assumption that a fulltime housewife would be operating them ..."(cowan, 1983). that assumption, of course, no longer holds true in mostamerican households. information technology in the form of themicroprocessor permits more flexible control of appliances, thus supporting thelifestyles of busy people who work outside (or perhaps inside) the home.even as families contemplate the purchase of a home computer,microprocessors are entering their homes as control components of standaloneappliances. microwave ovens, refrigerators, washers, and sewing machinescontain microprocessorbased controls that can proceed through a complexseries of steps and respond more accurately to the surrounding environment.ovens can be preprogrammed to defrost, brown, and heat sequentially so thatdinner is ready 15 minutes after the last family member comes home from workor school. refrigerators monitor their own operations and signal if a door is notclosed tightly or a mechnical malfunction occurs.limits to what microprocessorcontrolled appliances can do are set moreby available sensors than by the microprocessors themselves. for example, it isnot too farfetched to anticipate a cleaning robot in the 1990s that can vacuumautomatically without stumbling into furniture. achieving this, however, willrequire substantial advances and cost reductions in sensor technologies as wellas processing capabilities.information technologies in the home132information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the diffusion of microprocessors in the home is somewhat analogous tothe home use of electric motors. before the 1930s, electric motors were toolarge and expensive for most home applications. the development of cheap,fractionalhorsepower motors led to the proliferation of small motorizedappliances after world war ii. middleclass american households today haveliterally dozens of electric motors in blenders, grinders, can openers, knives,power tools, hair dryers, toys, and toothbrushes. in a similar way, inexpensivemicroprocessors are becoming commonplace in everyday household appliances.home networkslocal networks within the home allow even more flexible control ofappliances, as well as security and other home management functions.microprocessorbased controllers use the home's electrical wiring to signalappliances from a central panel in the kitchen or bedroom. the television setcan also serve as the central panel, controlled by a handheld device similar to aremote channel switcher. with these home networks, lights or appliances can beturned on and off from another part of the house, or remotely from outside thehome with a telephone call. home networks can also help in energymanagement by, for example, allowing you to call home to turn on the heat inan empty house just before arriving."smart telephones" and telephone peripheral equipment also support busylifestyles and aid home management functions. thirteen percent of losangeles households have a telephoneanswering machine, although the extentto which these devices improve the quality of life for either the caller or theanswering party remains open to question. home security systems linked to thetelephone or to cable tv networks also are in demand. at&t now offers amicroprocessorbased smoke alarm connected to the telephone that, whentriggered by smoke, dials a preprogrammed number and announces, "fire! at[the specified address]." developers commonly offer microprocessorcontrolledintrusion alarm systems as amenities in newly constructed apartments,condominiums, and houses.home information and transaction servicespersonal computers and home terminals linked to external data bases willencourage more electronic information gathering and transactions from thehome. the telephone, of course, has provided such services for more than acentury. although similar computerbasedinformation technologies in the home133information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.services for banking, shopping, ticket ordering, and information gathering havebeen relatively slow to develop, several now appear near the takeoff point: electronic banking at home is available from more than 30 financialinstitutions. bank of america and chemical bank together have morethan 20,000 electronic home banking customers. bank customers usethese electronic services to write checks, review account balances,compare current interest rates, and move funds among their accounts,as needed. customers particularly like the ability to review theiraccount balances at any time, without waiting for a monthly statementto arrive in the mail. securities transactions and airline reservations now can be madeelectronically from home pcs via compuserve and the source, twopopular computer information services. videotex offers better color, graphics, and userfriendly interfaces forhome transaction and information services. consumer videotexservices with highquality graphics are now operating in miami,florida, and orange county, california.* the times mirror gatewayservice in orange county offers its subscribers electronic homebanking, financial planning, ticket ordering for entertainment andsports events, travel booking, catalog ordering, and home shoppingfrom department stores and other retailers. stock and commodity price quotations are available at home from dowjones, commodity news service, and several other vendors. mostcustomers of these financial information services use the twowaytelephone network to transmit queries from their home computer to acentral data base, which then sends the requested information back tothe home. if twoway transactions are not required, however, theinformation alone can be broadcast as a oneway service. individualstock and commodity quotations are currently available via fm radiosubcarrier and direct broadcast satellite. these services are now pricedso high that they appeal only to active investors, but their costs shoulddrop within the next few years to make them accessible to morehouseholds. financial management draws considerable consumer interest (table 3),although few individuals as yet use their home pcs very effectively forbudgeting, tax preparation, or other financial planning tasks. as moreand more people become familiar with spreadsheet software programsin business, their use in the home for financial management willundoubtedly increase.these home transaction and information services are still in their infancy.fewer than 1 percent of the nation's households subscribe to* these videotex services use the north american presentation level protocolstandard (naplps), which provides more colors and higherresolution graphics thanalphamosaic services such as prestel in the united kingdom, or textonly, asciiservices such as dow jones news retrieval, compuserve, or the source.information technologies in the home134information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.any of them. yet consumer attitudes toward electronic transactions from thehome have turned decidedly more positive within the past year (table 4).acceptance has moved beyond the small number of early adopters, who are thefirst to try anything new, toward a broader segment of the public. from the fieldtrials and commercial experience to date, both information and transactionservices appear necessary for the commercial success of videotex and similarelectronic services to the home. neither pure information nor pure transactionsseem viable without the other.home transactions appeal especially to adults working outside the home,for whom time is at a premium. consumer surveys show that busy adults highlyvalue information that saves them time or money (yankelovich, skelly, andwhite, 1984). consumers also prefer the flexibility of electronic transactionservices that are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. they do not want todepend on traditional banking or shopping hours.with electronic transaction services at home, consumers will do more ofthe work themselves and rely less on middlemen such as bank tellers, orderclerks, and travel agents. banks' increasing use of automatic teller machines(atms) already portends this trend. the next step will be to move from theatm to a home terminal for all but cash transactions. as a result, employmentopportunities for tellers, clerks, and other service agents may be squeezed ashome transaction services expand.electronic transaction services in the home will not replace retail stores orservice businesses, however. as they do when earning a living, people like tomix with other people and are not likely to avoidtable 4 consumer perceptions of information technologies for transactions athome, 1983 and 1984percent responding19831984computers that allow for athome purchasingšmake life better1626šmake life worse2320bank at home via personal computer or cable tvšmakes life better2130šmakes life worse2018source: yankelovich, skelly, and white. inc. 1984. the yankelovich monitor. new york.reprinted with permission.information technologies in the home135information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.all shopping trips. their buying habits may change, though, with moreelectronic ordering of commodity products and services done from home.learning at homeparents express great interest in using personal computers to teach theirchildren at home. as indicated in table 3, more than 40 percent of the homecomputer buyers surveyed expect to use them for learning and education.computer manufacturers know these statistics, too. their advertisingemphasizes the importance of computer literacy and exhorts parents to preparetheir children for success in the classroom and the job market. softwarepackages clearly labeled as educational stay on the bestseller lists at homecomputer stores. educational software accounted for about $100 million, or justunder 10 percent of all software sales for home computers in 1983 (holden,1984).it is important, however, to distinguish between learning and formaleducation. computers and other information technologies unquestionably canaid learning at home, especially when the educational content is entertaining.flight simulation programs, for example, effectively teach elements of aviationeven though they are designed as games. some educational software programsare fun to use as well, for example, ''rocky's boots,'' which introduces conceptsof computer logic, and "green globs," a game that teaches analytic geometry.but many more programs are pedestrian and dull. like earlier examples ofeducational technology, they will be put on the shelf and soon forgotten.personal computers are not the only information technology for learning athome. videotapes such as "jane fonda's workout" have considerable learningpotential. so do conventional broadcast television programs, as "sesamestreet," "mr. rogers," the national geographic specials, and bill moyers' "awalk through the twentieth century" attest. research confirms the layman'sperception that television is a particularly powerful medium for learning. aspatricia greenfield reports in her recent review of media effects: "children tendto learn what they see on television more thoroughly than what they read orhear on radio or tape" (greenfield, 1984).whether computers will move the locus of education toward the home is afar different question. several factors militate against the change: we have heavy investments in schools' physical plant and in teachers'human capital. the educational establishment is unlikely to show muchinformation technologies in the home136information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enthusiasm for moving formal learning from the schools into the home,even if technologies permit or favor the change. few parents want to transfer education from the school to the home.working parents count on the schools to take charge of their childrenduring the day. if anything, adult lifestyle changes imply heavierreliance on the schools for activities once carried out at home. children, like adults, want facetoface contacts with their peers.schools facilitate these relationships and the learning that accompaniesthem. we remain in large part a credential society, demanding certificatesfrom schools as prerequisites for jobs and advanced education.although homebased degree programs exist, they generally do notsubstitute for the credentials given by the schools.still, america's current disenchantment with the schools and the calls foreducational reform undoubtedly will stimulate more parents to buy computersand educational software for learning at home. the educational consequencesare likely to be mixed. one probable result will be to widen the knowledge gapbetween children from affluent and lowerincome homes. according to a recentreview of a national institute of education conference on the topic, "the vastmajority of computer buyers are well off, well educated and white. sixtypercent of those purchasing computers costing over $500 have incomes over$40,000" (holden, 1984). in addition to learning with their computers at home,children from these affluent families will be more comfortable using computersat school and eventually on the job.the home computer should not be branded the villain, however. this samegapwidening problem has occurred for every important new learning tool,including paperback books, telephones, and television. each of thesedevelopments began by helping the affluent more than the nonaffluent.although "sesame street" was created principally to teach verbal and numberskills to children from lowincome families, which it did very successfully,children from affluent homes ended up learning even more (cook et al., 1975).computers in the home simply add another dimension to the knowledge gapbetween children from different socioeconomic backgrounds.one partial solution to the computer learning gap at home is to providecomputer instruction to all children at school. although more than twothirds ofu.s. public schools have at least one microcomputer, they still are not widelyavailable for student use (market data retrieval, 1984; shavelson and winkler,1984). a 1983 study, cited by shavelson and winkler, found that the ratio ofstudents per microcomputer averaged 183 to 1 in elementary schools, 181 to 1in junior high schools, and 125 to 1 in public high schools. parental purchases ofinformation technologies in the home137information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.home computers thus may place increased pressure on the schools to add morecomputers in the classroom.opportunities also may exist to coordinate home and school use ofmicrocomputers. word processing provides a good illustration. as seymourpapert pointed out in his celebrated book mindstorms, computers enablechildren to improve their writing markedly through editing and reworking theirthoughts on the screen:for most children rewriting a text is so laborious that the first draft is the finalcopy, and the skill of rereading with a critical eye is never acquired. thischanges dramatically when children have access to computers capable ofmanipulating text. (papert, 1980)children can be introduced to word processing at school and then reinforceand extend their writing skills on a home computer. coordination wouldleverage the educational impact of both home and school computing.unfortunately, there seems little precedent for effective coordinationbetween school and home in the use of other information technologies such astelevision. the conceptual foundations exist for involving parents in teachingcritical television viewing skills to children (dorr et al., 1980) or forincorporating primetime television programs into the school curriculum, butlittle implementation has occurred. perhaps computers in the home will bedifferent from other educational technologies and will offer better opportunitiesfor homeschool coordination.relaxing at homehome is the principal place for leisuretime activities, includingentertaining, talking on the telephone, reading, and watching television. timebudget studies show that television viewing dominates the use of free time athome (table 5). adults in 1975 watched television as a primary activity 2.2hours a day, on average, a substantial increase from the 1.5 hours recorded in1965 (robinson, 1977, 1981). more recent data show a slight decline in adultviewing since 1975, but it still averages more than 2 hours a day (juster,forthcoming).these data fall below other figures cited by the television informationoffice and the rating services (a. c. nielsen, 1984; roper, 1984). according torecent nielsen data, home television sets are turned on an average of more than7 hours a day. the differences result from two factors: different householdmembers watch the same television set at different times during the day; andindividuals often watch television as a secondary activity during time primarilydevoted toinformation technologies in the home138information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.eating, personal care, housework, reading, or other leisure activities. thenielsen data show average daily tv usage continuously increasing from 5.5hours in 1965œ1966 to 7.5 hours in november 1983. households with three ormore people, as well as those with pay cable services, watch more than 8.5hours per day (figure 1). television viewing declines with increasinghousehold income, although the difference between highand lowincomehouseholds is relatively small.table 5 time spent in leisure activities, 1965 and 1975minutes per dayactivity19651975study1523organizations1616entertainment2117visiting (and meals out)6454active leisure1822leisure travel2124television89132reading3531other2424total303343source: adapted from "television and leisure time: a new scenario." by john p. robinson inthe journal of communication. vol. 31. no. 1.the growth of television viewing has clearly affected other activities in thehome. since 1950, television has taken time away from sleeping, housework,reading, and conversations with friends (comstock, 1982). president reagan,someone quite familiar with the medium, observes that television substitutes forfacetoface visits:we watch a lot of television, seeking continuity and reassurance in the regularand predictable appearance of our favorite tv stars and programs. they visit usšas if they were a friend or relative coming by for the evening. tv isincreasingly becoming the american neighbor. (reagan, 1984)just as the automobile transformed the ways in which individuals andfamilies deal with distance, so television has profoundly changed their use oftime. we still do not understand the full personal and social implications of thisshift to television viewing in the past generation.technical improvements in televisiongiven the vast market that television represents, much technical andeconomic activity is directed toward expanding and improving it.information technologies in the home139information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1hours of tv usage per week by household characteristics, november 1983.source: a. c. nielsen company. 1984. nielsen report on television.northbrook, ill. reprinted with permission.twenty years ago, only 8 percent of u.s. households could receive nine ormore television stations, while today 61 percent can do so (a. c. nielsen,1984). cable television brings even more viewing options, including 24houraday channels devoted to movies, sports, news, weather reports, governmentevents, and contemporary music. many cable systems builtin the past fiveyears have the technical capacity to deliver 50 or more tv channels to thehome, but not yet enough programming to fill them.continuing technical development, along with deregulation of theelectromagnetic spectrum available for television, will make more channels oftelevision available to u.s. households via several distribution means:lowpower television (lptv) uses directional antennas to broadcastadditional television signals at conventional vhf and uhffrequencies without interfering with existing stations. although fewlptv stations are yet on the air, the federal communicationscommission (fcc) has awarded more than 200 licenses by lottery andcontinues to process the several thousand applications it has received.multichannel, multipoint distribution service (mmds) broadcasts atmicrowave frequencies previously reserved for instructional television.mmds services can bring at least eight new television channels tohomes in metropolitan areas. the fcc is also holding lotteries toaward mmds licenses.information technologies in the home140information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.direct broadcast satellite (dbs) could beam 12 or more televisionchannels to the home by the end of this decade. although some earlyentrants have withdrawn from the field, dbs service still holdspromise, especially for rural households that are not well served byconventional broadcast and cable television.fiber optic systems may in the 1990s overtake coaxial cable for videodistribution to the home. the wired video distribution networks of thetwentyfirst century probably will be switched, digital, and fiber optic.both the telephone and cable television industries are positioningthemselves to provide fiber optic systems in the future (baer, 1984).efforts are also under way to improve the image and sound quality oftelevision receivers:stereo sound reception is already available in topoftheline receivers.only a few tv stations are as yet broadcasting in stereo, but theindustry expects consumer demand to accelerate and to prove a boon totv set manufacturers. some tv programs will carry bilingual soundtracks instead of stereo.digital tv sets contain a few digital chips that replace several hundredanalog components. they might be more accurately termed"digitizing" tv sets, since they convert an analog tv signal to digital,process it digitally, and then reconvert it back to analog for display.digital sets improve image and sound quality by simplifying tv signalalignment, reducing ghosts and noise, and compensating for agingcomponents. the builtin digital circuitry should lower the cost ofteletext and videotex decoding, as well as provide new features such asfreezeframe and splitscreen viewing. already available in europe,digital tv sets will be on the market in the united states by early1985. many industry experts expect digital sets to capture the bulk ofthe television receiver market within a few years.component video systems separate the television display monitor andaudio speakers from the tuner and other picture and sound processingcomponents. component systems appeal primarily to seriousvideophiles who want better image and sound quality, particularlywhen playing videotapes and videodisks.highdefinition tv (hdtv) would replace the 525line ntscstandard, which has prevailed in north america since the 1940s, withimages containing 1,000 or more lines. at this resolution, theperceived image quality is about the same as that of 35mm film. inaddition to more lines, hdtv also will have a wider aspect ratio,multichannel sound, and a better technical method of transmitting thebrightness, color, and sound information within the available tvbandwidth. technical groups are now studying the issues surroundinghdtv and hope to reach agreement on international standards forhdtv systems. digital signal processing within the tv receiver canhelp deal with compatibility problems between hdtvinformation technologies in the home141information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and existing television standards. however, because digital signalprocessing can clean up lowerresolution images from existingstandards and make them look better to viewers, digital tv sets mayactually hold back the demand for hdtv.projection tv and other largescreen displays are improving in qualitybut remain limited in consumer appeal by the low resolution of ntsctelevision images. digital signal processing or highdefinition tv willmake largescreen display much more attractive to consumers. work onfiat panel displays is also progressing, although these new technologiesstill find it difficult to compete in cost with the venerable televisioncrt.consumer purchases of videocassette recorders (vcrs) have surpassedeven optimistic projections of a year ago. the installed base of home vcrs hasgrown from less than i million in 1979 to 9 million by the end of 1983. sales in1984 are up over 60 percent above 1983, with no signs of leveling off. theindustry estimates that 16 percent of u.s. households have vcrs now, andprojections are for 30 percent market penetration by 1986, and perhaps 50percent by 1990. consumers want vcrs both to record programming frombroadcast or cable tv for viewing at more convenient times and to playprerecorded tapes. the prerecorded tape rental business has grown as rapidly asvcr sales, giving vcr owners an even wider range of program choices. theimpact of vcrs on home activities is discussed below.videodisk players may make a comeback in the home, despite rca's wellpublicized exit from the business after losses of nearly $600 million. opticalvideodisk players offer better image and sound quality than vcrs or the cedvideodisks that rca marketed. the anticipated success of "compact"audiodisks using similar technology for highquality sound reproduction mayreawaken interest in optical videodisks as well. so, too, may the use of theoptical videodisk's interactive capabilities for games and, eventually,information retrieval. following their success in video arcades, severalcompanies are developing videodisk games for the home. still, videodiskplayers are likely to have a narrow appeal to affluent early adopters rather thanappealing to the mass home market.these technical developments in distribution systems, television receivers,vcrs, and videodisks continue the trend toward making more video channelsavailable in the home with technically better image and sound quality. thenumber and variety of available video programs also are increasing, althoughnot as rapidly as the channels for distributing them. opinions differ widely as towhether the quality of video programming available in the home has improved.survey data suggest that consumers perceive the new video technologies moreinformation technologies in the home142information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.positively than conventional television programming, which more respondentsthink has worsened rather than improved in the past year (table 6). however,the ratio of "worsened" to "improved" responses has changed from nearly 3 to 1in 1980 to about 3 to 2 in 1984. by comparison, the perceived change in cable/pay tv quality in 1984 is positive by more than a 3to1 ratio. consumerattitudes toward videotape recorders have remained much more positive thannegative over the past four years.new technologies' challenge to televisionother information technologies seek to challenge television for theindividual's leisure time. videogames have been the principal diversion,especially for children. videogames have been purchased by onequarter ofamerican households, or nearly 40 percent of all households with children. butenthusiasm for action videogames is declining, at least among adults whorespond to surveys (table 6). more people now think these games "make lifeworse" than "make life better," a reversal of attitude in the past two years.interest is turning away from videogameonly consoles to moresophisticated games played on home computers. they range from softwareversions of trivial pursuit to board games (scrabble, backgammon, chess) tointeractive fiction in which players create their owntable 6 consumer perceptions of home entertainment technologies, 1981œ1984percent responding1981198219831984quality of tv programmingšimproved19162227šworsened55544842quality of cable/pay tvšimprovedššš47šworsenedššš15videotape recordersšmake life better25221926šmake life worse9111010tv gamesšmake life better24221920šmake life worse12172324source: yankelovich, skelly, and white, inc. 1984. the yankelovich monitor. new york.reprinted with permission.information technologies in the home143information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.characters and participate in an adventure story (zork, witness). a recent bookon the psychological implications of computers describes how compellinginteractive fiction games can be for children and teenagers (turkle, 1984)šand,i suspect, for adults.up to now, electronic games in the home have been standalone unitsconnected to the television set or to the computer display. downloading gamesvia telephone, cable, or satellite is technically feasible and may proveeconomically attractive to consumers. several companies are now testing thecommercial prospects for downloaded games. games are also a prominentfeature of videotex and other interactive home information services. videotexgames are now played interactively between a player at home and the hostcomputer. however, technical advances in microprocessor hardware, software,and communications are proceeding to a point where multiplayer interactivegames may be offered commercially within the next two or three years. suchgames would link players in separate households via cable television or thetelephone network, with the host computer acting as referee. as robert luckyof at&t bell laboratories has suggested, videotex and communicationscompanies' new advertising theme may be "reach out and play someone"(lucky, 1984).videotex brings information on demand, including (for leisure activities)news, sports, and other features. it also enables subscribers to send messagesand chat electronically. electronic bulletin boards on such topics as moviereviews, recipes, and dating have proved very popular in videotex and otherhome information services around the country. videotex will not replace thetelephone for persontoperson communications or supplant newspapers andother print media for most information needs, but it seems likely to find a nicheamong media uses in the home.will any of these new, more interactive services displace televisionviewing? if they are to have significant impact on leisure activities, they musttake some time away from television. there is simply very little time in otherhome leisure categories to replace.social commentators often criticize television viewing as a passive, lowestcommondenominator activity. despite more program options and bettertechnical image quality, most intellectuals still consider television a "vastwasteland." they would like to see television viewing replaced by more activepursuits, such as learning, conversing with others, and even game playing. butthe critics' concerns are not really relevant here; individual preferences are thereal issue.prospects for displacing television with other activities are supportedinformation technologies in the home144information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.by studies showing that television provides relatively low consumersatisfaction. robinson reports the results of a 1975 survey in which respondentsrated various activities on a scale from 0 (dislike a great deal) to 10 (like a greatdeal):while the average score of 6.1 for tv viewing did fall on the positive side ofthe scale, it was well below the scores of almost all other free time activities....television was rated about the same as housework for women (but not formen) and well below work. (robinson, 1981)opinion surveys conducted over three decades show growing consumerdissatisfaction with television. half of a sample surveyed in 1980 agreed that"television seems to be getting worse all the time," compared to 24 percent in1960 (bower, forthcoming). these results are consistent with the yankelovichfindings shown in table 6. more consumers consistently say that the quality oftelevision programming has "worsened" than that it has "improved.''other media experts contend, however, that television precisely meets theneeds of tired individuals who seek relaxation at home. they want passive,undemanding entertainment during their evening leisure hours. watchingtelevision is habitual, russell neuman concludes after reviewing studies ofviewer behavior:the viewer plops down in front of the set, spins the dial, examines theprograms available, and selects the least objectionable. surveys repeatedlyconfirm that most viewers report "watching whatever is on." . . . close analysisof viewing behavior indicates there is almost no correlation between expressedpreferences and actual viewing behavior. (neuman, forthcoming)television may generate a low level of viewer enthusiasm, but it has a highlevel of acceptance.videogames may be displacing some television viewing time amongchildren, although the data are still quite sparse (greenfield, 1984). in one studyreviewed by greenfield, children watched less television after they receivedhome videogames. whether this change will persist after the novelty of thevideogame wears off is not really known.with the possible exception of videogames, there is no convincingevidence as yet about the mass entertainment appeal of other informationtechnologies and services. multiplayer interactive games have largely beenconfined to computer hackers and students with access to powerful mainframes.videotex may over time prove popular for leisuretime activities, as well as fortransactions and information gathering, but videotex will not be a mass marketservice for severalinformation technologies in the home145information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.years to come. in general, the most enthusiastic users of interactive services arelikely to be infrequent users of television. consequently, the burden of proofstill falls on those new activities that would displace the time individuals nowspend watching television.a separate but related question is the significance of the shift towardwatching videotapes rather than television. consumers use their vcrs to shiftviewing times to suit their convenience. time shifting of daytime soap operasfor evening viewing is a frequently cited example. some viewers even prefer torecord sports events for later replay. they must then avoid listening to theresults on the radio or reading them in a newspaper before watching their tape.viewers also like the choice of content available from tape rental stores. taperentals further fragment the viewing audience and contribute to the trend towardwatching less network programming.television advertisers already are concerned about vcr viewers who fastforward through commercial breaks. such ''zapping" is evidently widespread.an a. c. nielsen survey last fall found that 65 percent of vcr owners use theirfastforward button to zap commercials.* although one cannot extrapolate toofar from these data from relatively affluent households, zapping cuts to the heartof advertiser supported television in the united states. the impact could begreat as vcr ownership moves toward 50 percent of u.s. households.videotape and videodisk players also permit a form of "browsing" throughvideo materials that cannot be done with conventional television. viewers canspeed up or slow down a sequence, stop to watch a still frame, and go back totake another look at a sequence of particular interest. video browsing seemsconfined to a small number of serious videophiles today, but it could become aroutine way to watch video programming when vcr ownership becomeswidespread.the impact of information technologies onhome activitieshow information technologies will affect these four broad categories ofhome activitiesšworking, doing chores, learning, and relaxingšis* i recall one recent evening when a tv viewer pressed the fastforward button on hisvcr controller as a commercial appeared, and nothing happened! "you mean we'rewatching in real time?" he said with impatience and incredulity.information technologies in the home146information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summarized in table 7. up to now, technology has had a modest influence onworking at home. that may change, since computer and communicationstechnologies make it possible for more people to substitute working at home forworking in an office. for most workers, however, the substitution will be partialrather than complete. and it will be slow. information technologies have thepotential to transform work at home, but decisions by individuals andinstitutions seem likely to bring about far more modest changes in the nextdecade.households make relatively modest use of information technologiesšprincipally the telephonešfor doing chores. however, the trend seems clear forsignificantly increased use of microprocessor controls, home networks, andelectronic transaction services over the next decade. yet their longterm impacton household productivity or on the perceived quality of life may be quitemodest. these technologies primarily support the lifestyles of busy peopleseeking to minimize the time and toil of household chores. they do not changethe nature of these chores materially, nor do they elevate them to moresatisfying pursuits. rather, just as electricity and the telephone moved frombeing household luxuries to being necessities, so these newer informationtechnologies will gradually become integrated into routine home managementtasks.technology's impact on learning at home is much less clear. pastexperience with other educational technologies should make us skeptical aboutextravagant claims for the computer. but computers just might be different.some of the recent studies of kids and computers hint that, over the long term,computers might really bring about profound changes in learning. the field ismoving so rapidly that we have little notion of what state of the art learningsoftware will be even a few years from now, in either the school or the homeenvironment.television already has significantly influenced leisure time at home. thenew technologiesšcable, direct broadcast satellite, vcrs, interactive games,and videotexšwill not displace conventional tv. nevertheless, they seemlikely to fragment further the mass audience fortable 7 impact of information technologies on home activitieshome activitypresent impactlikely impact innext decadepotential longtermimpactworkingmodestmodestsignificantdoing choresmodestsignificantmodestlearningmodest?significantrelaxingsignificantsignificantsignificantinformation technologies in the home147information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.television and otherwise significantly affect leisuretime habits for a substantialnumber of people.these specific activities in the home raise broader questions of howinformation technologies may affect personal relationships, family structures,and the overall concept of the home itself. certainly information technologiesgive individuals more options as to what activities they can perform at home:a living communicating with others and relaxingthey encourage our efforts to customize our activities and our lifestyles.information technologies also expand our links with other people beyondthe physical limitations of home, city, and even nation. scientists and engineerswell recognize that our communities of interest extend throughout the unitedstates and into other countries. the telephone has been the principal technologypermitting us to build networks of colleagues and friends, largely independentof geography. we have established what melvin webber called "communitieswithout propinquity." computer networks available at home as well as in theoffice will enlarge the range and scope of these relationships, enabling us toshare common interests and experience.but technology, a neutral force, could also serve to isolate rather than tounite us. max frisch explains: "technology is the knack for organizing theworld so we don't have to experience it." as is often the case, novelists haveseen these issues long before technologists. seventyfive years ago e. m.forster gave us an apocalyptic vision of information technologies in the homein his short story "the machine stops":imagine, if you can, a small room, hexagonal in shape like the cell of a bee. itis lighted neither by window nor by lamp, yet it is filled with a softradiance . . .. an armchair is in the center, by its side, a reading deskšthat isall the furniture. and in the armchair there sits a swaddled lump of fleshšawoman, about five feet high, with a face as white as a fungus. it is to her thatthe little room belongs.there were buttons and switches everywherešbuttons to call for food, formusic, for clothing. there was the hot bath button, by pressure of which abasin of (imitation) marble rose out of the floor filled to the brim with a warmdeodorized liquid. there was the cold bath button. there was a button thatproduced literature. and there were, of course, the buttons by whichinformation technologies in the home148information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.she communicated with her friends. the room, although it contained nothing,was in touch with all that she cared for in the world. (forster, 1968)this is the nightmare of information technologies used not to enhanceexperience, but to avoid it. technology could be used to create wholly artificialenvironments and to substitute for human interaction. technology could reducethe electronic cottage to the electronic isolation booth.forster's nightmare stands diametrically opposed to orwell's nightmare,with which we are more familiar, of information technologies used by amalevolent government to spy on individuals in their homes. although it mightbe technically feasible for big brother to watch us at home via twowaytelevision, we have not chosen that direction. the orwellian nightmare ofinformation technology used to entrench despotic authority and stamp outindividual freedom does not seem a likely possibility today in the united statesor other democracies. we recognize that technology need not determine ourdestiny.perhaps we should pay more attention to the forsterian nightmare ofelectronic isolation, although it, too, does not seem a likely prospect. humansare still largely social beings. despite the solipsistic possibilities offered bytelevision, videogames, and electronic shopping at home, people like to be withpeople much of the time. americans believe that technology makes it easier, notmore difficult, to maintain close, personal contact with other people(yankelovich, skelly, and white, 1984). nevertheless, we must remain awareof the possibilities for misuse of information technologies as we seek to developand commercialize them.the key feature of information technologies in the home is that they givemore control to individuals. they permit us greater freedom to control whereand when we work, do chores, learn, play actively, and are entertained. theyoffer us more choices of materials in more convenient forms, for entertainmentand learning. they provide us with more flexibility in obtaining information,making transactions, and communicating with individuals and institutions. theymay even over time replace some passive television viewing with more activepursuits.of course, how these technologies will be used in the home and how thehome itself evolves depend far more on nontechnical than technical factors.technology largely supports ongoing changes in individual lifestyle choices,family structure, and the relationships among the home, the school, the office,and other societal institutions. it is probably not correct to say that informationtechnologies theminformation technologies in the home149information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.selves will transform the home environment. they are more responsive thancausal. they do, however, support distributed decision making more thancentralized authority, and they encourage some transfer of control fromentertainment producers to viewers, from bosses to workers, and frominstructors to learners. by empowering individuals' decisions at home,information technologies can enhance the functions of the home in aninformationrich society.referencesa. c. nielsen company. 1984. nielsen report on television. northbrook, ill.baer, walter s. 1984. telephone and cable companies: partners or rivals for video distribution? incompetition of video media, eli m. noam, ed. new york: columbia university press.bower, robert t. (forthcoming) the changing television audience in america. new york:columbia university press.chamot, d., and j. l. zalusky. the electronic sweatshop: the use and misuse of work stations inthe home. paper presented at national executive forum, national academy of sciences,washington d.c., november 9œ10, 1983.comstock, g. 1982. television and american social institutions. pp. 334œ348 in television andbehavior: ten years of scientific progress and implications for the eighties, vol. 2.rockville, md.: u.s. department of health and human services.cook, t. d., h. appleton, r. f. connor, a. shaffer, g. tomkin, and s. j. weber. 1975. sesamestreet revisited. new york: russell sage.cowan, r. s. 1983. more work for mother. new york: basic books.dorr, a., s. b. graves, and e. phelps. 1980. television literacy for young children. journal ofcommunication. vol. 30, p. 71œ83.forster, e. m. 1968. the machine stops. collected tales of e. m. forster. new york: the modernlibrary. first published in oxford and cambridge review, 1909.greenfield, p. m. 1984. mind and media. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.harkhess, r. c. 1977. technology assessment of telecommunication/transportation interactions.menlo park, calif.: stanford research institute.hayesroth, f. 1984. the machine as partner of the new professional. ieee spectrum, june:28œ31.holden, c. 1984. will home computers transform schools? science, july 20:296.johnston, d. 1984. a newsman's view of technology. ieee spectrum, june:112œ113.juster, f. t. (forthcoming) a note on recent changes in time use. in time, goods and well being,f. t. juster and f. p. stafford, eds. ann arbor, michigan: university of michigan, surveyresearch center.krier, b. a. 1984. futurists compute the influence of computing. los angeles times, september21:v1, v24.lucky, r. 1984. "entertain me": television's omnipresence. ieee spectrum, june:85œ89.market data retrieval. 1984. microcomputers in schools, 1983œ84: a comprehensive survey andanalysis. education week, september 5:l45.neuman, w. r. (forthcoming) the media habit. in electronic publishing plus, martin greenberger,ed. white plains, n.y.: knowledge industry publications, inc.nilles, j. m., f. r. carlson, p. gray, and g. j. hanneman. 1976. the telecommuniinformation technologies in the home150information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cationstransportation tradeoff: options for tomorrow. new york: wiley interscience.olson, m. h. 1983. remote office work: changing work patterns in space and time.communications of the acm, march: 182œ187.papert, s. 1980. mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. new york: basic books.reagan, r. 1984. remarks at the presentation ceremony, 1983 young american medals forbravery. presidential document. administration of ronald reagan, august 28.robinson, j. p. 1977. how americans use time. new york: praeger.robinson, j.p. 1981. television and leisure time: a new scenario. journal of communication,winter: 120œ130.roper, b. w. 1984. trends and attitudes toward television and other media: a twentyfour yearreview. new york: television information office.rubins, d. 1984. will the plug be pulled? reason, october:24œ32.shavelson, r. j., and j. d. winkler. 1984. realizing the potential of information technology inamerican education. miti journal, october.taylor, s., jr. 1983. court reinstates federal rules affecting industrial home work. new york times,november 30:a25.toffler, a. 1980. the third wave. new york: william morrow.turkle, s. 1984. the second self. new york: simon & schuster.wall street journal. 1984. no work place like home. february 23:23.williams, f. 1982. the communications revolution. beverly hills, calif. : sage publications.wolfgram, t. h. 1984. working at home. the futurist, june:31œ34.yankee group. 1984. yankeevision. boston, massachusetts, may:35œ37.yankelovich, skelly, and white, inc. 1984. the yankelovich monitor. new york.commentsroland w. schmittsenior vicepresident, corporate research and developmentgeneral electric companyi think walter baer's paper is an excellent overview and delineation of thisfield of information technologies in the home. it codifies and defines the termsof reference for discussion of this topic probably better than any i have seen inthe past. the issues he raises have two dimensions. he has highlighted one ofthese dimensionsšthat of working, doing chores, learning, relaxing. there isalso that other axis of issues that he discussedšthe question of how certain isthe likely future? when is it going to happen? what surprises are going to bethere? i want to dwell on a couple of topics pertaining to this second axis. first,however, let me say that one of the key observations that dr. baer has made isthat when you are looking at information technologies in the home, the keyparameter is not discretionary dollars, but discretionary minutes anddiscretionary hours. i think that is something you must keep in mind whentalking about this topic.i would like to deal with two issues. first, markets. you might say it is alittle dangerous for a technical person to deal with markets, but frankly, it is myexperience that the marketing people do such a poor job of dealing withinformation technologies in the home151information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hightechnology markets that i do not fear to tread on that ground. second, iwill make a few comments on what is known as userfriendliness.home information technology markets have some interestingcharacteristics. first, the user and the buyer of these technologies are really veryclosely linked. most often they are the same person. that is a little differentfrom the situation in a factory or office environment. a great number ofnoneconomic, nonfunctional considerations go into the reaction of theconsumer; things like taste, fashion, curiosityšmany of the factors that walterbaer commented onšare very important. therefore, i believe that thesemarkets are really very hard to predict, and they are especially hard tomastermind. there is a lot of buying one and buying it oncešthe hulahoopexample, if you like. consider the evolution of videogames. the first onesreally did not impress people very much, and most people dismissed them as aminor novelty. suddenly, videogames came of age, and all at once we werehearing sweeping statements about a pacman culture. we heard thatvideogames were the prototype of the industry of the future. you mayremember that phrase, not heard very often anymore, atari democrat. the popsociologists told us that the videogame was either saving or ruining our youth,depending on whom you listened to. i recall a widely publicized seminar, heldat harvard university, on the educational impact of videogames. rememberhow towns were slapping curfews on video arcades? look at it today. thearcades are going broke. those same prophets who were wrong on the twoprevious rounds are confidently predicting that the videogame is dead, and isuspect that they are just as wrong this time.another example is the videocassette recorder (vcr). there was a verylong period of latency before the vcr really hit its stride and became the majorindustry it is today. one of the big factors in that growth was the emergence ofa momandpop industry, the videotape leasing and renting industry. suppose,for a minute, that someone in a large corporation had been smart enough earlyon to have envisaged the whole synergistic system that would be required tomake the vcr industry boom. suppose they had seen the necessity ofestablishing a network of video rental outlets and had put the ideas andscheduling together in a business plan. the answer from the top would havebeen that the investment is too high and the payback is too long. it just wouldnot have gone. the present boom and growth has truly emerged, in my opinion,from the patient offering of a new technology, from experimenting with it outthere in the real market, depending on the vision, on the interest, on theentrepreneurship of a lot of people who are trying things, finding out whathappens, and finding out what combinations will work. given this background,i think we have to realize that as we go down the path of evolving informationtechnologies in the home, it is going to be a highly experimental path, one oftrial and error, and one where there are going to be a lot of contributions from alot of different people. therefore, again, i do not think that these markets willbe easily masterminded.i would now like to turn to the topic of userfriendliness. it is a phrase weinformation technologies in the home152information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hear time and time again, and to which we attach a lot of emphasis andimportance. frankly, i think we are doing a poor job of it today. i think wereally do not understand the full dimensions of what is needed for userfriendliness. we have heard much about home computers, and i share thefrustrations and experiences of everyone who has pushed a disk in and had thescreen read "disk read error," "error 11," or whatever else can happen. icontend that you can fix those things and still not be userfriendly by a widemargin. i believe that the key to widespread diffusion of the technologies thatwalter baer has been talking about is for us to get to a new level ofunderstanding and appreciation of what userfriendliness really means. frankly,i think that tvšlow enthusiasm but very high acceptancešis a good standardfor userfriendliness.i want to dramatize what i mean by userfriendliness. let me take theexample of the telephone. think for a minute what happens to you when youwant to make a call on the telephone to someone whose number you do notknow and whose number is not in that list of 30 numbers you can store in yourtelephone today. you pull out a big, thick volume that you have tucked away insome obscure spot to keep it from being unsightly, open it up, and run yourfinger down fine print to try to find the person you want. then, of course, thereis no space to lay the book near the telephone, so you balance it on your knee,hold one finger on the name, pick up the receiver, try to hold it to your ear anddial, and halfway through you drop the telephone book and receiver. i submitthat that is not userfriendly.i believe that we do have to get to a new level of understanding andcomprehension of userfriendliness in order to make many home technologiescome about. there are a number of technologies on the horizon that can help dothat, but the biggest gain will come if we perfect voice input and voicerecognition. if we move forward to a state where voice input is low cost andsophisticated, userfriendliness will be just around the corner.finally, i agree, by and large, with the assessments that walter baer hasmade. the only one that i would question is whether the impact of learning inthe home will be quite as large as he thinks it will be unless we solve theproblem of userfriendliness. moreover, i think that the technologies required toimprove userfriendliness are only now emerging and being developed. thesoftware related to such things as expert systems and artificial intelligencešifthey come along as dramatically as many of us expect them tošwillsignificantly improve our ability to build truly userfriendly products.information technologies in the home153information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computers and businesstheodore j. gordoncomputers and automation are so irrevocably entwined with business thatit is hard to imagine what business would be like without them. thesetechnologiesšcomputers and automationšare ubiquitous, expected, andnecessary, appearing in almost every facet of business enterprise: fromrecruitment through layoff, from raw material ordering through themanufacturing of products, from identifying sales prospects to order entry anddelivery, from competitive analysis to strategic optimization, and frominnovation to design applications of computers and automation. they permeatebusiness life, and in doing so have changed it for all time. yet there is more tocome, not only with respect to business applications of computers andautomation, but perhaps more importantly with respect to their impact onbusiness itself and on the people who run it.this is a vast and literally boundless topic, so some structure is necessaryif we are to discern even the highlights of prospective change. a threedimensional space serves as the organizing principle for this paper: businessfunctions comprise one axis; on another axis lie the technologies; and on thethird, the impacts. for convenience, i have divided business functions intomanagement, manufacturing, selling, planning, training, and professionalsupport. for technology i have defined three major facets: computer hardwareand software; programmable automation, which includes robotics; andtelecommunications. and in the third dimension, the impacts fall on threeelements of business: people, those who define and execute the intent ofbusiness;computers and business154information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.structure, the organization of the business enterprise; and selfconcept, the viewof what business is about and is capable of attaining.this structure leads to a set of interesting questions. for example, howwill future developments affect people in management? for this discussion ihave selected only a few of these intersections, on the basis of theirsignificance, the number of people affected, and the likelihood of thedevelopments in the next 10 to 15 years. this is certainly not a complete set,and it relies heavily on judgments about what is possible and about the complexprocesses of acceptance and response to new technologies. the changes wehave seen to date are staggeringly significant. what is coming, however, notonly extends the trends of the past but includes massive changes that, in theaggregate, will define the very nature of business and the relationships betweenthose who serve and are served by it.my approach will be to set the stage with a discussion of somecharacteristics of emerging technologies and then to describe some of thechanges that seem likely at four intersections in our threedimensional (businessfunction/technology/impact) space. the intersections and their respectivechanges are as follows: at the intersection of training, computers, and people, the discussioncenters on simulation as an aid to training; at the intersection of manufacturing, automation, and people, onfactory automation and robotics; at the intersection of selling, telecommunications, and structure, onretail electronic funds transfer (eft); and at the intersection of management, computer, and selfconcept, onmodeling in management decision making.some characteristics of emerging technologiesfirst, the stage setting. there are three principal hardware trends thatcharacterize electronic hardware today: reduction in cost, improvements inreliability, and increases in packing density (the number of components that canbe packed into a given volume). each of these characteristics of the technologyšcost, reliability, and densityšhas been changing by approximately a factor of100 each decade since 1960. studies by the futures group indicate that thesetrends can continue for another two decades or so. as limits are reached duringthis period, new technologies will offer potential for further breakthroughs. forexample, photolithography (the technology required for printing microcircuitson silicon) is limited at present by the distance between lines that can be drawnoptically. this, in turn, is fixed by the wavelength of light. once this limit isreached, conventionalcomputers and business155information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.photolithography impedes further progress toward miniaturization. however,just behind this conventional technology lies the possibility of using shorterwavelength energy in these processes; for example, electron beam or xrayimaging.in addition to these more or less continuous trends of improved reliability,reduced cost, and increased packing density, it is worth noting two otherdevelopments of significance; these are discontinuities that can significantlyaffect the application of electronics in the future. first, the same techniques thatare being used to produce very large scale integrated circuits are also beingapplied to the manufacture of small mechanical devices. for example, a massspectrometer, a device for determining the constituent elements of gases andother fluids, has been ''printed'' on a chip. this is more than simply printing theelectronics on a chip, as is commonplace in very large scale integrated circuitry.rather, the whole machinešvalves and allšis part of the printed apparatus.1an example of the future use of microsystems in industry is the potential forprocess instrumentation that floats with a stream of chemicals and telemetersprocess control data (rather than being pointfixed on the well of a pipe).another industrial example is temperature and pressure instrumentation builtinto a grinding wheel or cutting tool to control a feedback system that optimizesmetal removal rates, improves precision of manufacture, and extends tool life.in the office these micromechanical devices can be useful in constructingextremely small microphones for dictation, telephones, or security systems(also, micro eavesdropping bugs), or feedback instruments for chairs, printers,and personal, local air conditioning. with this technology, buildings can beinstrumented to detect incipient mechanical failures, and quiescentmanufactured products can telemeter their state of functioning or readiness inresponse to an external radio trigger signal. in short, micromechanics not onlywill permit replication of macromachines on a tiny scale but will stimulate theinnovation of entirely new applications that benefit from small size, low price,dispersion, and decentralization.the second development is the coming of agešprobably within the nextdecadešof artificial intelligence (ai), the simulation of human intelligence bycomputers. artificial intelligence requires the ability to sense, operate on sensedinformation, draw inferences from observations, and perform adaptively in viewof these inferences and changing circumstances. ai programs have two generalattributes: search and knowledge. search comes from "defining a space ofpossibilities large enough to contain the soughtfor solution," and "knowledge isnecessary to guide the search through the space."2computers and business156information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the initial entries in this field are expert systems that capture pragmatic ifthen rules of analysis followed by human experts in a given field. examples ofexpert systems that are functional or in development abound. medicaldiagnostics, personal financial services, geological exploration, legal strategy,and software design are some examples. in these fields and in others yet tocome, computers will produce practical and functional answers to real problemsbetter than answers that could be produced by a random sample of professionals.when expert systems can learn from experience, the decision rulesincorporated in the knowledge portion of the program can be much moreextensive, and a transition will have occurred from programs that merelyemulate the behavior of experts to creative artificial intelligence routines. theseroutines will arrive at answers better than those that might be created by mosthuman experts. this will not happen tomorrow, but it is reasonable to expectselflearning systems to be in operation within 15 years.this image of the growth of electronics and its applications and spinoffsdepends, of course, on the market. given demand, the capability of electronicsand all of its derivatives grows; without demand, nascent applications wither.business fosters demand both by offering new products to consumers and bybecoming a consumer itself. in either mode business touches and is touched bythese technologies and thus is changed, not only in how it does business, but inwhat it believes business to be. let us turn now to some intersections in thethreedimensional space discussed earlier.intersection: training, computers, peoplesimulation as an aid to trainingtake as a starting point highdensity tv (in the more distant future,perhaps holographic tv) driven by rapidly accessed videodisks, excellent andsensitive computer simulation programs, and much more effective inputoutputsystems. put them together and imagine a workertraining system 10 to 15 yearshence. the key here is softwarešsuperb simulation techniques that permit thecreation of accurate environments that stress the student and promote learning.with such software, the emphasis in education switches from teaching tolearning. pilot training serves as a current example. in the future, decreasingequipment costs, better software, and realistic inputoutput systems mean thatapplications will be far less monumental and will certainly be applied inbusiness for training of production workers, managers, salespeople,computers and business157information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.repairmen, and anyone likely to benefit from the stress of practice. simulationin the context used here means that the user determines the plot of an unfoldingstory through his or her decisions. this is computer game playing carried to itslogical end. in schools you can be with napoleon or serve as a lieutenant towashington. in leisure at home, tv becomes active rather than passivešhereyou can be with cleopatra or j. r. ewing. in the workplace you can direct fieldoperations to put out oil well fires, or learn, as a potential manager, how it feelsto deal with labor grievances and the chess game of a strike.consequencespersonnel training and education will be substantially changed, withcompetitive advantage falling to the best corporate simulators. imagine the newcase study approach in management education: "have you played continentalillinois yet?" grading of personnel in corporations may be according to theirsuccesses or failures in simulations. imaginešin awed tonesš"he madecontinental survive." perhaps boredom will become a problem when the gameenvironment makes the adrenaline flow more easily than reality does.new products and markets will be built around interactive on the jobexperience. when the simulation tools are very good they will also serve asdecisionaiding tools. for the repairman not quite sure about which wire toconnect, a quick run on the simulator will show the consequences of connectingthe wireša working machine or a blown fuse. the analogous situation formanagement dilemmas is obvious.intersection: manufacturing, automation,peoplefactory automation and roboticswhen computers were first introduced, there was a great deal of concernthat unemployment would result. in fact this was not the casešwherevercomputers were used, more jobs were created. common wisdom holds that thissituation will always continue, but it might not be so. factory automation islikely to advance so far beyond current capabilities that the net effect ofintroducing such new technologies may be to improve total output with lesslabor required in both a relative and an absolute sense. i will explore thepotential for such technologyinduced unemployment in this section.artificial intelligence will allow machines to perform cognitivecomputers and business158information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.functions; robotics will move from specialized to generalpurpose applications.recent studies at the futures group have resulted in projections of robottechnology that illustrate the enormous potential for this field. as table 1shows, robotic accuracy, repeatability, mean time between failures, time torepair, and speed are expected to increase significantlyšmore than an order ofmagnitude in most casesšin the next 15 years.table 1 forecasts of robot technologystate of the artfeature19832000accuracy ofmanipulation(electric)0.02 inches0.001 inches(hydraulic)0.2 inches0.020 inchesrepeatability ofplacement(electric)0.005 inches0.001 inches(hydraulic)0.050 inches0.010 inchesmean time betweenfailures1,000 hours5,000 hoursfault detection andrepairmostly humanmostly selfcheckspeed for standardpattern4 seconds1 secondprogrammingexternalexternal andselftaughtsensingšvisualsilhouette3dimensionalmemory capacityand typemagnetic mediavastly expandedmagnetic andoptical mediainformationprocessingsequentialarchitectureparallel architecturesource: the futures group.within the next decade or so we also can expect to see very simple meansfor programming robots and, with the advent of artificial intelligence, robotsthat learn through experience. for example, a robot could be adaptivelyprogrammed to change its positioning or sequence in order to minimizerejection rates.a distinguishing feature of robots is their versatilityštheir ability to beused in a multiplicity of applications. in the future, robots will become moregeneralpurpose, in the sense that their implements can be utilized in a varietyof jobs without much cost penalty. vision and sensing will improve to makethreedimensional perceptions commonplace.the number of robots to be employed in the future is not certain by anymeans, but large increases seem likely. the number of robots in manufacturingquadrupled between 1979 and 1981.3 forces encouraging growth includecomputers and business159information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. improvements in the technology itself, which increase the number ofapplications possible with these machines; diminishing costs for given robotic capability as a result of learningcurve improvements: human labor; and growing sophistication on the part of management, facilitating theswitch to robotics.on the negative side, factors that limit the speed of diffusion of thistechnology include size of the required investment, institutional inertia that slows the adoption of automated technologies,and current equipment.now the question is: will progress in robotics and factory automation ingeneral create jobs or eliminate them? the answer is, of course, it will do both.at constant levels of output it will eliminate jobs, because the robots willperform jobs that human workers currently perform, and automation, properlyapplied, will improve productivity through increasing output per manhour.some people argue that as automation progresses more people will be requiredto produce the machines and that as people are freed from dull, repetitive,boring, and sometimes dangerous activities, unemployment will not diminishbut, in parkinsonian response, the scope of work and perhaps its quality willincrease to occupy the new capacity for work. while this has generally been thecase in the past, robotics and the new wave of automation have some newattributes. they promise to be very good, very cheap, and untiring. they canyield manufacturing quality higher than that produced by their humancounterparts. instructing these machines (programming) will be efficient and,through ai, they will be adaptive; thus as creative as the initial programmingmay be, the machines will progress and learn to do even better. the machineswill selfdiagnose, learn of impending internal failures through "introspection,"andšwhen necessaryšselfrepair, to a small extent initially and to a majorextent later. more than that, when programmed to do so, they can selfreplicate.just how many jobs will be displaced by continuing factory automationand robotics? the situation is summarized in table 2. we have created ascenario with several critical assumptions. the u.s. department of laborexpects the labor force to grow from its present level of 110 million to about134 million by the year 2000.4 we assume that real productivity grows at about1.5 percent per year as a resultcomputers and business160information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2 employment scenario: 1982œ2000yearlaborforce(millionsofpeople)grossnationalproduct(billionsof 1984dollars)productivity(dollars ofgnp/employee,inthousands)requiredemployment(millions ofpeople)number ofrobots(thousands)personequivalentof eachrobotdisplacedemployment(millions ofpeople)netrequiredemployment(millions ofpeople)surpluslaborforce(millionsofpeople)percentunemployed19821103,05930.90*99520.019911.0110.0119833,14231.3610019843,22631.8310119851153,31432.311033020.0610212.5110.8819863,40332.8010419873,49533.2910519883,58933.7910619893,68634.2910719901223,78634.8110910030.3010813.5411.1019913,88835.3311019923,99335.8611119934,10136.4011319944,21136.9411419951274,32537.5011525041.0011412.669.9719964,44238.0611719974,56238.6311819984,68539.2111919994,81139.8012120001344,94140.4012250052.5012014.1810.58note: assumptions: gnp growth rate, 2.70 percent; productivity growth, 1.50 percent.* 1982 productivity figure calculated based on total employment of 99 million people.source: the futures group.computers and business161information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of automation and that real gross national product (gnp) grows at 2.7percent per year. furthermore, the number of robots is assumed to grow from acurrently installed base of about 5,000 to 500,000 by the turn of the century. wesuppose, further, that the effectiveness of each robot also grows; today a robotis equivalent to about two persons, and we have assumed that by the turn of thecentury a robot can replace five workers. with these assumptions, as table 2shows, the contribution of robots is relatively minor. only about 2 percent ofthe labor force expected in the year 2000 will be displaced by robotics.while the picture presented in table 2 is a homogeneous representation ofthe labor force as a whole, certain industries will be more affected by roboticsthan others. in general, these are industries in which mechanization ofproduction yields lower cost, higher quality, diminished production time,improved efficiency, or improved worker safety. in these industries, the impactof robotics on job displacement will be considerable. for example, theproduction of passenger automobiles has involved a labor force of about270,000 over the last seven years. on average, this labor force produced about30 automobiles per employee, while production during this interval varied from6.2 million to 9.2 million units per year. now, assume that the number ofindividuals available for passenger automobile production grows at the samerate as the labor force as a whole. the employees required, however, areaffected by level of production of automobiles and by improvements inproductivity resulting from factory automation and the introduction of robots. ifwe assume (1) that production grows at 3 percent a year (so that by the year2000 more than 10 million units are manufactured in the united states), (2) thatproductivity grows at 1.5 percent per year (as previously assumed), and (3) thatthe number of robots used by the industry grows from 5,000 in 1985 to 25,000in the year 2000, less than half of those who might ordinarily have beenassumed to be available for employment in this industry will be required. amajor public policy concern, of course, is that those displaced may be the leastable to find new employment. whether this is a barrier to the spread of factoryautomation depends on many factors, such as the job security provisions oflabor contracts in affected industries and the state of the economy. my guess,however, is that robotics and programmable automation will spread rapidly asthe return on investment in such systems grows.consequencesthere is likely to be a growing emphasis on the job security issue andretraining in industries likely to experience displacement. also,computers and business162information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there may be the return to the united states of some jobs previously locatedoutside the country to take advantage of lowcost automated production.product quality will improve and a new class of employmentšsuch as the bluecollar programmeršwill emerge. factory automation and robotics willconstitute a new technological frontier on which the battles for internationalmarkets will be fought, since the products these technologies yield will be oflower price, higher quality, and more predictable performance.intersection: selling, telecommunications,structureretail electronic funds transfer (eft)there is an unusual and, to some extent, unexpected confluence oftechnological and consumer trends that may affect the retailing environment inthe immediate future. i believe that automated debit purchasing may come onthe scene faster than many people expect. here are some of the factors that leadto this position: automatic teller machines (atms) have spread (47,000 units in placein 1983) and have become much more widely accepted by consumers.5 the principal use of atms has been to withdraw cash from personalaccounts. many retail establishments are considering or are installing atms ontheir premisesšsmall bank branchesšin order to provide a means fortheir customers to obtain cash in their stores. the communication networks required to support the atms and thesoftware necessary to properly debit accounts exist and are proven.it takes only a small step of imagination to move the atm into the cashregister so that at time of purchase consumers can simply insert the atm cardinto the proper slot, punch in their personal identification number, and becharged for the purchase directly, just as if they had gone to the atm andwithdrawn cash. in this view, there will be no such thing as a special debit card.the bankissued atm card takes its place and the era of electronic fundtransfers at the retail level will have come on the scene smoothly, withminimum fanfare, and with relatively high consumer acceptance. more than justa convenience to shoppers, this is a crucial and catalytic step to a society that,while not cashless, certainly functions with much less cash.an important byproduct of this development for business will be theavailability of really exquisite information about who buys what, where, andwhenšthe basis for a potential revolution in marketing research. where willthis trend surface first? probably in supermarketscomputers and business163information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and gas stations. it then spreads in the retail environment wherever populationdensity and purchase traffic are high enough to warrant the investment. then itmay spread to vending machines of this new era. these vending machines willbe operated by coins as well as by atm cards. what better way could be foundto reduce store theft? the image for these vending machines will be upscale,and i would guess that these machines will typically carry much highervalueitems than do machines of today. one feature of these machines that will makethem unique is their ability to be easily programmed to offer a wide variety ofmerchandise (sweaters, socks, small electric appliances, stationery). in this waythe machines can be generic, and the price can be set for whatever merchandisethe retailer wants to sell.consequencesthe rate of growth in the number of checks written and processed will begreatly reduced, as will the amount of mail. there will be a major new role forsecure telecommunications networks, and today's credit cards will betransformed into their debitcredit equivalent. once the networks have linkedconsumers with their accounts at points of sale, whole markets can goelectronic, allowing buyers and sellers to meet electronically, and bid andauction until deals are made remotely. it seems to me that this kind of market,based on network connections, could be very well suited to real estate, taxshelters, and any other highvalue transaction in which "feeling themerchandise" is not essential.intersection: management, computer, selfconceptmodeling in management decision makingthe goals of a business are, by and large, determined by what managementbelieves is feasible at acceptable levels of investment and risk. theseperceptions are, in turn, informed by data available to management about theircustomers, about competing business, and about the environment in which theyoperate. the sensory capacity of the business to determine what is happeningaround it has improved and will continue to improve. beyond this, the ability todistill nuggets of pertinent information out of such data enhances not onlydecision making capacity but the goals on which such decisions are based. thesecret here is not knowledge about customers, competitors, and the environmentšreal knowledge about such matters is restricted to thecomputers and business164information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pastšbut rather the quantification of uncertainty and risk. new analytictechniques will facilitate the introduction of uncertainty into decision processes,and from the beginnings that are already in place today, corporate actions willbe weighed not only on the basis of expected return but on levels of acceptablerisk.here is an example. suppose that a forecast of demand for an existingproduct has just been made. using probabilistic tools, the forecast recognizesirresolvable uncertainties: the potential entry of competitors, the emergence of anew technology that could overtake the product, the potential for a fad thatcould spark unprecedented demand. such factors produce two scenarios for thefuture. suppose further that the first scenario requires building a new plant andthe second does not. has quantification of the level of uncertainty helped makethe decision about the plant? of course. one could reason as follows. case 1: ibelieve the first scenario and build a plant, but the second scenario occurs. case2: i believe the second scenario and do not build the plant, but the first scenariooccurs. clearly one situation is better than the other, and even in this simpleexample of risk analysis, quantification of uncertainty helped resolve the issue.for risk analysis to become very accurate and helpful, models must improveand be trusted by managers, and data about environmental factors, competition,and customers must be collected regularly. all of these developments arehappening and will accelerate.consequencesthe use of corporate intelligence gathering, not as espionage but as aroutine and accepted business function, will increase. decision making willbecome explicitly riskconscious, and decisions will be evaluated not in termsof return on investment (rod but in terms of roi probability distributions.intuition and the "gut call" will remain, of course, but in a probabilistic contextšsome highrisk opportunities will be seen as worth taking, while some lowerrisk options will be judged not worth it. for better or for worse, probabilisticmethods will make decision making more explicit and management more selfconscious and more accountable for its performance.conclusionthis has inevitably been a very rapid tour of some of the more importantintersections in the functionštechnologyšimpact space, but several more cellsdeserve some mention.computers and business165information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computeraided design and computeraided manufacture (cad/cam). the design shop and the shop floor are being modified infunction and form to capture the advantages of efficiency, quality, andaccuracy afforded by the new technology. cad/cam went from a $1million industry in 1973 to $1.2 billion in 1983. it is expected to growby a factor of 10 between 1985 and 1995.electronic mail. imagine an electronic typewriter that is likely to be onthe market in 5 years or so. it has a matrix printer, memory for severallines, builtin word processing, builtin spelling correction, and severalother easytoaccomplish software features. this typewriter is sold notas an office word processor or computer peripheral, but simply as aconsumeroriented portable. its price is less than $100, and it is astandard gift to high school graduates about to leave for college. it isnot difficult to imagine the sale of several million of these devices,perhaps several scores of millions, within the next 10 years. with amodem chip these machines can be plugged into standard telephonejacks. electronic mail, for better or worse, will have arrived overnight.group decision making. automated voting machines currently exist(e.g., the consensor) that permit participants in a meeting toprovide judgments in response to questions posed by a monitor. insome of these machines, an individual's input can be weighted on thebasis of expertise or knowledge. with improved expert systems andartificial intelligence, group interactions can be computeraugmented.individual weights can be set by experience or testing, and the groupitself can be integrated with expert systems and judgments drawnparticularly against the profile of issues being addressed. also, ofcourse, online data can be called up if necessary to providebackground for the group as a whole. these techniques tend to subduethe normal psychological problems that accompany group interactionsand to promote smoother, more precise, and probably more accuratedecision making. the consequence will be that teams, even teamscomposed of individuals located at remote places, become moreimportant, at the expense of the individual.the way business does its work is being profoundly and permanentlychanged. on the factory floor it is being changed by numerically controlledmachines, analog and digital sensing devices, automated testing gear, designsystems, materialhandling systems, inventory control systems, and automatedstockrooms. in the office changes are being driven by electronic filing,automated scheduling of meetings, direct access to information, wordprocessing, and, soon, idea processing. the computer affects almost every joband every worker. the nature of the jobs, where they are done, the way they areaccomplished, the expectations of job supervision, and the skills required toperform the tasks are all changing. additionally, thecomputers and business166information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information available for doing tasks and the precision and timeliness withwhich they can be done are changing.granted business processes are changing, but is business itself changing?after all, business takes raw materials, adds value, and sells products. at thislevel, is anything likely to be different? early critics of computersšcomputersusing cards that warned against folding, mutilating, or spindlingšwereconcerned about the way that computers would regiment and standardize us all,force us into providing rigid inputs that computers could understand. now it isclear that computers provide the ability to manipulate and track information,and a variety of individual needs can be easily accommodated. computers donot standardize; they promote diversity. we are coming closer to the time whenthe user can design the product and when, in sensitive and highquality workenvironments, the worker can change his or her environment and utilize anarray of information that makes that person's contribution unique. through thecomputer, business gains diversity.business may also gain responsibilities. the prescription to take rawmaterials, add value, and sell products may be too simple for a future age. forall of its elegance, accomplishments, and promise, the computer can causehuman obsolescence, displacement of workers, and unemployment. the rolethat business will have in accommodating these discontinuities is ideological aswell as economic, and it is far from clear how that role will evolve. somewherein this chaotic, complex, and uncertain mix lies business of the future.notes1. j. b. angell, s.c. terry, and p. w. barth. 1983. silicon micromechanical devices. scientificamerican, april:44œ55.2. committee on science, engineering. and public policy; national academy of sciences;national academy of engineering, and institute of medicine. cognitive science and artificialintelligence. in research briefings 1983. washington, d.c.: national academy press, p. 25.3. s. a. levitan, and c. m. johnson. 1982. future of work: does it belong to us or to the robots.monthly labor review, vol. 105:10œ14.4. h. n. fullerton. 1980. the 1995 labor force: a first look. monthly labor review, vol. 103,no. 12:11œ21.5. r. m. garsson. 1983. fast growing atms are now as ubiquitous as xerox machinesšgeorgia firm aims new computer at bank calling officers. american banker, december 21,1983:8ff.computers and business167information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commentsruth m. davispresidentthe pymatuning groupin spite of the scope of the papers presented here i still do not have the bigpicture of how information technology is going to affect us. in fact, i believethat i am fortunate in not understanding it; i may embody the discontinuity thatis going to allow technology and people to get along together. like everyoneelse, i need more time to adapt than advancing technology normally permits.admission of the need to gradually make the necessary moves to adapt and tolearn how to use this technology is going to be the key to its success.ted gordon has offered some superb insights into one of the arenas wherethis technology is making the greatest change. it is interesting, though, thatbehind this facade of change there are some very subtle inferences. forexample, as we have heard, it is very easy for managers to believe they aremaking changes in a company without actually doing anything. theymanipulate the information, talk about it, tell people, simulate it, and generateinteraction; they do this without making a single change in the company. wecan all generate a tremendous number of information activities without any realactivity in the marketplace. the result can be a different version of ''much adoabout nothing''šthat is, "much ado with nothing." i think we have to be terriblycareful that we do not jump from what we know how to došto work where wecan see results in real timešto manipulating results faster than real time interms of people's abilities to react.one of the most interesting points that emerges from the combination ofwalter baer's and ted gordon's papers is the blurring of the differentiation,which i have always been uncomfortable with, between work and leisure. thatdifferentiation is rapidly disappearing. many times i would rather sit at acomputer at home and play with a simulator than sit on the patio and smackmosquitoes. there will be many instances when the kind of work that we did inthe past is going to be replaced by fun because of the manner in which the resultis attained. if we cannot differentiate between leisure and working, however, wewill really have to adjust to a tremendous change in the near future. from theanticipated confusion will evolve the real world of tomorrow. i think the papersin this volume give you all the background that you need to determine your rolein the mixed marketplace and the mixed business/ leisure world of the future.much has been said here about information technology and business; tedgordon has helped focus this picture. i commend to you his concept that willlead you through the spectrum of technology in business, from the board ofdirectors on one side of the marketplace to the consumer on the other side. youcan use it in your own business to see where lies the real power forcomputers and business168information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.change. it has been difficult to bring technology to play in the boardroom and todetermine what companies should do to improve their market position andproducts. it is also very difficult to simulate a marketplace and the effects ofpolicy decisions. i can tell when i have crashed my simulated airplane into asimulated sears tower, but i cannot tell when i am making a bad prediction inthe boardroom.it is also important to consider young consumers, those individuals on theother side of the marketplace from the boardroom. we really cannot predicttheir behavior even though they are already consumers of informationtechnology. at three or four years of age they use their terminals and watchvideo, cutting out commercials and listening only to what they want. as thoseyoung consumers, who are now making the process of learning and buyingcontinuous, grow older, they are going to be utilizing information technology tolead them to many decisions immediately, and they are going to grab hold ofthe marketplace and swing it around like a child swinging a lion by the tail. fora long time we have had a more homogeneous consumer group that the sellingside of the marketplace could manipulate: a group that ranged from the age of15 to the age of 60. the information technology that you have heard about is thetechnology of the individual, and it will result in dramatic changes in theconsumer marketplace that will, in turn, force changes in business.computers and business169information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computers and business170information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.about the authorswalter s. baer is director of advanced technology at the timesmirror company, los angeles, california. prior to joining times mirror in1981, he was director of the energy policy program at the rand corporation insanta monica, california. he has published widely in the fields of energy,telecommunications, and science and technology policy. his book cabletelevision: a handbook for decision making received a 1975 preceptor awardfrom the broadcast industry conference. before joining rand dr. baer servedon the staff of the office of science and technology in the executive office ofthe president and as a white house fellow with vicepresident huberthumphrey. dr. baer holds a b.s. degree from the california institute oftechnology and a ph.d. degree in physics from the university of wisconsin.he is currently a member of the faculty of the rand graduate institute.anne wells branscomb is a lawyer specializing incommunications law, a fellow of the gannett center for the study of the mediaat columbia university, and a recent chairman of the communications lawdivision of the american bar association science and technology section.mrs. branscomb serves on the steering committee of the annenberg scholarsprogram of the annenberg school of communications at usc and on theadvisory committee of the communications law program of ucla. she is acontributing editor of the information society and the journal ofcommunication, and a trustee of the rensselaer polytechnic institute. she iscurrently writing a book, teletribes and telecommunities, on the social andpolitical impact of communications technologies and is editor of toward a lawof global about the authors171information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications networks. she is a member of the commission on freedomand equality of access to information. mrs. branscomb is an honor graduate ofthe george washington university law school and holds degrees in politicalscience from harvard university and the university of north carolina.harlan cleveland is dean of the university of minnesota's huberth. humphrey institute of public affairs, and professor of public affairs; he hasbeen at minnesota since august 1980. a princeton university graduate, he wasa rhodes scholar at oxford university in the late 1930s; an economic warfarespecialist in washington, d.c., and united nations relief administrator in italyand china in the 1940s; and a foreign aid manager, magazine editor andpublisher, and dean of the maxwell school of citizenship and public affairs atsyracuse university in the 1950s. mr. cleveland served as assistant secretaryof state for international organization affairs in the administration of presidentjohn f. kennedy, and as u.s. ambassador to nato under president lyndon b.johnson. from 1969 to 1974 he was the president of the university of hawaii,and from 1974 to 1980 he was director of the program in international affairsof the aspen institute for humanistic studies. he is author or editor of 13books. his latest book, from which his paper for this volume is derived, is theknowledge executive: leadership in an information society (new york: e. p.dutton, 1985).theodore j. gordon is president of the futures group, which hefounded in 1971. the futures group is a management consulting firm in thefields of planning, futures research, policy analysis, and project implementation.he has been associated with futures research and policy analysis for manyyears, and has made substantive and methodological contributions to bothfields. he is one of the innovators or coinnovators of several methods offorecasting, including crossimpact analysis, trend impact analysis, andprobabilistic system dynamics. mr. gordon helped establish the institute for thefuture, where he served as vicepresident and senior research fellow prior to1971. before joining the institute, mr. gordon directed engineering programs atthe mcdonnelldouglas astronautics company, serving variously over 16years as chief engineer of the saturn program, test conductor for the thor andthorlaunch systems, and director of advanced space systems and launchvehicles. mr. gordon earned a b.s. in aerodynamics from louisiana stateuniversity and an m.s. in aerodynamics from the georgia institute oftechnology.about the authors172information technologies and social transformationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.melvin kranzberg is the callaway professor of the history oftechnology at georgia institute of technology. he is the principal founder ofthe society for the history of technology; edited its quarterly journal,technology and culture, from 1959 to 1981; and became president of thesociety in 1983. dr. kranzberg was one of the original members of the historyadvisory committee of the national aeronautics and space administration,serving as its chairman from 1966 to 1969; in 1984 he was reappointedchairman of that committee and made a member of the nasa advisorycouncil. in 1979œ1980 dr. kranzberg was national president of sigma xi, thehonorary scientific research society. professor kranzberg received his a.b.from amherst college, and his m.a. and ph.d. from harvard university.john s. mayo is executive vicepresident, network systems at at&tbell laboratories in murray hill, new jersey. since joining bell laboratoriesin 1955, dr. mayo has been director of the oceans systems laboratory,executive director of the ocean systems division, executive director of the tollelectronic switching division, and vicepresident of electronics technology.he assumed his present position in may 1979. dr. mayo received his b.s.,m.s., and ph.d. degrees in electrical engineering from north carolina stateuniversity. he was elected to the national academy of engineering in 1979.about the authors173