detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/1816mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enablingtechnologies into neuroscience research180 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309044974 | doi 10.17226/1816constance m. pechura and joseph b. martin, editors; committee on a nationalneural circuitry database, division of health sciences policy, division ofbiobehavioral sciences and mental disordersmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mappingmappingmappingmapping   thethethethe   brainbrainbrainbrain   andandandanditsitsitsits   functionsfunctionsfunctionsfunctionsintegrating enabling technologies into neuroscienceresearchconstance m. pechura and joseph b. martin, editorscommittee on a national neural circuitry databasedivision of health sciences policydivision of biobehavioral sciences and mental disordersinstitute of medicinenational academy presswashington, d.c.1991imapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the institute of medicine was chartered in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to enlistdistinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. in this, the institute acts under both the academy's 1863 congressional charter responsibility to be an advisor to the federal government and its own initiative inidentifying issues of medical care, research, and education.the work on which this publication is based was performed pursuant to contract no.27889003 with the national institute of mental health, public health service, department ofhealth and human services. funds for this contract were provided by the national institute of mental health, the national institute of drug abuse, and the national science foundation (under nsfagreement no. bns8913554).library of congress cataloginginpublication datainstitute of medicine (u.s.). committee on a national neural circuitry database.mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscienceresearch / committee on a national neural circuitry database, division of health sciences policy, division of biobehavioral sciences and mental health, institute ofmedicine; constance m. pechura and joseph d. martin, editors.p. cm. š (publication ; no. iom9108)includes bibliographical references and index.isbn 03090449791. brainšresearchšdata processingšcongresses. 2. brain mappingšcongresses. i.pechura, constance m. ii. martin, joseph b., 1938 . iii. title. iv. series: iom publication ; 91œ08.[dnlm: 1. brainšphysiology. 2. brain mapping. 3. medical informatics. 4. neurosciences. 5. research. wl 335 i59m]qp376.i516 1991612.8'2šdc20dnlm/dlcfor library of congress 914832cipcopyright © 1991 by the national academy of sciencesno part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for public or private use, without written permission from the publisher,except for the purpose of official use by the united states government.printed in the united states of americathe serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all culturesand religions since the beginning of recorded history. the image adopted as a logotype by the institute of medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient greece, now held by the staatlichemuseenin berlin.iimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on a national neural circuitry databasejoseph b. martin (chair),* dean, school of medicine, university ofcalifornia, san franciscokaren j. berkley, mckenzie professor, department of psychology,florida state university, tallahasseevinton cerf, vice president, corporation for national research initiatives,reston, virginiaw. maxwell cowan,ƒ vice president and chief scientific officer, howard hughes medical institute, bethesda, marylandjerome r. cox,* welge professor and chairman, department of computerscience, washington university, st. louis, missourijoseph t. coyle,* distinguished service professor of child psychiatry,director, division of child psychiatry, professor of psychiatry,neuroscience, pharmacology, and pediatrics, johns hopkins universityschool of medicine, baltimore, marylandrhetaugh g. dumas,* dean and professor, university of michiganschool of nursing, ann arborjon h. kaas, centennial professor of psychology, vanderbilt university,nashville, tennesseejames kajiya, associate professor of computer science, department ofcomputer science, california institute of technology, pasadenarichard lucier, director, laboratory for applied research in academicinformation, welch medical library, johns hopkins university, baltimore,marylandmarcus e. raichle, professor of neurology, washington universityschool of medicine, st. louis, missourigordon m. shepherd, professor of neuroanatomy, yale universityschool of medicine, new haven, connecticutdiane c.p. smith, chief scientist, xerox advanced informationtechnology, xerox corporation, cambridge, massachusettslarry w. swanson, professor of biological sciences and psychology, university of southern california, los angelesdavid van essen, professor of neurobiology, division of biology,california institute of technology, pasadenadonald j. woodward, professor of cell biology and neuroscience, university of texas health science center at dallasiiimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institute of medicine staffruth ellen bulger, director, division of health sciences policyconstance m. pechura, study directorcharles e. vela, staff officer⁄elizabeth e. meyer, research associateshelley a. myers, project assistantapril e. powers, project assistant* member, institute of medicine.ƒ member, institute of medicine and national academy of sciences.⁄ from september 1989 to may 1990.ivmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe committee on a national neural circuitry database was convened inoctober 1989 to formulate a position concerning the feasibility and utility ofincorporating computer technology into the basic and clinical neurosciences inorder to enhance research progress. the committee was comprised of expertsfrom the fields of neuroscience and computer and information sciences. eachgroup was, in general, unaccustomed to the other area of endeavor, andconsiderable effort was required in the beginning to identify the problemsconfronting neuroscience and to learn more about the electronic and digitalapplications that might be relevant. to carry the analysis forward, thecommittee commissioned four task forces to examine the issues in more detail,organized three symposia and open hearings, and sought advice and counselfrom leaders of the neuroscience community and from those with experience indatabase development and computer systems design. this report summarizesthe committee's findings and offers advice regarding the opportunity to facilitateneuroscience research and to maximize the benefits of that research.it was not altogether clear at the outset of the study how therecommendations would unfold. several members of the committee wereskeptical that the time was ripe to apply new technologies to the gathering anddissemination of neuroscience data. the enthusiasm that emerges in the reportfor new approaches to these issues arose from much deliberation, numerousdiscussions, and careful assessment of the technological opportunities thatcurrently exist and which are expected to expand rapidly in the future.throughout the studyprefacevmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee confronted some of the same challenges that will eventually befaced by those who may be charged with implementing its recommendations.one challenge was to find effective means of communication across the diversedisciplines of neuroscience (basic and clinical) and computer science andinformatics (encompassing digital graphics, database technology, and electronicnetworks). beyond the expected difficulties of language (i.e., certain wordsmean one thing to neuroscientists and something entirely different to computerscientists), there were often fundamental differences in the perceptualframeworks used by the two groups. in educating each other the members of thecommittee came to the end of the study with a much greater understanding ofhow each discipline approaches its work and how these approaches can andshould be melded in a common effort.a second challenge was to balance creativity with practicality in order toforge a reasonable plan for application of electronic and digital technologies tothe neurosciences. such a balance had to be achieved largely in the absence ofimmediately applicable models from other areas of biomedical science. thecommittee evaluated the existing biomedical databases and found substantialdisparity in their development, funding, and structures. this disparity wasparticularly characteristic of the genome and protein sequence databases. thecommittee also discovered that the federal infrastructure for support ofbiomedical science has not yet developed a clear, integrated set of guidelinesand policies to facilitate the incorporation of technological advances.nevertheless, technology has made major inroads in most of the physical andbiological sciences.a third challenge the committee faced was the recognition that itsdeliberations were being held during a time of serious biomedical researchfunding constraints. indeed, the question of funding was at the core of the mostvigorous objections to the proposed brain mapping initiative: someneuroscientists feared the initiative would produce largescale efforts that wouldundermine the traditional investigatorinitiated research enterprise. thecommittee took these concerns seriously and the prospect of allocating alreadyscarce resources to possible new initiatives led the committee to attempt toassess the probable costs and benefits of its recommendations. in addressingthis issue there emerged a recurring theme of the advantages of investment now,as a protection against costly corrections later. the recommendations offered inthe report reflect the committee's attention to the possible dangers, as well as thepossible benefits that neuroscience can derive from computer and informationtechnology.not withstanding the difficulties presented by these challenges, greatprefacevimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enthusiasm emerged from the committee's deliberations. the committeebelieves that the more than 150 neuroscientists who served on the committee,participated in task force groups, attended open hearings, or responded towritten solicitations of opinions were representative of the diverse neurosciencecommunity. some were already in favor of the proposals being discussed andexpressed strong views that the proposals should proceed. this group tended tobe comprised of the most experienced in the use of computer and informationtechnology. some participants had strong reservations about the proposals. ofthe remaining participants, many held no clear position in the beginning. in theend, however, some of the greatest excitement could be found among this groupas they considered the capabilities of the various technologies shown indemonstrations and presentations and how these capabilities could be applied todata collection and analysis, as well as to rapid communication of researchresults.the recommendations that resulted from the committee's deliberations andactivities address certain key issues. the first is that a proper base of handsonexperience must be built before any largescale effort can begin. thus, thecommittee has proposed a twophase initiative. phase 1 would consist of pilotprojects that would allow neuroscientists and computer scientists to worktogether to construct usable resource prototypes and address a variety oftechnological and sociological challenges as described in the report. to realizethe greatest benefit from these pilot projects, however, a strong centralcoordinating body must be in place. thus, the committee has recommended thatan advisory panel be charged with certain responsibilities, including thefacilitation of information exchange among the projects, the establishment ofeditorial and training functions, the development of policies to protectconfidentiality and intellectual property, and the definition of the overalldirection of the program. the committee's recommendations further outline thepossible funding structures that might be used and the need for additionalappropriations to support the proposed projects.despite the need for program stability and central authority, the committeedid not assign responsibility for the proposed initiative to any single agency orinstitute but instead outlined two possible structures. in one, a lead agencywould have authority over the implementation of the initiative andresponsibility for its funding. alternatively, multiple agencies could sharefunding responsibility, but central authority would be maintained by formalagreements between two or more agencies or institutes. because neuroscienceresearch is funded through a wide variety of sources, the committee felt thatstrict definition of a structure might limit resources available to the proposedprefaceviimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.initiatives. similarly, a detailed plan for the second phase of the initiative is notoffered in the committee's recommendations. the more global second phase ofdevelopment and integration of electronic and digital resources must proceedfrom the experience gained in the pilot projects, a requirement which limitedthe committee's ability to define a precise structure for the future.the increasing use of many of the technologies discussed in this report isbeginning to change the way research is conducted and an integral role for suchtechnologies in biomedical science in general, and neuroscience in particular, isinevitable. in the absence of clear priorities and policies to support thesetechnologies, the process of change will occur in a scattered, disparate, andcostly manner. it is the committee's hope that this report will underscore theimportance of a new focus on the role of computer and information technologyin the conduct of neuroscience research. such a focus would help bringneuroscience to an unprecedented level of discovery and, in a broader sense,provide a model for technological integration that would benefit all ofbiomedical science.in that spirit, this report is aimed primarily toward policymakers in thecongress, the public health service, and other federal agencies who areresponsible for the support and direction of the biomedical research enterprise.the report will also be of interest to basic and clinical neuroscientists, computerscientists, systems developers, and information scientists. beyond these groups,other individuals interested in the broad issues of technological change mayfind certain aspects of the report useful. therefore, the committee attempted torespond to the needs of a wide audience in constructing this report. chapters 1and 2 emphasize certain key aspects of neuroscience research, including alreadyachieved and potential benefits; the chapters further describe how computer andinformation technology might enhance the acquisition of more informationabout the brain than is available today. chapter 3 is an overview of some of themethods and concepts of neuroscience. this chapter is specifically intended togive those readers not familiar with neuroscience a greater appreciation of thefield's complexity, a factor that makes the integration of computer andinformation technology especially challenging. chapter 4 provides a fictionalscenario of how a laboratory of the future might use electronic and digitalresources, followed by descriptions and specific examples of how computer andinformation technologies are now in greater use in biomedical science. asummary of the input received by the committee through its various activities iscontained in chapter 5. this chapter covers a broad range of topics that werediscussed at task force meetings and open hearings and thatprefaceviiimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.provided a strong base of knowledge for crafting specific recommendations.finally, chapter 6 contains the committee's formal recommendations.in completing this study, the committee was aided in many valuable ways.of particular benefit were the efforts of the task force participants (seeappendix a). these neuroscientists, computer scientists, and informationscientists gave generously of their time and expertise to provide the committeewith creative and in many cases indispensable suggestions. another importantsource of input was those individuals in the neuroscience community whoresponded to the committee's requests for opinions. these responses kept thecommittee in touch with the variety of viewpoints existing in the field. thecommittee also appreciated the help given by the speakers and demonstrators ateach of the three symposia and open hearings (see appendix c), as well as theinsightful, honest input provided by all the participants of these meetings.finally, the committee wishes to thank the fidia pharmaceutical corporationand the fidia research foundation for their support of the symposia andhearings, and barry peterson and sandra hicks from the department ofphysiology at northwestern university for their help in arranging the hearingheld in chicago.during the course of the study, other individuals provided helpfulinformation and necessary background materials. these included stephenkoslow and ronald schoenfeld, the study's project officers from the nationalinstitute of mental health; lana skirboll from the alcohol, drug abuse, andmental health administration; lawrence sellin from the national sciencefoundation; daniel masys from the national library of medicine; eugenestreicher from the national institute of neurological disorders and stroke; andbruce waxman from the defense mapping agency. the committee is alsograteful for the work of the seven individuals who reviewed the report andprovided many thoughtful, carefully crafted suggestions and commentaries,which greatly strengthened the final product.the committee's charge could not have been met without the dedicationand expertise of the staff of the institute of medicine. special thanks are owedto staff editor leah mazade for her careful work in polishing the report. thecommittee also wishes to thank the director of the division of health sciencespolicy, ruth bulger, for her consistent interest and excellent suggestions.shelley myers, the project assistant, made the many meetings in and out ofwashington as comfortable for the participants as possible and providedexcellent secretarial support. april powers became the project assistant towardthe end of the study, when a thousand details, in everchanging report drafts,require attention. she dealt with these pressures with singular commitmentprefaceixmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and a calming sense of humor. the numerous contributions made by elizabethmeyer, the study's research associate, would be difficult to list here. to eachtask she was assigned, from planning figures and illustrations to writingsummaries of the many meetings and designing the fliers for open hearings,elizabeth brought a quiet competence and an unfailing willingness to help.before leaving the study to accept a position in industry, charles vela, staffofficer and assistant study director, provided valuable assistance as a liaison tothe computer and information scientists of the committee and key informationregarding the funding and organization of other scientific databases. lastly, andmost importantly, i wish to acknowledge the extraordinary efforts of constancepechura, the study director, in shepherding the committee through its difficulttask.joseph b. martin, chairmancommittee on national neural circuitry databaseprefacexmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents list of boxes, color plates, figures, and tables xiii summary 1 advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain, 2 examples of the value of integrating knowledge tosolve problems, 4 the growth of neuroscience, 7 computer and information technology in biomedicaland neuroscience research, 8 building consensus, identifying needs, 10 the brain mapping initiative: committee recommendations, 13 conclusion, 191 introduction 212 advancing neuroscience in the decade ofthe brain 25 complexity and the need for information management, 26 examples of the value of integrating knowledge tosolve problems, 31 the growth of neuroscience, 41 references, 46contentsximapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3 overview of neuroscience research: acloser look at the neural hierarchy 48 references and bibliography, 654 computer and information technology inbiomedical and neuroscience research 66 critical breakthroughs, important opportunities, 69 conclusion, 88 references, 895 building consensus, identifying needs 91 building a useful resource complex, 93 the challenges ahead, 99 strategies for building a base of experience, 107 references, 1116 the brain mapping initiative: committeeconclusions and recommendations 113 the longrange goal, 113phase 1: implementation, 116phase 2: longterm integration and its potential benefits, 125 summary of recommendations, 127 references, 129 appendixes a task force topics and rosters 133b samples of requests for opinions 136c lists of speakers and demonstrators in symposia andopen hearings 139 index 143contentsxiimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.list of boxes, color plates, figures, andtablesboxes21 the gene for neurofibromatosis 1, 3022 sometimes the brain learns to ignore visual input, 3231 not all neuroscience research is concerned with neurons, 5632 the genetics of color vision, 6441 relational databases versus objectoriented databases, 77color platesfigures21 magnetic resonance images of identical twins, one withschizophrenia and the other without, 3931 the neural hierarchy, 4932 an action potential tracing, 5933 the synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate, 6134 the acetylcholine receptor, 6341 the decreasing cost of computer memory, 7142 computerassisted neuronal reconstruction, 7543 growth of online searches of wordoriented databases, 7844 brain browser, 83tables21 prevalence of selected neurological disorders, mental illnesses, and alcohol and drug abuse, 4222a investment in neuroscience research by the national institutesof health, 4522b investment in neuroscience research by the alcohol, drugabuse, and mental health administration, 4523 u.s. investment in neuroscience and mental health research:sponsoring agencies and foundations, 4641 text versus image data: byte requirements, 7242 selected genome and scientific databases, 80list of boxes, color plates, figures, and tablesxiiimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexivmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mapping the brain and its functionsxvmapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvimapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summarythe human brain is a fascinating, complex system whose mysteries arebecoming increasingly accessible to the tools of modern science.neuroscientists have amassed a sizable body of knowledge about the structureof the brain and its specific functions, which has improved our ability to treat avariety of mental and neurological diseases. many other diseases are lesstractable, however, and effective treatments will require major advances in bothbasic and clinical neuroscience. underlying these advances will be an explosionof experimental data, whose magnitude poses serious problems for informationmanagement and communication.effective access to existing neuroscience information is critical to theenterprise of discovery: such information forms the basis of new hypotheses,drives the search for improved methodologies, and, ultimately, leads to insightsapplicable to human disease. new strategies must be developed to enhanceintegration of this information and to facilitate new discoveries about the brain.within the range of potentially beneficial strategies, the greater use of computerand information technology in neuroscience research holds particular promise.this report synthesizes the deliberations of the institute of medicine'scommittee on a national neural circuitry database, which was formed at therequest of the national institute of mental health (nimh), the nationalinstitute on drug abuse (nida), and the national science foundation (nsf).the committee's task was to consider the desirability, feasibility, and possibleways of implementing a family of resources, both electronic (e.g., computernetworks) and digital (e.g., databases),summary1mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for the enhancement of neuroscience research. the incorporation of computerand information technology into diverse scientific fields is often accomplishedin the absence of coordinated policy through trial and error by individualscientists capitalizing on rapidly developing technological innovation. theseefforts have often led to farreaching changes in the style of scientific researchthat call for new governmental policies regarding the conduct of research in thiscountry and abroad. within this context, and with an overall purpose ofincreasing the resources available to the neuroscience community, thiscommittee has sought to formulate a position on the requirements for and appropriateness ofestablishing a family of electronic and digital resources for basic andclinical neuroscience that would allow optimal data communicationand sharing among investigators; consider the scope and elements of data that would constitute theseresources and determine strategies for representing the diverse datatypes generated by neuroscientists; consider data storage, retrieval, and sharing schemes of existingnational databases to identify successful strategies and potential pitfallsfor the possible establishment of computerized resources forneuroscience; describe the optimal organization of a family of computerizedresources so that it can be efficiently established and coordinated forresearch use by the neuroscience research community, clinicalinvestigators, clinicians, students, and educators; and provide recommendations to nimh, nida, and nsf on futuredirections in program development with respect to establishing suchelectronic and digital resources.advancing neuroscience in the decade of thebrainthe major advances in neuroscience in the past two decades havegenerated the opportunity that now exists to achieve an integratedunderstanding of the brain's structure and functions. these advances, which areproducing new data on brain activity, include the identification of complex anatomical connections; capabilities for understanding the biochemical, molecular, and geneticmechanisms that control brain structure and functions; the ability to measure and visualize human brain functioning duringmental activity; and the ability to monitor neural activity simultaneously in complicatednetworks of neurons.summary2mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these and other advances have occurred primarily through the efforts ofindividual investigators working in small groups on highly specific projects.despite the piecemeal quality of these efforts, the information derived fromthem is so extensive that it is extremely difficult to coordinate it all and producea meaningful picture of how the brain functions. this traditional method ofneuroscience researchšindividual investigators, highly specific projectsšissimilar to a group of surveyors, each of whom has been assigned to chart adifferent geographical region. to chart an entire continent, however, the workof each surveyor must somehow be coordinated with the work of all othersurveyors. based on input obtained through a variety of means, as well as on itsown deliberations, the committee considers it necessary to establish a formalbrain mapping initiative to coordinate the valuable efforts of individualneuroscientists in such a way that new discoveries occur with greater speed andefficiency. the brain mapping initiative is meant to subsume all the proposedaspects of a national neural circuitry database. in addition, it expressesexplicitly the overarching goals of the proposed effort and reflects moreadequately the complex of electronic and digital resources that will be required.complexity drives the need for information managementthe brain is more complicated than any other part of the human body. tounderstand the brain, scientists must measure and analyze the rapid changes inneuronal activity that occur throughout the brain's many intricate neuralnetworks and pathways. the scope of such an endeavor is daunting.neuroscience research proceeds along a multilevel hierarchy, from behaviorand emotion to molecular interactions and genetic expression. at each level,researchers use numerous techniques that are specifically designed to collectinformation appropriate to that level. but information from one level may, andmost often does, have important implications for research and knowledge atother levels. therefore, new methods for assembling and integrating the piecesof the ''brain puzzle" can be as important as the individual discoveriesthemselves.the goal of information management, which is distinct from simplyacquiring data, is to realize the greatest possible benefit from the data thatalready exist. the field of neuroscience research has two major informationmanagement needs: (1) databases, which relate diverse data typessystematically and efficiently, and (2) visualization of structures in threedimensions to capture the discoverable architecture of the brain and relate thisarchitecture to brain functioning.summary3mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of the value of integratingknowledge to solve problemsit is useful to examine how the diverse neural hierarchy relates to realbiological processes and human disease. the examples in this section provide aglimpse of the breadth of neuroscience research and suggest how that research,coupled with better information management, can have positive effects onhuman health.vision: how we see affects how we thinkinterpretation, complex perception, and even the appreciation of beautyoften begins with visual information. the neural basis of vision involvesbillions of neurons and more than 300 separate but interrelated pathways in thecerebral cortex alone. as in all neural systems, visual functioning relies on thecoordinated activity of neurons that communicate with each other, employinghundreds of different molecules for the generation of specific electrical andchemical signals. many of these molecules are arranged in distinctive patternsand located in specific brain regions. the combination of complexphysiological processes, anatomical pathways, and molecular and chemicalinteractions creates a system that functions extremely well but that isexceedingly difficult to decipher. notwithstanding all of the informationcurrently available, the fundamental nature of visual perception remains amystery. to understand it, we need more experimental data and new ways ofassembling the diverse kinds of related data into an integrated whole.among the resources necessary to understand the basis of patternrecognition and to gain insight into existing control and regulatory mechanismsare methods for overlaying anatomical maps with chemical and physiologicalmaps. computer simulations would also be of great value for understanding thesignal processing of neural sets and networks. (such simulations could also beused outside of neuroscience to construct new kinds of sensors and signalprocessors for robots and other automated devices.) enhancing research intovision with these electronic tools promises to help ameliorate visual deficitscaused by injury and to increase the range of treatments available for a numberof diseases, including glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and inherited retinaldegeneration, as well as blindness from other causes.substance abuse: the search for the biology of selfdestructiona large fraction of the u.s. population uses substances that are injurious tohealth. these substances include legally approved drugs,summary4mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such as nicotine and alcohol, and illegal drugs, such as cocaine and heroin, thatare accompanied by the societal burdens of violent crime and increased infantmortality, among others. the key to substance abuse lies in the brain. one ofthe clear successes of neuroscience has been the discovery that certainmolecules on the surface of neurons, called receptors, specifically bind manydrugs, including nicotine, heroin and other opiates, and even benzodiazepines,such as valium ®. this finding has led to the search for synthetic compoundsthat can block the actions of an injurious drug, yet still satisfy a person's cravingfor that drug. neuroscientists have also begun to pay close attention to thoseareas of the brain that mediate not only the normal pleasurable experiences ofeating and socialization but the motivating, often pleasurable, drug effects thatcan lead to psychological addiction. the complexity of these brain areas,however, greatly complicates the investigations.unlike the visual and motor systems of the brain, the socalled rewardsystem of brain nuclei and cortical areas has not been clearly defined. twokinds of computerized databases could help researchers construct a frameworkfor this system. one would depict the distribution patterns of importantreceptors and compare these patterns to the known anatomical andneurochemical circuitry of the brain. the other would contain informationspecific to those areas of the brain known to be involved in addictive processes.these resources would allow investigators faced with integrating data onanatomy, neurochemistry, pharmacology, and behavior to benefit from theresearch of other subspecialties in the field.pain: sometimes a warning, sometimes a cursepain is a ubiquitous reality of life, and we need it to a certain degree torecognize sprained ankles, overstressed back muscles, kidney stones, infections,and many other problems. yet for tens of thousands of people who suffer fromabnormal or pathological pain, any benefit from pain is hard to identify. forthese individuals, pain is an intractable barrier to a happy, productive life. theneural basis of pain involves almost every region of the brain, spinal cord, andperipheral nerves. often, pain affects other body systems, such as the immuneand endocrine systems. the complexity of pain perception helps to explain thevariety in the pain people experience and the treatments that have beendeveloped. much has been learned in recent years about the basic neuralmechanisms of pain, but substantial gaps in knowledge remain. for example,we still do not understand pathological painšthe severe pain often experiencedin an amputatedsummary5mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.body part (despite its absence, socalled phantom limb pain) or the terrible painthat can occur following seemingly minor injuries or after surgical procedures.there is a pressing need to transfer the information gained through basicresearch about pain to clinical practice. at present, widely divergent strategiesare used to treat pain and to use it diagnostically. a broad range of professionalsare often involved; thus, the responsibility for pain management may shift as apatient is moved from the operating room, to recovery, to a postsurgery ward. adatabase that related clinical observations to an integrated picture of relevantbasic scientific data would be of great value in pain management, especially if itwere combined with a repository of treatment and diagnostic strategies and theirdocumented outcomes. indeed, better ways to integrate data from basic painresearch could contribute significantly to the alleviation of a major cause ofhuman suffering.schizophrenia: broken minds, shattered dreamsthe symptoms of schizophrenia often emerge in adolescence or earlyadulthood, just as young people are beginning to plan their futures. in thiscountry the lives of more than 2 million people have been devastated byschizophrenia and its various manifestations, which include hallucinations,delusions, blunted emotions, cognitive deficits, and an inability to maintainmeaningful relationships. neuroscience has focused on three major researchareas in its search for understanding: neurochemical abnormalities, structuraland functional brain abnormalities, and potential genetic and environmentalcauses.it has long been thought that the effects of the neurotransmitter dopamineare greater than normal in the brains of those with schizophrenia. not all of thesymptoms of schizophrenia are alleviated by depression of dopamine activity,however, and evidence is mounting that other neurotransmitters are involved.the structural abnormalities identified thus far in some individuals are enlargedcerebral ventricles and a thinning of the cerebral cortex in certain areas.although there seems to be a concomitant decrease in functioning in the frontalcortex, neuroscientists do not know how these structural and functionalabnormalities contribute to the causes or symptoms of schizophrenia.advances such as gene mapping and positron emission tomography (pet)scanning may lead to increased understanding of the neurobiology ofschizophrenia, but greater integration of the available information is needed.the kinds of digital resources that would be of most use are maps of thedistribution of dopamine, dopamine receptors,summary6mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and other neuroregulators in the brain, databases of the existing brain imagingdata with detailed descriptions of each patient's history and specificconstellation of symptoms, and databases containing information about thegenes that are most likely to confer susceptibility to schizophrenia. for thosewhose ravaged lives testify to the burden of this disease, and for their families,needed answers are long overdue.the growth of neuroscienceneuroscience research has grown in response to criticalproblemsthe preceding examples reflect only a small portion of the overall cost ofmental and neurological diseases. these diseases, combined with drug abuse,constitute an immense financial burden to our population every year in directcare expenses and lost wages. nearly 23 million americans suffer from headand spinal cord injuries, hearing and speech disorders, or infectious diseases ofthe nervous system. more than 3.5 million people suffer from alzheimer's,huntington's, or parkinson's disease, or from other degenerative disorders,including multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. more than 60million people suffer from mental illnesses, including schizophrenia anddepression, and more than 20 million abuse alcohol or drugs. each of theseproblems clamors for resolution.in response, neuroscience has made steady progress in a number of areas.researchers have applied many new technologies, from the first oscilloscope tomodern computer graphics, to the study of the brain. these technologies,combined with insightful, painstaking research, have led to the importantbreakthroughs witnessed in the past two or three decades and have enlargedconsiderably our understanding of the biological basis of disease. in addition,many talented young scientists have entered the field of neuroscience: themembership of the society for neuroscience has risen from 500 in 1969 tomore than 17,500 in 1990. because we now possess vast amounts of data andthousands of bright, dedicated scientists, the opportunities for successfullyaddressing the remaining questions about the brain have never been morepromising.neuroscience is a national priorityanother source of the existing opportunities in neuroscience is the highpriority the united states places on research aimed at alleviating mental andneurological disorders. research support has come from various governmentbodies, including the national institutes ofsummary7mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health (nih), the alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration(adamha), the department of veterans affairs, the national sciencefoundation, and other government agencies; private agencies and foundations,including the howard hughes medical institute, the macarthur foundation,and the pew charitable trusts, have also provided funds. it is estimated thatthese groups invest more than $1.5 billion annually in neuroscience research,the majority of which comes from nih and adamha. yet howeverimpressive the total, this investment represents a very small fraction of theoverall societal costs of neurological and mental diseases. in times of competingneeds and fiscal constraints, it is important to find ways to derive the most valuefrom the investments that are made. the committee believes that a brainmapping initiative, by enhancing the process of discovery and thecommunication of new insights in neuroscience, can help to maximize thebenefits gained from the present investment of national resources.computer and information technology inbiomedical and neuroscience researchin the committee's opinion, a complex of electronic resources that willenhance neuroscience research is an attainable goal. current trends in computerand information sciences clearly point to an unprecedented opportunity toincorporate technologies that will enable neuroscientists to expand their use ofvaluable, hardwon data and to communicate these data more effectively toother scientists. in addition, the sheer mass of neuroscience informationaccumulated to date, and the accelerating rate at which new results are beingobtained and reported, are becoming major driving forces for the kind oforganization, structure, and accessibility that electronic and digital resourcescan provide. increasing sophistication in computer technology, coupled withdecreasing costs, holds out the promise of enhanced research capabilities formany fields of scientific endeavoršbut in particular, for neuroscience, owing toits inherently visual, hierarchical nature.three areas of computer science are especially important for biomedicalresearch: computer graphics, database technology, and electronic networking.the use of computer graphics, so pervasive in such fields as earth mapping andspace sciences, has only recently emerged as a resource in biomedical research,a direct result of the rapidly decreasing costs of computer memory capacities.one of the most successful applications of computer graphics has been themodeling of molecular structures using data derived from xray crystallography.no longer are scientists confined to trying to visualize a dynamicsummary8mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.molecule from a ballandstick depiction; computer models can be rotated andmanipulated to simulate the molecule's actual functioning. these models willsoon help to predict which drugs stop certain viruses, how genes are turned onand off, and how two molecules may interact with one another. in neuroscience,the use of computer graphics has led to visualization of the activity of thehuman brain through pet scanning and magnetic resonance imaging (mri).such graphic depictions have proved to be so useful that greater and greaterattention is being paid to the concept of visualization computing in biomedicalsciences. one example of this increased attention is the greater priority given tobiomedical computing by leading universities and government laboratories.databases, the second computer science area that is important tobiomedical research, allow digitized data to be stored and organized in a waythat makes the data easily accessible. databases can be word, number, image, orsound oriented, and can be either public or private. the use of databases,including databases of biomedical information, has increased substantially overthe past 15 years. the leader in the development of biomedical databases hasbeen the national library of medicine (nlm), which currently maintains anumber of online systems, including bibliographic databases of scientificliterature, registries of chemicals and their toxic effects, and medicalinformation related to cancer and other diseases. other prominent scientificdatabases are the protein sequence and genome databases developed by avariety of institutions and individuals, which are being used in the efforts tomap the human genome. the need for databases for neuroscience information isgreat, and the systems are beginning to emerge. neuroscience databasedevelopers can learn much from the experiences of the nlm and protein andgenome database originators.the purpose of computer networks is to help create a communicationenvironment that is as free of barriers as possible. in science the communicationof data and ideas is as important to the growth of knowledge as the datathemselves; consequently, the use of computer networks holds great promise forneuroscience. since 1969, networks connecting research laboratories anduniversities have grown so rapidly that today more than 5,000 interconnectednetworks in 35 countries connect more than 300,000 computers. further efforts,such as the national research and education network (nren), are under wayto upgrade the transmission rates of u.s. scientific and educational computernetworks, including the national science foundation's nsfnet, to permitthem to handle more data and data of greater complexity (e.g., image data,which currently cannot be efficiently transmittedsummary9mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.through computer networks). if computer networks are to be a viable methodfor communication of neuroscience data, the planned increase in transmissionrates is a necessity. also needed are strategies for standard data formats tofacilitate communication of digitized information among investigators.building consensus, identifying needsthe committee sponsored a number of consultative activities to seek outthe opinions and advice of the neuroscience community at large. theseactivities included written requests for opinions (published in various journalsand solicited directly from the leadership of the society for neuroscience);formation of four task forces; and sponsorship of three symposia and openhearings, which were held in washington, d.c., chicago, and san francisco. inaddition, the committee commissioned two background papers: one traced thedevelopment and current uses of genome and related scientific databases, andthe other investigated the defense mapping agency's experience in convertingcartographic data to digital formats. participants in these activities reflected awide range of backgrounds and expertise including library management,scientific database administration and design, computer science, andneuroscience research. additionally, participants came from academicdepartments, government laboratories, and private industry.the complexity of neuroscience dictates that the scope of data included inany group of electronic and digital resources must eventually be quite broad.the majority of the individuals providing input to the committee's deliberationsenvisioned the proposed complex of resources as necessarily containing morekinds of information than are already or can be contained in library referencematerials and published journals. participants also endorsed using theneuroanatomy of the brain as the principal organizing arrangement for theresources. information on neuroanatomy could function as the skeleton orframework on which data from multiple levels of the brain's hierarchy,including information on functions, could be displayed. the information wouldinclude neural pathways, cell types, neurochemistry and identification ofneurotransmitters, protein and gene sequences and gene mapping, receptortypes, electrophysiological responses, and data regarding behavioralrelationships, such as memory.to realize such a database, the computerized resources must include arange of capabilities. some of the features participants deemed necessary werethe ability to transform data into threedimensional images,summary10mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. browse through various kinds of data, extract arbitrarily defined subsets of data, and compare different brain images with each other by precise overlayingor coregistration of the images.there was overwhelming consensus among all participants that a singlenational neural circuitry database was not a workable plan. rather, a complexof electronic and digital resources should be developed to include separatedatabases with varied levels of accessibility. this complex should be composedof reference databases, data banks, informal databases, national andinternational registries, research collaboration databases, and specialty databases.to implement this complex of resources, however, significant advanceswill be required. the committee identified three areas deserving of attention:databases, networks, and imaging technologies. only imaging is sufficientlyadvanced to be immediately applied to neuroscience research. databasemanagement technology presents one of the most difficult barriers toimplementation. currently available database technology cannot handle imageseasily, although improved capabilities are under development. databasedevelopers should consider incorporating these advances as soon as theybecome available. in addition, present mechanisms to interlink differentdatabases will need to be improved substantially for application toneuroscience. humancomputer interfaces also require improvement so thatthey are uncomplicated for users yet powerful enough to enable the user toextract needed information. underlying both database and user interface designissues is the challenge of developing software that allows the data to beaccessible and usable. finally, as noted earlier, computer network upgradingwill be necessary for the transmission of complex image data.the final technical topic covered by the task forces was the developmentof standards for the exchange of data. four areas of technical concern wereaddressed: data representation and standard data formats are needed for textualand numerical data and for the generation of images and graphics. mechanisms are needed for conveying new algorithms for a variety ofapplications. standard humancomputer interface packages should be explored toreduce barriers to the actual use of electronic resources. standard communication protocols are needed to accommodate thedynamic range of data accessibility required for researchorienteddatabases.summary11mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition to the technological changes that will be required to implementthe proposed resources, the task forces identified sociological patterns andissues specific to the scientific community that must also be addressed. thedevelopment of standard data formats presents important sociological questions.participants expressed strong views that standards should evolve out of theneeds and perspectives of users and not be imposed from outside. a carefulbalance must be sought between the need for technical standards to facilitatecommunication and the barriers that can result from overly strict standardformats.data sharing is another major sociological issue. in some neurosciencespecialties, sharing of unpublished and "raw" data is commonplace, whereas inother specialties such openness is rare. although the committee places no valuejudgment on either end of the datasharing continuumšrestrictive to openšitrecognizes the existence of a continuum and concludes that potential datasharing mechanisms must be carefully considered as part of any initiative. forexample, priority should be given to formulating methods to ensure that propercredit is assigned for those contributing data and that the privacy of humansubjects is protected. in addition, the level of certification (peerreviewed,verified, unverified, etc.) of all data must be clearly stated, although preliminarydata probably would be included in special databases. clear identification ofdifferent levels of certainty, including unambiguous labeling of preliminarydata, will also need to be incorporated into the various kinds of databases; formajor resources, editorial boards may be a good mechanism to aid in thisprocess. as in all sciences, replication of experimental results will continue tobe important. the task forces also supported the concept that university tenurecommittees should consider certain types of data sharing, particularly of peerreviewed data, as evidence of professional competence, comparable to journalpublication and teaching evaluations. the committee was further encouraged toexamine the policies developed recently by some journals devoted to genemapping and gene and protein sequencing for deposit of data into establisheddatabases. other areas of sociological concern were how to ensure thatelectronic resources would be accessible to more than a few wellfundedlaboratories and how to overcome resistance to the integration of technologyinto the way people work. an additional concern of many participants was thechanging work force that would result from greater use of technology and theneed for computer specialists with expertise in neurobiology as well asneurobiologists with expertise in computer science.to overcome these technological and sociological impediments, thesummary12mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.task forces in particular strongly recommended that the committee call for theestablishment of pilot projects. the primary goal of these projects would be toprovide a desperately needed base of experience from which to establish afamily of usable computerized resources. the task forces suggested a twophaseeffort, with the pilot projects as a necessary first step, followed by a more globalincorporation of computerized resources into the neuroscience researchenterprise.a key area of consensus was that pilot projects would require coordinationand that oversight and evaluation mechanisms were crucial to the eventualimplementation of the resource complex. structures suggested for coordinationof the pilot projects included advisory boards, host institutions, and formalmeetings.a final area of discussion was funding. despite general support for theproposed effort, many participants expressed concern about how and wherefunds might be secured. there was considerable dialogue about currentconstraints on biomedical research support, and virtually all participantsexpressed the opinion that funds for this project should be obtained onlythrough additional appropriations.the brain mapping initiative: committeerecommendationsafter considering the opinions expressed and the input received through itsactivities and during its own deliberations, the committee concluded that anenvironment of opportunity now exists to enhance neuroscience research by amore global incorporation of computer and information technologies.considering past experiences in other scientific disciplines, however, it is alsoapparent that to ensure the greatest benefit from these technologies, they shouldbe incorporated with care and with a clear vision of the intended goal.neuroscience is diverse in its methodology and levels of inquiry. to achievetrue understanding, all of the available information must be coordinated into anintegrated, meaningful picture. at present, the detailed information beinggenerated at every level of neural organization is difficult to grasp and integrate.even searches for information regarding relatively specific neural levels orprocesses are hindered because the information is widely scattered throughscores of different journals, review papers, symposia summaries, and books.added to these difficulties are the unique visual requirements of neuroscience.the mass of information is steadily expanding because researchers can nowgenerate two and threedimensional graphic images relatively quickly andeasily. the increasing use of computers to collect the various kinds ofneuroscience data needed by researchers and the development currently underway of the technology to link thesesummary13mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computerized research environments makes this an opportune time to begin abrain mapping initiative. therefore,the committee recommends that the brain mapping initiative be establishedwith the longterm objective of developing threedimensional computerizedmaps and models of the structure, functions, connectivity, pharmacology, andmolecular biology of human, rat, and monkey1 brains across developmentalstages and reflecting both normal and disease states.the brain mapping initiative is meant to include features that wereoriginally proposed for a national neural circuitry database, although the newinitiative, unlike the earlier project, would not be a singleentity database.rather, the brain mapping initiative would lead to the establishment of acomplex of interrelated, integrated databases accessible from individuallaboratories. the committee is aware of the broad scale of such an undertakingand that the successful implementation of this program will requiretransformation of the way information is acquired, communicated, and analyzedby neuroscientists. therefore, the committee envisions the initiative as a longterm endeavor to be accomplished in two phases. phase 1 would comprise anorganized initiation of seed or pilot projects with the overall goals of gainingexperience in the incorporation of the required technologies and applying thatexperience to longrange planning for phase 2. phase 2 would involveconstruction of the maps and models necessary to provide a complex of digitaland electronic resources to enhance neuroscience research. to begin phase 1,the committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects or consortia.these projects should be peerreviewed by neuroscientists and computerscientists; they should also be investigator initiated, involve geographicallydispersed laboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels ofcomputer experience. the projects should develop common formats for theexchange of data and focus on different types of computer data representations(geometric, structural, image, and free text). selection of projects should be onthe basis of research quality and value to the evolution of a complex ofelectronic resources for mapping the brain.the pilot projects the committee recommends should be a coordinatedprogram of separate efforts but with certain common goals. in the committee'svision, the pilot program would consist of severalsummary14mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.groups of investigators, each working on specific neuroscience topics, with theprimary goals of mapping the brain's anatomy, chemistry, and functions, andforging pathways for the integration of computer and information technologyinto the overall neuroscience research effort. consortia could be organizedamong geographically distinct institutions or as centers housed within a singleinstitution. (if the centers approach is chosen, special attention should be givento involving investigators from geographically distant institutions as users of thetechnologies developed.) research topics for the phase 1 projects should reflectthe vertical hierarchy of the brain from behavior and emotion to molecularbiological and genetic mechanisms, as well as the horizontal range of inquiryincluding the anatomy, physiology, neurochemistry, and molecular anddevelopmental biology of specific brain systems.in terms of technical developments, the overall goals of the pilot projectprogram would be the following: develop electronic data collection and storage methods for data typesat each level of the neural hierarchy. identify the kinds of data, level of resolution, and experimentalinformation necessary to facilitate new insights and stimulate research. examine and evaluate the wide range of available capabilities that canincrease use of the resources and enhance access to meaningfulinformation. develop a variety of databases from formal, consensus databases toinformal databases for research collaboration. develop and experiment with different software for translation acrossdifferent computing environments, for user interfaces, for networktransmission of images, for data searching, and for image generationand comparison. begin to develop standard data formats, nomenclature, and datacollection schemes, and to evaluate the evolution of these standards. gain experience in data sharing and communication through electronicmeans, including networks and transportable media. communicate with others in the program to share and evaluateexperiences and technological developments.to ensure the greatest benefits possible from the phase 1 projects, thecommittee agreed to emphasize certain areas by formulating therecommendations below.the committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceed internationallyand recommends that an international registry of neuroscience databases andcontacts be established so that appropriate linkages can be created in the future.summary15mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such a registry, which should be available to users through computernetworks, would help to identify currently available resources and provide amechanism to coordinate the efforts of phase 1 investigators and investigatorsin other countries.the committee recommends the establishment of an archive of public domainsoftware, accessible through computer networks.the committee expects that phase 1 projects will have special needs fornovel software. public domain software is available at little or no cost to anyonewho wants to use it, and these programs should be explored. in addition, suchan archive would encourage the formation of neuroscience ''news groups," orgroups of users with similar interests, who could communicate by computerbulletin boards or electronic mail.the committee recommends that an administrative structure be established tocoordinate phase 1 activities. this brain map advisory panel (bmap) shouldbe composed of neuroscientists and computer and information scientists, withadditional input from funding agency administrators. the panel would beresponsible for the overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortiaand for the development of necessary policies relating to establishment of abrain mapping effort. the committee also recommends that the advisory panelbe responsible for consideration and development of editorial functions andpolicies relating to the ethical and sociological issues that will arise, including,but not limited to, correctness of information and quality control, intellectualproperty rights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.to develop the proper basis for a coordinated brain mapping effort, theremust be communication among the consortia and some type of centraloversight. the committee considered several mechanisms for providing suchoversight and chose an advisory panel structure. the bmap could also act as aclearinghouse for information and perform certain other functions: examine the needs of the entire neuroscience community; evaluate various aspects of database development including resourceuse, standards development, and effectiveness of incentives for datasharing;summary16mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. gather information from the consortia on emerging trends in thecomputer industry; and facilitate acceptance of the database among neuroscientists.the bmap should exercise oversight not in a topdown manner but as theresult of communication between members of the consortia and the panel. thiscommunication could occur through a variety of mechanisms includingconsortia representation on the panel and the sponsorship of regular meetingsfor consortia investigators. the panel should also coordinate establishment ofthe international registry of neuroscience databases and contacts and the archiveof public domain software recommended by the committee. finally, the panelshould coordinate the brain mapping initiative's interaction with fundingagencies and with other, related scientific initiatives, and undertake the longrange planning of phase 2.if electronic resources are to be accepted and utilized, scientists must beable to trust the accuracy of the information contained in the resource. one ofthe tasks of phase 1 investigators should be to begin to define mechanisms thatensure the appropriate use and labeling of different levels of data (frompreliminary to peerreviewed) and that allow for the deletion of information thatbecomes obsolete. in the committee's opinion, one of the best ways to achievesuch goals is to develop edited archives and databases.the committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of the brainmapping initiative maintain a close relationship with the gene mapping andsequencing community and the human genome project, and with otherscientific computing efforts, including network initiatives such as nsfnetand the proposed national research and education network. as part of theseefforts, the committee further recommends that linkages be established withprotein sequence and genome databases to enhance access to information aboutbrainspecific genes.the committee believes that the importance of gene mapping andsequencing to neuroscience should not be underestimated. in addition, muchcan be learned from existing database initiatives in this area, including the arrayof public and private databases that support the human genome project andother established scientific networking efforts. interaction with the ongoingscientific computing efforts in the global change research, astrophysics, andearth mapping communities would also be desirable.summary17mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee recommends that federal funding agencies develop requests forapplications and/or cooperative agreements to support the formation ofconsortia and the activities of the brain map advisory panel. limited use ofcontract mechanisms should also be considered when appropriate to the overallgoals of the initiative.the federal government uses several mechanisms to provide federal fundsfor research. one is contracts in which the government funds projects that itsagencies propose, to be completed by an outside investigator according to acontract written by the government. another mechanism, typical of nih,adamha, and nsf is grants to investigators or groups of investigators forresearch projects that are proposed, accomplished, and supervised by theinvestigators themselves. a third method, the cooperative agreement used bynsf, combines aspects of both grants and contracts. in the committee's opinion,the proposed brain mapping initiative favors the use of grants because thedevelopment of usable resources should be intricately combined with theresearch itself. this kind of development is best carried out by scientistsactively involved in neuroscience research.the committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the brain mappinginitiative be international in scope and that they be funded by multiple sourcesin a coordinated fashion. the structure for administering the funding shouldensure program stability and effectiveness. possible funding structures includethe identification of a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formaladministrative structures among two or more agencies.the sources of neuroscience funding include the three institutes ofadamha and almost every institute of the nih, as well as many othergovernmental agencies. the proposed organization of the brain mappinginitiative, especially the inclusion of an advisory panel and computer scientists,will not fit well into the usual funding structures administered by the nihdivision of research grants. to be successful, the proposed phase 1 projectsrequire the involvement of multiple components of the federal biomedicalresearch complex, as well as communication and cooperation amongappropriate agencies of the public health service, the departments of defenseand energy, and private foundations that fund biomedical science.the committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposed brainmapping initiative justify the investment of necessary resources andrecommends the appropriationsummary18mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of additional funding to support the establishment of phase 1 projects.the committee is sensitive to the current fiscal constraints now being feltby the entire u.s. biomedical research effort and recognizes the view held bymany scientists that largescale projects pose a threat to the basic researchenterprise. the committee believes, however, that the brain mapping initiativeis an important project that should be undertaken and that it could begin with anadditional allocation of approximately $10 million annually, with an overallevaluation to occur at the end of five years. this investment represents only asmall part (less than 1 percent) of the entire u.s. neuroscience research effort,which is estimated to be more than $1.5 billion annually. it is the committee'sconsidered opinion that the success and probable benefits of the initiativeproposed here depend on and justify the appropriation of this additional support.conclusionit is clear that neuroscience stands at the threshold of a tremendousopportunity to unlock the mysteries of the brain and its functions. securing thebenefits inherent in this opportunity requires a concerted, interdisciplinary efforton the part of the many basic and clinical neuroscientists engaged in researchworldwide. it is equally clear that this scientific enterprise is increasingly relianton the use of sophisticated methodologies and computer technologies. thebrain mapping initiative proposed in this report will allow investigatorsstudying the brain to view data in new ways, to communicate data to each othermore efficiently, and to access data from any of the neuroscience subspecialties.so enabled, neuroscientists will be able to map the brain and its functions, thusrealizing the full potential of the electronic resources now available to thescientific enterprise and ensuring that society will receive the greatest possiblebenefits from neuroscience research.note1. these species are intended as starting points. the committee also recognizes the need toinclude data from other, vertebrate and invertebrate, species.summary19mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary20mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionthe computer, the instrument of the sciences of complexity, will reveal anew cosmos never before perceived. because of its ability to manage andprocess enormous quantities of information in a reliable, mechanical way, thecomputer, as a scientific research tool, has already revealed a new universe.this universe was previously inaccessible, not because it was so small or so faraway, but because it was so complex that no human mind could disentangle it.heinz pagels, dreams of reasonscientists studying the brain have generated a wealth of experimental data,and this explosion of information has unlocked many of the secrets of brainfunctioning. moreover, this progress already has helped to alleviate some of thehuman suffering that results from brain injury and disease. ironically, however,the field is threatened by its own success in that the sheer mass of informationavailable to basic and clinical neuroscientists is becoming unmanageable.effective access to existing neuroscience information is critical to the enterpriseof discovery: such information forms the basis for new hypotheses, drives thesearch for improved methodology, and, ultimately, leads to the advancesnecessary for fundamental improvements in human health.one way to improve access and speed the meaningful dissemination ofscientific discoveries is through the application of sophisticated computer andinformationsharing technologies. these enablingintroduction21mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technologies currently assist space exploration, earth mapping, globalcommunication, and dissection of the atom, among other functions. in certaintypes of scientific investigation, computer and information technologies haveled directly to new ways of observing, simulating, and manipulating biologicaland physical processes. the neuroscience community has seen an escalation inthe use of computer technologies to collect and analyze data, organize the dataof individual investigators, and share experimental results with otherresearchers. as computerbased tools for threedimensional representations,simulation and modeling, and storage of large data sets improve, theirusefulness to the study of the brain becomes more apparent. during the pastdecade, many neuroscientists have become interested in the expandedapplication of computer and information technologies in their research, with thegoal of forging new pathways for communication among investigators andmanaging diverse collections of scientific information.this report results from the deliberations of the institute of medicine'scommittee on a national neural circuitry database, whose objective was toconsider the desirability, feasibility, and possible ways of implementing afamily of electronic (e.g., networks) and digital (e.g., computer databases)resources for the enhancement of neuroscience research. the committee wasformed in response to a request from lewis judd, director of the nationalinstitute of mental health (nimh); it was funded by nimh in cooperation withthe national institute on drug abuse (nida) and the national sciencefoundation (nsf). the impetus for the study came in large part from the needexpressed by neuroscientists for new ways of collecting and integrating thelarge amount of data they generate. an additional motivation was the increasedattention of the general scientific community and of policymakers regarding thechallenges presented by these emerging technologies and their potential tosupport and improve research. initiatives such as the national research andeducation network, proposed by senator albert gore and supported by thepresident's science advisor, and the longrange plans of the national library ofmedicine to construct digital libraries are examples of this increased attention.the incorporation of computer and information technology into a scientificfield often begins through trial and error, driven by individual scientists whorespond to opportunities as they emerge. the initial use of these technologies isoften highly individual, and it generally proceeds in the absence of anycoordination within specific scientific disciplines. as usage expands, however,the need for coordination and standardization increases, raising importantquestions about the development of appropriate governmental policies, whichintroduction22mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ultimately affect the conduct of research both nationally and internationally.within this broad context, the charge to this committee was to formulate a position on the requirements for and appropriateness ofestablishing a family of digital resources for basic and clinicalneuroscience that would allow optimal data communication andsharing among investigators; consider the scope and elements of data that should constitute theseresources and determine strategies for representing the diverse datatypes generated by neuroscientists; examine existing national databases to identify successful data storage,retrieval, and sharing strategies as well as potential pitfalls for theestablishment of computerized resources for neuroscience; describe an effective structure for a family of computerized resourcesto allow its efficient establishment and optimal coordination for use bythe neuroscience research community, clinical investigators, clinicians,students, and educators; and provide recommendations on future directions in program developmentfor nimh, nida, and nsf with respect to such computerizedresources.to fulfill its charge, the committee drew on many sources of expertise,beginning with the experience and knowledge of its members. a diverse set ofactivities supplemented the committee's deliberations and provided key data forthe study. between october 1989 and october 1990, the committee convenedfour task forces, in total, comprising 43 neuroscientists and computer andinformation science experts, that considered various resource options in termsof varied levels of neuroscience inquiry (see appendix a). the committee alsosolicited input from the neuroscience community through published requests foropinions, letters to the present officers and past presidents of the society forneuroscience, and a series of three symposia and open hearings (these activitiesare summarized in appendixes b and c).based on these activities and deliberations, this report focuses on thebenefits that could be realized by the successful application of electronic anddigital resources to the conduct of research into brain functions. the report'srecommendations provide a structural framework for initiating a program toapply these resources; they also identify certain key elements that should beconsidered by those who may be charged with implementing such a program.thus, the report should be useful for policymakers and directors of institutionswho will be involved in the endeavor. it is hoped that the committee'sintroduction23mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings will underscore for this audience the importance of increasing theintegration of information technology and computer science with neurosciencein particular and with the biomedical research enterprise in general. in addition,the report is aimed toward working scientists to foster an understanding of thebenefits to be gained by using these resources in their own research and bysharing their results. as we enter the decade of the brain, the committeebelieves that an exciting opportunity exists to harness computer and informationtechnology for the enhancement of neuroscience research. the advantages to bederived from seizing this opportunity include accelerated progress inunderstanding and treating neurological and mental illness, brain and spinalcord injury, and developmental deficits.introduction24mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2advancing neuroscience in the decade ofthe brainnot very long ago, the feasibility of mapping the distinguishable regions ofthe human brain in relation to their functional roles seemed remote. with thetremendous advances in neuroscience in the past two decades, however, theopportunity now exists to approach the integrated understanding of brainstructure and functioning necessary to clarify the neurobiological basis ofhuman thought and emotion and to discern the mechanisms that underliesensory perception and locomotor functions. many of the intricate anatomicalconnections of the brain are being defined in great detail. new capabilities haveemerged to identify and describe the biochemical, molecular, and geneticmechanisms that determine brain structure and functions. the activity of thehuman brain during mental activity can be measured and visualized. it is evenbecoming possible to monitor simultaneously the activity of many neuronswithin complex neural networks during discrete behaviors. the challenge nowis to establish a comprehensive initiative that will increase the ability ofneuroscientists to make discoveries about the brain and to apply this knowledgeto the many mental and neurological disorders that affect humankind.the progress made in this area has occurred primarily through theconcerted efforts of increasing numbers of individual investigators, workingmostly in small groups on highly specific projects. the body of informationgained through such efforts has grown in a piecemeal fashion; it has nowreached a point of limitation, in terms of its usefulness, because the mass ofinformation is so great and its dissemination so poorly coordinated that criticaldata are often difficult to recover andadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain25mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.define. indeed, this approach to neuroscience research, which was so successfulin the past, may soon limit advances in the same way that a single surveyor whocharts a field cannot hope to map a continent without a coordinated planinvolving other mappers. a brain mapping initiative could identify thoseaspects of information exchange infrastructure that are critical to addressing abroader goal, one that will include the advantages of singleinvestigator projectsand yet also yield the benefits of a larger, coordinated program. the brainmapping initiative is intended to subsume all the proposed aspects of a nationalneural circuitry database outlined in the charge to this committee. it is alsodesigned to express explicitly the goals of the proposed effort and reflect moreadequately the complex of electronic and digital resources that will be required.a consensus is emerging that the initial steps can now be taken toward theglobal task of understanding brain structure and functioning. the impact ofdigital computer technology began in the physical sciences three or fourdecades ago and led to such current largescale efforts as the supercollider,space telescope, and interplanetary probes. in neuroscience, the increasingavailability of new enabling technologies is likely to have similar, farreachingimpacts. the development of highdensity memory chips and the latestgeneration of microprocessors provides a key stimulus to accelerateddevelopment of image analysis graphics and image manipulationša set ofcapabilities known as visualization computing (mccormick et al., 1987). theemergence of parallel processing, scientific visualization workstations, and highcapacity digital communications may provide the technical support needed toconduct coordinated projects in neuroscience.a comprehensive, coordinated effort to understand basic organizationalpatterns of brain connections needs to be undertaken. this effort should includea definition of the chemical identity of neuronal populations and a descriptionof neuronal structure and neuronal circuit organization in each region insufficient detail to clarify the computational processes involved. the pace offuture advances in neuroscience will depend on critical choices, which need tobe made now, regarding the handling of information to be gathered in thefuture. at issue is whether neuroscientists will embark on a largescale effort todevelop and integrate new forms of technology for acquiring and managinginformation.complexity and the need for informationmanagementthe brain exhibits by far the greatest complexity of any of the organs ofthe human body. indeed, there is reason to believe that a substantialadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain26mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.percentage of the human genome plays a role in creating neural structure,connectional patterns, and neurochemistry. the brain's responsibilities arenumerous and include initiation of movement, mediation of sensation, andregulation of other body organs. its functioning provides the basis of perceptionand cognition and underlies emotion and creative expression. althoughdescribed as a master computer, the brain is fundamentally more complex andits processes far more subtle than those of any current computer design. withthe advantage of parallel operation of neuronal populations, the brain managesand controls a wide variety of tasks simultaneously, reliably, and with rapidprecision. indeed, much of the brain's work proceeds even in the absence of anindividual's conscious awareness.all brain activity results from electrical and chemical communicationamong neurons (the primary signaling cells of the brain), each of which cancommunicate with other neurons using signals at rates of up to 1,000 events(impulses) per second. to understand the brain, neuroscientists must measureand analyze the rapid changes in neuronal signaling activity that occur over thevast networks of cells and connections. the scope of this endeavor is immense.it is estimated that the human brain contains more than 100 billion neurons, andeach neuron maintains an average of about 1,000 connections, called synapses,with other neurons. some neurons have as many as 200,000 synapses. duringeach moment of daily life, neural signals may be transmitted across any ofapproximately 100 trillion synapses.improvements in human health require greater integration and synthesis ofknowledge than can be gained simply by describing the intricate, extensivecircuitry that characterizes a normal or average brain. to treat schizophrenia,alzheimer's disease, brain injury, degenerative diseases, developmental deficits,and chemical dependency, it will be necessary to understand the biochemicalreactions and specialized neurochemistry expressed by different types ofneurons. in addition, neuroscience must take into account the differences amongindividuals that arise from environmental as well as hereditary factors. suchdifferences range from subtle genetic variations in small populations of neuronsto differing developmental states and wideranging perturbations of major brainsystems.in many ways, because of the brain's organization, neuroscience research isobliged to proceed along a multilevel hierarchy, from behavior to molecularinteractions (see chapter 3). each level of research uses numerous techniquesthat are specifically designed to collect information appropriate to that level.but information from one level often has important implications for knowledgeat other levels. effective synthesis of the data depends on the traditionalacademic skills ofadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain27mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the scholar; it is becoming increasingly difficult, however, for neuroscientists toidentify, manage, and process all the information needed for the efficient designand conduct of their research. even with welldeveloped traditional academicskills, the neuroscientist clearly needs new information organization and accesstechnologies. electronic information management provides assistance at a highlevel of synthesisšin much the same way that hand calculators and wordprocessors facilitate tasks like balancing a budget or creating a document.to draw an analogy, neuroscientists are like puzzle builders who mustintegrate and fit together numerous small pieces of information derived fromthe hundreds of available techniques. metaphorically, the challenge is toassemble a multimillionpiece, threedimensional puzzle, starting with anincomplete set of pieces (many key facts about the brain remain unknown) andincomplete knowledge of how different pieces relate to one another (seeminglydisparate facts are often closely related). in addition, the puzzle that representsthe brain must depict more than simply a structure. it must integrate structurewith function, function with chemistry, and chemistry with genetic mechanisms.generating the data that represent the individual pieces of the puzzle is difficultin and of itself: the techniques available to neuroscientists all have inherentlimitations and usually produce only incremental bits of information, althoughevery year more bits are added and new puzzle pieces identified. the nextdecade is expected to provide enough new pieces to allow for the discovery ofexciting new ways to understand, protect, and restore brain functioning. butinnovative methods of information assembly and integration will be asimportant as the discovery of the individual pieces.in science, the conventional way to gain access to relevant informationgenerated outside one's own laboratory is through the study of scientificliterature and by formal and informal communication with other scientists. asthe number of publications and literature sources grows, the use of suchresources becomes more and more expensive, inefficient, and incomplete. itnow takes an inordinate amount of time to sift through the various conventionalpublications. the process usually requires a narrowly focused search strategy,which yields less information than is actually available. eventually, the processis self limiting. to pursue the puzzle analogy, it is like trying to assemble thethreedimensional puzzle by using twodimensional sketches of the pieces,rather than being able to hold the original threedimensional pieces.furthermore, because the pieces are scattered in various locations, most of one'stime is spent in looking for the individual pieces and not in trying to understandhow they are interrelated.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain28mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for many years, a number of neuroscientists have envisioned alternativestrategies for coping with the problem of information management, which isdistinct from that of acquiring more data. information management is aimedtoward realizing the greatest benefit from the data that already exist. two majorkinds of information management are the most critical for neuroscience: (1)databases, which allow at least partial automation of the task of relating diversedata types in a systematic, efficient manner, and (2) the capacity forvisualization of structures in three dimensions. visualization computing,whether by machine or by the scholar's brain, captures the discoverablearchitecture of the brain and relates this architecture to brain functioning.scientists mapping the human genome or sequencing biologicallyimportant proteins have been using databases for years (smith, 1990; vela,1990). these databases contain precise information, obtained directly fromexperimental investigation, regarding the sequence of base pairs of specificgenes, their locations on specific chromosomes, and the amino acid sequencesof known and newly discovered proteins. investigators consider these databasesinvaluable for a host of reasons. most commonly, researchers check a newlycharted protein sequence against thousands of other known sequences to see iftheir new sequence is related to other known proteins. similarly, the base pairsequences of genes of one species are routinely checked against sequences fromother species to determine the level of homology of specific genes acrossspecies. beyond simple comparison, knowledge of base pairs and proteinsequences can provide key information regarding biological functions. thus,protein and gene mapping databases are more than simply references; they arequickly becoming essential components of the scientific process of discovery(see box 21; delisi, 1988; colwell, 1989).the experience of the protein and gene mapping community is aninstructive example of the benefits to be gained from incorporating databaseand information technology into biomedical research efforts. there are majordifferences, however, that must be taken into account when considering how toextend this approach to the field of neuroscience. chief among these differencesis that of complexity. although proteins exhibit tremendous diversity, much ofthis diversity is represented by the linear sequence of amino acids that make upeach protein. such linear arrays are easy to store in traditional databases andalso represent the key information for genes. all proteins also have a threedimensional structure, however. computerized molecular modeling has beenvery successful in displaying molecular structures in three dimensions (howardhughes medical institute, 1990), but it is not yet possible to incorporate thesethreedimensional models intoadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain29mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.traditional databases. in contrast to molecular biology, understanding thediversity inherent in brain structure and functioning requires the threedimensional display of many types of experimental information. because thefundamental complexity of neuroscience data exceeds that of molecular biologydata, the development of information management technologies to enhanceneuroscience research will present great challenges. yet such challenges areapproachable, and the potential benefits to greater understanding of the humanbrain are compelling reasons for confronting them.box 21the gene for neurofibromatosis 1first described in the late nineteenth century, neurofibromatosis 1(nf1) is an inherited condition affecting 1 in every 3,500 people. the twomost common symptoms of nf1 are areas of dark pigmentation on theskin, and benign but often disfiguring tumors, called neurofibromas,beneath the skin. a wide range of other, less common symptoms appearin connection with nf1, and these include learning disabilities, mentalretardation, malignancies of the nervous system, scoliosis, and other boneabnormalities.in 1987, james gusella and his colleagues at massachusettsgeneral hospital (seizinger et al., 1987) and ray white and his researchteam at the university of utah (barker et al., 1987), localized the generesponsible for causing nf1 to chromosome 17. the abnormal gene wassubsequently isolated and sequenced by white's team and by franciscollins and his coworkers at the university of michigan (lewis, 1990). thenext step was to translate the genetic code into an amino acid sequence,which was then fed into a computer and matched against databases ofother known sequences. similarities were found between the proteinsequence of nf1 and those of two other genes, one being a gene thatcodes for a group of proteins called gap proteins, which are thought tosuppress tumor growth, and the other being a tumorsuppressing gene inyeast. the homologies seem logicalšaltered gap protein function couldcertainly have manifestations similar to those observed in nf1. althoughmany important details remain to be filled in, what scientists already knowabout gap proteins and yeast genes will provide a springboard forresearchers striving to understand neurofibromatosis.the knowledge base established by white, collins, gusella, and theircolleagues is likely to attract researchers from many disciplines that havenot traditionally studied neurofibromatosisšcancer researchers inparticular, because nf1 now joins the growing list of potential tumorsuppressor genes. a complete solution to the nf1 puzzle is unlikely in thevery near future, but discovery of the nf1 gene and its protein productpromises to speed development of prenatal diagnosis of and possiblytreatment for nf1.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain30mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of the value of integratingknowledge to solve problemsachieving advances in neuroscience is a difficult task, particularly thoseadvances that yield improvements in the treatment and understanding ofneurological, developmental, and mental diseases. integration of knowledgeacross the areas of investigation at each level of the neural hierarchy is required.the importance of applying these diverse methodologies to discern how thebrain functions can be illustrated by the following explicit examples of thehierarchical organization within neuroscience (see also chapter 3).vision: how we see affects how we thinkthe visual system, one of the most intensively studied systems of thebrain, reveals remarkable complexity in organization and functioning. becauseit occurs so effortlessly, vision is something we often take for granted andconsider to be a fairly simple matter. in fact, however, the brain conductsextensive processing of all visual information to allow for pattern recognition,interpretation, and appreciation of such concepts as beauty. the neuralunderpinnings of these abilities are contained within a rich, intricate network ofpathways that involve billions of individual neurons. the system also includesmuscles and motor regions of the brain to point the eyes toward areas of interestand to track objects in motion (see box 22).investigations of the visual system have used a wide range of techniquesthat have contributed substantial knowledge regarding the anatomy,biochemistry, and physiology of the system. the information that reaches theeyes is first processed by a thin layer of cells that make up the retina at the backof the eye. through exquisitely sensitive signal transduction mechanisms,retinal cells respond to a range of inputs, including color. coordination amongthe cells in the retina also provides the first filtering of incoming information bythe balancing of excitatory and inhibitory processes. from the retina,information is transmitted to a pair of nuclei on each side of the brain, called thelateral geniculate nuclei, in a highly ordered pattern so that each half of thevisual field is precisely mapped onto the lateral geniculate on the opposite sideof the brain. so well understood is this map that differing kinds of visualdeficits can indicate the exact location of damage (a frequent occurrencefollowing stroke or as a result of the pressure of a growing tumor) along thepathways of the visual system. the lateral geniculate nuclei relay visualinformation to the primary visual cortex. again, the information is mapped in ahighly ordered pattern with segregation of the inputs from each eye.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain31mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 22sometimes the brain learns to ignorevisual inputto focus on objects in the visual field, the muscles of both eyes arenormally coordinated so that both eyes move in unison. but abnormal eyemuscle development in one eye can cause misalignment of the two eyes,often resulting in a condition known as strabismus. a child born with thiscondition will favor one eye to avoid double vision, and, over time, visualacuity in the less favored eye deteriorates. left uncorrected, the childbecomes blind in that eye. before the neural basis of binocular vision wasunderstood, procedures to correct strabismus were typically done at age 8or 9, long after permanent deterioration had occurred. today, thecondition is corrected very early to protect such children's normal vision.measurement of how neurons in the visual cortex respond to differentstimuli has revealed much about the microprocessing of information. mostimportant, many visual neurons are selective for specific features in the visualworld. for example, nobel laureates david hubel and torsten wieseldiscovered that many neurons are selective for the orientation of a bar, whichallows them to signal the presence of particular edges and contours (hubel andwiesel, 1979). since their discovery, other researchers have described types ofneurons that are sensitive to color, directional movements, and, at higher levels,even complex shapes like faces.from the primary visual cortex, information is transmitted to many othercortical areas involved in higher aspects of visual processing. this dispersion ofinformation is necessary for all the activities associated with vision, includingreading, writing, and recognition of objects in the environment. the monkeyhas 32 regions of the cortex that are known to be involved in some type ofvisual processing (plate 21). each of these regions subserves a specificfunction; yet they are interlinked by more than 300 separate pathways. muchvisual information ultimately reaches neural centers involved in cognitivefunctions and emotions. understanding these parallel, distributed pathways hasimportant implications for understanding the deficits from brain injury,including stroke. they also help explain some of the most puzzling aspects ofthese problems. (for example, some stroke patients can recognize words andobjects such as tables and chairs, but cannot recognize a loved one's face[sacks, 1970]. because each of these different stimuli present distinct features,damage to one area of the cortex may affect the perception of one constellationof features but not others.)advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain32mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognition and recognition are not the only results of visual sensation. theretina also projects visual information to nuclei that are involved not in featureanalysis but in controlling the eye muscles. these pathways mediate the turningof the eyes in the direction of a stimulus; the coordinated, simultaneousmovement of both eyes; and the ability to track moving objects in the visualfield. again, certain kinds of damage affect these pathways and may result indebilitating deficits.as in all neural systems, the functioning of the visual system relies on thecoordinated activity of neurons that communicate with each other usingelectrical and chemical signals generated by hundreds of different molecules,including neurotransmitters, second messengers, and signal transductionmolecules. many of these molecules have been found in distinctive patterns inspecific areas of the visual system. the combination of complex physiologicalresponses, complex anatomical pathways, and hundreds of neurochemicalinteractions creates a system that is extremely difficult to disentangle. despiteall the information we possess, we still do not understand the fundamentalnature of visual perception, nor do we understand the specific computationscarried out in the vast networks at each stage of information processing.finding answers to these challenging questions will require not onlyadditional experimental data but new strategies for assembling the availableinformation to facilitate integration of the diverse data types. to accomplish thisintegration, the use of threedimensional graphics, sophisticated databasetechnology, and greater levels of electronic communication among investigatorswill be critical. for example, maps of the anatomical pathways must be overlaidwith neurochemical maps to understand how the wide repertoire of chemicalmodulatory influences may be related to different aspects of visual perceptionand visualmotor coordination. computer simulations and realisticcomputational models, based on physiological and anatomical data, are neededto understand the specific signalprocessing strategies used in various regions ofthe visual system. such computational studies are also of interest to engineersand computer scientists in the construction of new types of sensors and signaldetectors for nonbiological uses.it is clear that the full potential of visual system research has yet to berealized. progress in this field will contribute to the ability to treat orcompensate for visual deficits caused by brain injury. in addition, this work cancontribute to the amelioration of blindness and diseases of the visual system,including glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and inherited retinal degenerations.the mapping and physiological characterization of the multiple visual systempathwaysadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain33mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.also have direct relevance for understanding other portions of the brain,especially other portions of the cerebral cortex.substance abuse: the search for the biology of selfdestructiona large fraction of the u.s. population uses substances that are injurious topersonal health. these substances range from legally approved drugs (e.g.,nicotine and alcohol) to illegal drugs (e.g., cocaine and heroin) that areaccompanied by grave societal costs such as violent crime and infant mortality.the key to understanding and dealing with substance abuse lies in the brain.one path of research has already led to the critically important discovery thatthere are cellsurface receptors not only for neurotransmitters but also for manydrugs, including nicotine, marijuana, heroin and other opiate drugs, andbenzodiazepines, such as the tranquilizer valium® (plate 22). often, certaindrugs bind to the same receptor to which a particular neurotransmitter binds.for example, the two kinds of acetylcholine receptors were first distinguishedby the fact that one bound nicotine and the other did not. such receptors havebeen mapped to specific nuclei of the brain. thus, the notion that certain drugshave specific actions in discrete brain regions offers a possible route fordisrupting the effects of those drugs.but the problem goes much deeper. for example, alcohol does not act atspecific receptor sites; its effects are much more general throughout the brain.furthermore, all psychoactive substances produce experiences that providesome type of motivation or pleasure that can lead to addiction. therefore,addiction to medically harmful substances is directly related to the involvementof brain systems that mediate the normal pleasurable experiences associatedwith many daytoday activities such as eating, drinking, and socialization.neuroscientists do not completely understand the location, organization, andchemistry of the system in the brain that underlies positive emotions andpleasure and, with that, the pleasurable, motivating effects of drugs and alcohol.certain fascinating clues, however, have been found. for example, animals willselfadminister cocaine so avidly that they totally ignore food; yet this behaviorcan be completely reversed if the neurotransmitter dopamine is removed froman area of the brain known as the nucleus accumbens. no conceptualframework similar to those that guide our understanding of the visual and motorsystems has emerged to explain this phenomenon. many scientists hypothesizethat a number of brain regions in the limbic system and hypothalamus areinvolved, but the connections between these regions are extremely complex andnot well understood.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain34mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.two types of databases could greatly enhance research into the biology ofsubstance abuse. databases that allow for the easy comparison of braindistribution patterns of receptors for the many substances that are abused wouldbe invaluable. their usefulness would be particularly great if distributionpatterns could be compared with the known circuitry of the brain, with theassociated distribution patterns of known neurotransmitters, receptors, and ionchannels, and with the results of behavioral studies related to the neuralmechanisms of addiction. no conventional library system currently allows forthis level of analysis of visual material. a second, related kind of databasewould contain information about the known neural pathways implicated inaddiction. such a resource could aid the development of a viable picture of thebrain system involved in mediating the reinforcing aspects of drug use and inthe formulation of efficient strategies for research into areas where moreinformation is needed. substance abuse offers a compelling example of how theavailability of comprehensive databases that incorporate and integrateinformation from many fields, including chemical neuroanatomy,pharmacology, and biopsychology, would almost certainly speed thedevelopment of effective treatments for a widespread, serious threat to humanhealth.pain: sometimes a warning, sometimes a cursepain is a ubiquitous reality of life. we need pain to recognize sprainedankles, overstressed back muscles, kidney stones, infections, and a host of otherills. this useful warning system can go awry, however, and become anintractable barrier to a happy, productive life (plate 23). the neuralunderpinnings of pain involve almost every region of the brain, spinal cord, andperipheral nervous system. moreover, these neural mechanisms interact withother systems of the body, including the immune system and certain endocrineglands, and are even affected by changes in the metabolic status of theindividual (e.g., as in diabetes). pain is thus a remarkably complex processabout which much remains to be learned.in its simplest form, pain results from the activation of peripheral nervesby certain types of stimuli impinging on the skin and internal organs. thisneural information is transmitted to and processed by specific parts of the spinalcord. from the spinal cord, information about injury is transmitted to numerousbrain regions, including specific relay nuclei that, in turn, transmit it to thesensory part of the cerebral cortex and to nonspecific nuclei that disperse theinformation through their abundant connections to other brain regions.informationadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain35mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.regarding a painful stimulus reaches brain regions that are involved in emotion,sensory perception, body movement, and hormonal release. in addition, theinformation reaches brain regions that connect back to the spinal cord and thatare capable of modulating the activity of spinal neurons. these complexconnections form the anatomical basis for systems that can activate or inhibitpain. the pain system also utilizes scores of different neurotransmitters and aninteresting group of peptides that include endorphin and enkephalin, which aresimilar to morphine.the intricacy of these connections explains in part some of the mostfascinating and worrisome aspects of pain perception. for example, it iscommon for wounded people to walk considerable distances to reach helpwithout conscious awareness of their pain and for people with malignantcancerous growths to be free of pain in the cancer's early stages (possiblybecause of the activation of paininhibiting systems). on the other hand, peoplewho have had amputations, including mastectomy, often feel pain in theamputated body part, despite its absence (possibly because of painactivatingsystems). the intricacy of the pain system also accounts for the wide variety ofkinds of pain people experience, of kinds of treatments that are effective, and ofscientific and clinical disciplines that deal with pain.the need for enhanced communication in neuroscientific disciplines iswell illustrated by the example of pain research and treatment. in the clinicalarena, neurosurgeons have had a longstanding interest in finding ways todisrupt appropriate brain areas to alleviate intractable pain. the electricalstimulation or selective destruction of such areas has met with limited success,sometimes utter failure; in the worstcase scenario, the pain returns and isgreater than before the surgery. further advances in these and other techniquesdepend on expansion of knowledge from anatomical, electrophysiological, andneurochemical studies in animals.the experience and knowledge of other disciplines are also important. forexample, anesthesiologists deal with pain on an everyday basis, but theresponsibility for pain management typically changes from the anesthesiologistto other health care providers as a patient is moved from the recovery ordelivery room to a regular medical/surgical ward. as a result, widely divergentstrategies are used. increased communication among these various careproviders could lead to more effective pain management and the ability to usepain (and the lack of it) as a diagnostic tool. as it becomes clearer that painmanagement has a substantial impact on recovery following surgery,communication between health care providers and basic researchers should beincreased to promote better information transfer.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain36mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic pain research has generated an impressive amount of knowledgeabout the brain and the way it deals with pain. recent work has begun tocharacterize the connectivity patterns of spinal and brainstem pathways thatmediate pain, as well as their biochemical and physiological qualities. it isbecoming increasingly evident that the neural mechanisms underlyingmusculoskeletal, cutaneous (skin), and visceral (internal organs) pain aredifferent, and these differences are under active investigation. differences inchronic and acute pain also are being intensely studied. investigators aredefining as well the actions of various immune system products at the site ofinjury and their contribution to pain. a very recent development has been theuse of animal models for pain caused by arthritis and peripheral nerve injury.this work has brought the first hints that damage to the nerves can result inpermanent changes in the spinal cord, and possibly in other brain regions, thatmay well be responsible for intractable pain syndromes. prevention of thesechanges by early intervention may help to alleviate a sizable proportion of thehuman suffering that results from this kind of pain.given the prevalence of pain and the societal burdens it imposes, there is apressing need to find better ways to transfer into clinical practice what is beinglearned from basic research and to apply clinical observations to the design ofbasic research experiments. a family of computerized resources could promotethese information transfers by making anatomical, biochemical, andphysiological data available in a manner that integrates the informationgraphically, crossreferences data from other disciplines, and provides relevantclinical observations. a repository for various pain diagnostic and treatmentstrategies and observed outcomes would also be useful. finding answers to themany unresolved questions about pain and its varied pathologies will depend, inpart, on several communicationrelated factors including the most efficient useof the information that exists now and the widest dissemination of theinformation that will be generated in the future.schizophrenia: broken minds, shattered dreamsfor the 2 million americans who suffer from schizophrenia, the world isoften terrifying, confusing, and bitterly lonely. this devastating disease of thebrain most often strikes people in adolescence and young adulthood and isexpressed in a variety of forms, depending on the specific constellation ofsymptoms that occur. these forms range from those with predominantly''negative" (loss of function) symptoms to those with mainly "positive"symptoms (exaggeratedadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain37mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or distorted brain functions). thus, a person with schizophrenia will exhibitsome combination of the following: hallucinations and delusions, blunted orinappropriate emotional expression, inability to derive pleasure from normalexperiences, cognitive difficulties, and abnormal socialization. major efforts areunder way in neuroscience to discover the causes of schizophrenia, tounderstand the mechanisms of the disease, and to find better treatments forthose whose lives are burdened by this illness.researchers are pursuing three major areas of investigation: neurochemicalabnormalities, structural and functional brain abnormalities, and possiblegenetic and environmental causes of the disease. the discovery that certaindrugs can alleviate the hallucinations and delusions of schizophrenics providedstrong evidence that a neurochemical imbalance was important in the disease.because all effective drugs were found to decrease the effects of theneurotransmitter dopamine, research is now focusing on the mechanisms ofdopamine action in the brain and on mapping the areas of the brain that usedopamine in neural transmission. unlike parkinson's disease, a condition inwhich a specific group of dopaminecontaining neurons die, people withschizophrenia have no single, welldefined area of the brain that is damaged;rather, anatomical studies suggest that many dopaminecontaining brain areasare affected. in addition, unlike parkinson's disease, which exhibits a loss ofdopamine owing to neuronal death, schizophrenia displays an apparent excessof dopamine activity. this excess activity may be due to an abnormally highnumber of a specific type of cellsurface receptor for dopamine, the d2 receptor.(receptor subtypes are themselves a subject of intense interest because eachsubtype behaves differently; thus, their existence adds ever deeper levels ofcomplexity to the questions regarding the precise role of dopamine inschizophrenia.)further research is necessary to understand how abnormalities in thedopamine system of the brain contribute to the symptoms of schizophrenia.evidence is mounting that other neurotransmitters are also involved. forexample, it is well known that dopamine blocking drugs are effective onlyagainst the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, which suggests that theblunting of affect and other negative symptoms do not result from dopamineabnormalities. recent studies have shown that these negative symptoms can belessened by drugs that act on another neurotransmitter, gamma aminobutyricacid. given the variable symptomatology of schizophrenia and the complexityof the brain systems involved, it is not surprising that continued progress isaccompanied by new questions regarding the role of dopamine in this disease.nevertheless, investigations into the neurochemicaladvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain38mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.perturbations of schizophrenia have farreaching implications for improvedtreatment of the disease. digital maps of neurochemical systems, including thelocations of different receptor subtypes, and the known functions of thosesystems in normal and disease states would be of particular value in the study ofschizophrenia.figure 21 magnetic resonance images of the brains of two 44yearoldmale identical twins, one with schizophrenia (right) and the other without(left). arrows point to the cerebral ventricles, which are enlarged in theaffected twin. images provided by the national institute of mental health.the ability to "image" the structure and functioning of the brain is afundamental advance that is being vigorously applied to the study ofschizophrenia. magnetic resonance imaging (mri) has revealed some subtleand intriguing structural abnormalities. these include in some individualsabnormally large cerebral ventricles, specific spaces in the brain containingcerebrospinal fluid, and an apparent thinning of certain areas of the cortex thatare involved in emotional expression (figure 21). nevertheless, the functionalimplications of these structural abnormalities have yet to be determined. brainimaging techniques, such as positron emission tomography (pet scanning) andits variations, can be used to measure such functions as energy metabolism,blood flow, and receptor binding; localized electrical activity can be recordedusing electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography. these imagingstudies can be done while subjects are actively involved in specific tasks or atrest. such studies can also shed light on brain functioning during periods ofsevere dysfunction or relativeadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain39mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.remission, and during treatment with antischizophrenic medications. studies ofregional cerebral blood flow suggest decreased activation of the frontal cortexin response to certain tasks in some people with schizophrenia. pet studies ofcerebral metabolism have confirmed this dampened activity of the frontal cortexand have further suggested increased activation of other brain regions. petstudies of dopamine receptor binding in schizophrenic patients are justbeginning to yield interesting, although sometimes conflicting, information.the potential of functional imaging studies to increase our knowledge ofschizophrenia is great, but these studies are complicated by several factors. forexample, the variable clusters of symptoms exhibited by different patients andtheir differing treatment histories must be carefully correlated with the specificfindings from imaging experiments. in pharmacological studies, such as thosethat examine dopamine receptor binding, the differing properties of the drugsthat are used must be well understood to interpret the results of eachexperiment. databases of imaging data combined with careful annotationsregarding patient history, pharmacological properties, and other variables couldgreatly facilitate more rapid and more meaningful conclusions from these typesof studies.genetic studies, involving both population and molecular genetics, areintegral to research on schizophrenia. studies of families and particularly oftwins clearly suggest genetic factors in the disease. yet attempts to locate the"schizophrenia gene" have not been successful. candidates include genescoding for the dopamine (d2) receptor or for certain enzymes involved indopamine synthesis or degradation. the lack of success in finding a likelysingle gene, combined with the complicated manifestations of the disease andthe different responses to treatment, suggests that schizophrenia might actuallybe a group of related diseases. indeed, strong evidence supports the notion thatthere is probably more than one gene related to schizophrenia and that insteadof being a direct cause, it confers increased susceptibility for the disease.this increased susceptibility raises the issue of environmental factors thatmight precipitate expression of such a genetic predisposition. proposed factorsrange from viruses, or other infectious agents, to nutritional deficits to traumaticearly childhood experiences. information about these environmental factors andthe varied clinical manifestations of the disease is exceedingly difficult tocorrelate. therefore, another use for sophisticated information managementtools is to begin to build a knowledge base about all that is known regarding theenvironmental history of each patient, in context with information about thepattern and prevalence of schizophrenia inadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain40mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.their families. in addition, once candidate genes for increased susceptibility areidentified, they can be compared with the genetic maps in existing databases(see chapter 4).schizophrenia stands as yet another example of the brain's complexity.better answers about the causes of and effective treatments for schizophreniaare anxiously awaited by those who suffer from the disease and by theirfamilies. although more data are needed to provide these answers, there is alsoa pressing need to correlate and combine more adequately the data that alreadyexist.the growth of neuroscienceneuroscience research has grown in response to criticalproblemsthe costs of caring for those who suffer from neurological disorders, drugabuse, and mental illness, combined with the cost of lost wages and otherindirect losses from these conditions, are extremely difficult to estimate becausereporting mechanisms cannot account for those who have more than onedisorder (e.g., hearing loss and parkinson's disease) and the severity of thesedisorders vary widely. yet even without such estimates we know that thesedisorders constitute a sizable liability to the health and wellbeing of u.s.society (table 21). nearly 23 million americans suffer from neurological andcommunicative disorders resulting from head and spinal cord injury, hearingand speech impairments, and infectious diseases of the nervous system,including acquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids). more than 3.5 millionpeople suffer the effects of debilitating disorders such as alzheimer's,parkinson's and huntington's diseases, and demyelinating and atrophicdisorders such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (nationaladvisory neurological and communicative disorders and stroke council,1989; national institute of neurological disorders and stroke, 1989).impairment arising from alcohol abuse, drug abuse, and mental illness alsotakes a significant toll. it is estimated that more than 60 million americanssuffer from such mental illnesses as schizophrenia, affective disorders, anxietydisorders, various types of dementia, eating disorders, childhood and adolescentdisorders, and sleep disorders, and more than 20 million americans suffer fromalcohol or drug abuse (alcohol, drug abuse, and mental healthadministration, 1990; gerstein and harwood, 1990; rice et al., 1990).researchers have estimated the lifetime prevalence for any alcohol, drug,or mental health (adm) disorder to be 32.7 percent (regier et al., 1990).moreover, there is significant comorbidity among admadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain41mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disorders. for example, the regier study also showed that 37 percent of thosewith an alcohol disorder had a comorbid mental disorder; of patients with adrug disorder (other than alcohol), more than half (53 percent) had a mentaldisorder as well. the frontline efforts now occurring to understand and treat thisdiverse array of diseases are headed by basic and clinical neuroscientists.table 21 prevalence of selected neurological disorders, mental illnesses, andalcohol and drug abuseconditionestimated cases (in millions)aalzheimer's disease and related dementias3.0brain tumors0.062epilepsy2.0multiple sclerosis0.131neuroaids0.02bstroke1.9trauma (head and spinal cord injury)1.0mental illnessesaffective disorders27.7antisocial personality8.8anxiety disorders25.3schizophrenic disorders2.6alcohol and drug abusealcohol17.7drug4.6total94.8a some persons have more than one disorder concurrently (e.g., epilepsy and affective disorder),and these figures may reflect that comorbidity.b incidence (number of new cases reported each year).source: for neurological disorders, ninds, november 1989 and nancdsc, january 1989; formental illnesses, rice et al., 1990; for alcohol and drug abuse, adamha, 1990 and gerstein andharwood, 1990.neuroscience has grown in response to new technologiesand an expanded understanding of biologymuch of the recent growth in neuroscience has been spurred by thedevelopment of important enabling technologies, which have opened entirelynew areas of research. for example, the development of theadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain42mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.oscilloscope permitted the first accurate visualization of the electrical activity ofneurons. the development of the electron microscope allowed investigators tostudy components of neurons too small to be seen with conventionalmicroscopes. the development of antibody techniques to tag specific moleculespermitted the visualization and localization of specific neurochemicals. inaddition, the combination of tissue culture techniques with antibody labelingand molecular biological techniques has provided critical new knowledgeregarding the mechanisms of neural functioning. finally, the development ofcomputer technologies has played a fundamental role over the past two decadesin enabling data collection and analysis of singleneuron physiological data.more recently, the development of graphic visualization techniques haspermitted researchers to view the active functioning of a human brain.many other factors in addition to technology have contributed to thegrowth of neurosciencešfor example, increased appreciation of the importanceof the fundamental biological processes that underlie brain disorders, especiallymental illness. in the past decade, the groundwork has been laid for tacklingsome of the most intractable neurological problems, including spinal cordinjury, epilepsy, stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases. these and otherachievements have led to a feast of exciting research opportunities that haveattracted great numbers of new investigators to neuroscience in the past 10years. the society for neuroscience membership roster currently stands at morethan 17,500, a remarkable figure, given that there were only 500 chartermembers in 1969 and 6,350 members in 1979. (at the society's annual meetingin 1990, almost 8,000 abstracts of individual research projects were presented.)beyond u.s. borders, growth in international organizations is also apparent: theinternational brain research organization boasts more than 20,000 membersfrom 73 countries. an increase in scientific journals has accompanied thisgrowth, with more than 200 scientific journals now exclusively devoted toneuroscience disciplines in the areas of basic science or clinical investigation.although growth in the field of neuroscience has contributed greatly to anunderstanding of the brain, it is not without its problems. the volume ofknowledge and information generated from this work has been growing linearlywith public and private investments in resources and with individualcommitment. this expanding knowledge offers extraordinary opportunities forneuroscience to make rapid progress in the treatment and prevention of mentaland neurological illnesses during the next decade. without innovative strategiesfor information management, communication, and processing, however, theamountadvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain43mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and complexity of the data present daunting impediments to future advances.neuroscience research is a national prioritya comprehensive resource for managing information on brain structureand functioning is necessary to protect an already substantial public investment.one measure of the current national investment in neuroscience research isfederal and nonfederal expenditures. tables 22a and 22b summarize theneurosciencerelated expenditures of two agencies, the national institutes ofhealth (nih) and the alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration(adamha). many other agencies in the federal biomedical research complexalso support basic, as well as clinical, neuroscience research. the nationalscience foundation has a long history of funding basic neuroscience research,and other federal research support derives from such agencies as thedepartment of energy, the department of veterans affairs, and the office ofnaval research (table 23). outside the federal government, a number ofprivate agencies and foundations, such as the howard hughes medical instituteand the macarthur foundation, provide support for neuroscience research(table 23). although it is impossible to determine the precise amount spent onneuroscience research (because of the diversity of funding sources and theinclusion of neurosciencetargeted funds in budgets that reflect support in morethan one field of biomedical research), it is estimated that the total nationalinvestment is approximately $1.5 billion per year (table 23).when considered within the context of the massive disease burden frommental and neurological diseases, even greater investment in neuroscienceresearch could be justified. strategies such as the brain mapping initiative aredesigned in part to protect current investments by maximizing the integration ofinformation gained from neuroscience research. the longterm benefits of thisresearch are numerous and will substantially reduce the national andinternational burdenšboth in terms of costs and human sufferingšimposed byneurological and mental disorders. to hasten this progress, strategies must bedeveloped to integrate new discoveries with the extensive body of accumulatedknowledge. such integration is needed now because the advances made byneuroscientists, especially in the past decade, have brought this researchenterprise to the threshold of major breakthroughs in a number of areas,including neurogenetics, biobehavioral sciences, and neural injury.neuroscience research is a complex field that comprises many subdisciplines,most of which share a common need for a comprehensive map of the brain indigitaladvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain44mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 22a investment in neuroscience research (in thousands of dollars) by thenational institutes of healthinstitute1988 (actual)1989 (actual)1990 (estimated)division of researchresources30,30134,36528,728national cancer institute34,06841,37842,753national eye institute79,18881,24481,753national heart, lung, andblood institute52,97056,28057,700national institute of allergyand infectious diseases24,57140,19741,805national institute ofarthritis andmusculoskeletal and skindiseases6281,1371,255national institute of childhealth and humandevelopment78,17391,03295,000national institute of dentalresearch9,3378,5118,755national institute ofdiabetes and digestive andkidney diseases25,50026,90028,100national institute ofenvironmental healthsciences15,58819,12019,866national institute of generalmedical sciences11,40011,50011,750national institute ofneurological disorders andstroke458,792471,632490,409national institute on aging63,22178,57384,380total883,707961,869992,254source: division of financial management, national institutes of health, september 1990.table 22b investment in neuroscience research (in thousands of dollars) by thealcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration aagency198819891990national institute of mental health118,803153,881180,161national institute on drug abuse38,00054,00066,000national institute on alcohol abuse andalcoholism18,60923,90429,313total175,412231,785275,474a all numbers are actual.source: financial management and planning offices of the three agencies, december 1990.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain45mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.form. the incorporation, through a brain mapping initiative, of enablingtechnologies in the field of neuroscience research is an appropriate strategy tofuture breakthroughs.table 23 u.s. investment (in thousands of dollars) in neuroscience and mentalhealth research: sponsoring agencies and foundationsaunitamountbnational institutes of health992,254alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration275,474department of veterans affairs115,369cnational science foundation39,000office of naval research22,200department of energy20,000office of scientific research u.s. air force15,600environmental protection agency3,900ddepartment of agriculture3,501centers for disease control1,204efoundationshoward hughes medical institute35,000the john d. and catherine t. macarthur foundation14,000pew charitable trusts6,500cwhitehall foundation, inc.2,000total1,546,002a includes basic and clinical, extramural and intramural research only (services excluded).b figures are for fiscal year 1990 except where otherwise indicated and were obtained throughpersonal communications and, in some cases, annual reports.c fiscal year 1989 figures.d figure is for the neurotoxicology division of the health effects research laboratory.e extramural grants for head injury research.referencesalcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration. 1990. alcohol and health (seventhspecial report to the u.s. congress). adamha pub. no. 901656. washington, d.c.:u.s. department of health and human services, public health service.barker, d., e. wright, k. nguyen, l. cannon, p. fain, d. goldgar, d. t. bishop, j. carey, b. baty,j. kivlin, h. willard, j.s. waye, g. greig, l. leinwand, y. nakamura. p. o'connell, m.leppert, j.m. lalouel, r. white, and m. skolnick. 1987. gene foradvancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain46mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.von recklinghausen neurofibromatosis is in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17.science236:1100œ1102.colwell, r. r., ed. 1989. biomolecular data: a resource in transition. new york: oxforduniversity press.delisi, c.1988. computers in molecular biology: current applications and emerging trends.science240:47œ52.gerstein, d. r., and h. j. harwood, eds. 1990. treating drug problems, vol. 1. washington, d.c.:national academy press.howard hughes medical institute. 1990. finding the critical shapes. bethesda, md.: howardhughes medical institute office of communications.hubel, d. h., and t. n. wiesel. 1979. brain mechanisms of vision. scientific american241(3):150œ162.lewis, r.1990. a glimpse of neurofibromatosis 1 protein function. journal of nih research2(oct.):60œ64.mccormick, b. h., t. a. defanti, and m. d. brown, eds. 1987. visualization in scientificcomputing. siggraph computer graphics newsletter21(6):1œ13.national advisory neurological and communicative disorders and stroke council. 1989. decadeof the brain: answers through scientific research. nih pub. no. 882957. bethesda,md.: u.s. department of health and human services, national institutes of health.national institute of neurological disorders and stroke. 1989. profile. bethesda, md.: u.s.department of health and human services, national institutes of health.regier, d. a., m. e. farmer, d. s. rae, b. z. locke, s. j. keith, l. l. judd, and f. k. goodwin.1990. comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other substance abuse. journal ofthe american medical association264(19):2511œ2518.rice, d. p., s. kelman, l. s. miller, and s. dunmeyer, eds. 1990. the economic costs of alcoholand drug abuse and mental illness. adamha pub. no. 901694. washington, d.c.:u.s. department of health and human services, alcohol, drug abuse, and mental healthadministration.rowbotham, m. c., and h. l. fields. 1989. postherpetic neuralgia: the relation of pain complaint,sensory disturbance, and skin temperature. pain39:129œ144.sacks, o.1970. the man who mistook his wife for a hat. new york: harper and row.seizinger, b. r., g. a. rouleau, l. j. ozelius, a. h. lane, a. g. faryniarz, m. v. chao, s. huson,b. r. korf, d. m. parry, m. a. pericakvance, and j. gusella. 1987. genetic linkage ofvon recklinghausen neurofibromatosis to the nerve growth factor receptor gene. cell49(5):589œ594.smith, t. f.1990. the history of the genetic sequence databases. genomics6:701œ707.vela, c.1990. overview of u.s. genome and selected scientific databases. background paperprepared for the committee on a national neural circuitry database, institute of medicine.advancing neuroscience in the decade of the brain47mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3overview of neuroscience research: acloser look at the neural hierarchythis chapter is intended as a primer or simplified overview of someaspects of neuroscience for those readers not familiar with the field. as such,the chapter describes some of the experiments that are done at each level of avertical hierarchy of neural functioning, from behavior to genetic mechanisms(figure 31). researchers have developed hundreds of techniques andformulated elaborate repertoires of experimental strategies to answerfundamental questions about brain functions. when combined, these techniquesprovide information at all levels of the vertical hierarchy. although apparentlydistinct, these levels cannot be separated because information that exists at onehorizontal plane must be considered in concert with information from all otherplanes to generate a coherent picture of brain functioning. in addition, at eachvertical level, the results of many different experimental approaches need to beintegrated.behavior and emotion are manifestations of brain activitybehavior encompasses many degrees of complexity, from the mostrudimentary kneejerk reflex to the subtlety and sophistication of movementexhibited by a ballet dancer or chess grand master. the study of behavior can besubdivided into several broad facets: sensory processing (vision, hearing, touch,and smell leading to conscious perception), motor processing (reflexes andcoordinated movements), and cognitive processing (learning, thinking, andplanning). behavior also includes psychological processes, such as personalityand mood.overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy48mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 31 the neural hierarchy. adapted from shepherd, 1988.overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy49mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animals as simple as fruit flies and snails exhibit behaviors that areneurally driven. as organisms become more complex, their behaviors becomecorrespondingly more intricate. human behavior represents the ultimate in richand elaborate repertoires that are affected by a range of factors from ''hardwired" genetic codes to minutebyminute environmental perturbations.behavior and its neural underpinnings must also be understood across differentdevelopmental stages and different abnormal or pathological conditions. thechallenge in neuroscience is to understand the contributions of different factorsto specific behavioral and emotional functions. because important factors existat all levels of the hierarchy, from organized brain systems to individual cellsand even genes, this formidable challenge can be met only by invoking adiverse and powerful arsenal of experimental tools.many behavioral studies in animals employ conditioning techniques firstdeveloped by pavlov in the late 1920s. by pairing a bell with the presentation offood to a dog, pavlov was able to "condition" the dog to respondphysiologically with increased gastric secretion when only the bell was soundedand no food was present. (in other words, a bell/food association wasestablished, and this mental association produced a physiological response inthe animal's body.) later research efforts developed the concept of operantconditioning: animals can be taught, using associations of food and sensorystimuli such as sound or light, to press bars, enter doors, or perform some otheractivity. moreover, once an animal is trained to perform a specific activity, newassociations can be taught; how well these activities are learned, as well as thedisruption of welllearned activities, can then be assessed using a variety ofexperimental manipulations. for example, many psychotropic drugs, includingmorphine and nicotine, have been tested by operant conditioning in studiesaimed at finding replacement drugs that are perceived by the user to be similarto the real drug but that have no addictive properties. finally, because operantconditioning models involve learning, behavioral experiments with rats born ofalcoholingesting mothers or rats exposed to lead poisoning have contributed toan understanding of some of the learning deficits that result from prenatal orenvironmental exposure to toxic substances.other behavioral research has involved the selective destruction orelectrical stimulation of discrete brain regions and the subsequent observationof behavioral changes. such experiments helped to associate a particular part ofthe hypothalamus with the regulation of eating behavior, certain limbic systemnuclei with aggressive behavior, specific nuclei of the diencephalon with avariety of movement disorders,overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy50mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and the hippocampus with memory deficits. as more is learned about thepresence, function, and location of brain neurotransmitters andneuromodulators, these kinds of investigations are expanding to measure theeffects of loss and replacement of specific neurochemicals.learning and memory can also be measured in nonhuman animals. simpleorganisms, such as the fruit fly, can be classically conditioned, and, amazingly,certain specific genetic mutations in the fruit fly are known to compromiseseverely this type of learning (dudai, 1985). because there are importantsimilarities, or homologies, between the genes of fruit flies and those of higheranimals, identification of the protein encoded by the defective gene mayprovide a clue to the genetic basis of learning in higher animals.animals such as monkeys are capable of complex learning tasksšforexample, long chains of discrete movements, association of symbols withspecific movements, association between different objects, or manipulation ofspatial relationships between objects. these tasks can be designed in such a wayas to distinguish shortterm memory from longterm memory and to allowprecise measurement of learning acquisition. behaviors such as these can thenbe used as benchmarks for a range of manipulations of brain structure andchemistry. electrical recordings of brain activity made during specific tasks canhelp localize the part of the brain that mediates the information processing andcontrol of movements necessary for the task. these tasks are also useful forassessing the deficits caused by experimental brain injury or stroke.the aim of behavioral research in animals is to discover neural processesthat can be correlated with human brain functions. yet the techniques applied tohuman behavior have also sought to go beyond such correlations and acquire awindow into cognitive and emotional function. for a long time, behavioralresearch in humans was severely limited by the paucity of techniquesappropriate for human experimentation. now, a number of new techniquespermit the study of human brain function. one important step was the advent ofnoninvasive recording methods such as electroencephalographic (eeg)recordings, which made it possible to associate certain behavioral states withchanges in the electrical activity of the cerebral cortex. (the recordings exhibitdifferent patterns during different states of consciousness, including quietwakefulness, alert wakefulness, and sleep.) following its development, the eegtechnique was immediately applied to the study of many human neurologicaland mental illnesses.more recently, it has become possible to discriminate between differentkinds of brain electrical activity by amplifying particular componentsoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy51mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the eeg recordings during stimulation of specific visual, auditory, or sensorysystems. these socalled eventrelated potential (erp) recordings, which areessentially more finely tuned eegs, contain specific waveforms that can bemapped, albeit with limited resolution, to specific structures of the brain. erpshave been used to diagnose brain injury locations, describe abnormalities inschizophrenic patients, and trace the pathways underlying certain types ofinformation processing. in the past five years, techniques have begun to bedeveloped to record the magnetic rather than electrical fields that are generatedby cortical activity. magnetoencephalography, or neuromagnetic imaging, hasbeen applied to the study of epileptic seizure activity and may in the future addgreater resolution to the study of human brain activity.another exciting development is the ability to measure simultaneously theactivity of most of the discrete brain regions in humans, during a variety ofsituations, with positron emission tomography. in pet scanning, shortlivedradioactive markers are attached to specific molecules and injected into thebloodstream. these tagged molecules can then be visualized by detectorsoutside the brain and the resulting images stored in a computer (plate 31). insome cases, the tagged molecules trace the blood flow to or the uptake ofglucose by the brain. tracing these patterns in the nervous system helps toidentify brain regions with higher activity levelsšthey generally exhibitincreased blood flow and increased uptake of glucose. likewise, decreasedblood flow and glucose uptake are associated with those brain regions that arenot as active or that are being inhibited. researchers have also used pet tovisualize the binding of various drugs and neurotransmitter substances toreceptors in the brain during discrete behavioral tasks and in certain emotionalstates.because pet studies can be repeated several times, they can be used toevaluate clinical treatments for behavioral and emotional disorders, in additionto their use in diagnosis or basic research. pet screening permits thereassessment of individual subjects after the administration of therapeuticagents or therapies and thus may show a return to or approximation of normalbrain activity following successful therapies. clearly, the use of pet in normalsubjects also has great potential for increasing basic understanding of the brainand its processes in addition to providing a baseline from which to judgeexperimental therapies. so far, pet has provided the best and most completeinformation on humans with which to correlate the mass of data from studies ofnonhuman animals, and its use will facilitate a more rapid transfer of basicscience research to human beings.magnetic resonance imaging is another technology that has provedoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy52mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to be useful in visualizing brain functions. mri uses external magnetic fields tovisualize the threedimensional structure of the brain at a resolution much betterthan that provided by xrays or computerassisted tomography (ct). eventhough mr and ct images are essentially views of static structures and do notreflect dynamic changes, their improved resolution has had an immediateimpact on the localization of brain damage from stroke, alzheimer's disease,epilepsy, and brain cancer. furthermore, numerous efforts are under way toachieve the precise overlay, or registration, of mr images with pet images sothat the anatomical localization of pet data can be improved. the future shouldsee the improvement of mri techniques to allow visualization of particularmolecules, such as phosphorus, to reveal dynamic changes in neurochemicalactivity over time.the systems of the brain are connected by elaboratepathways and serve many functionsalthough behavioral research has associated many functions with specificparts of the brain, resolution of precisely how neural computation occursdepends on knowledge of how various brain regions are connected to each otherand how activity in one region affects other regions. this level of the hierarchyis concerned with organized groups of neuronsš"areas" of the cerebral cortexand "nuclei" of subcortical regions. groups of nuclei and areas make up themajor systems of the brain, and vast networks of connections link thesecomponents. at the turn of the century, the development and use ofhistochemical stains revealed the rich variety of neuronal types and allowedresearchers to map and identify many of the interconnections among majorsystems of the brain.for many years this early information guided initial studies of factorscrucial to the development of certain brain regions. for example, researchshowed that the neurons in the visual part of the cerebral cortex in kittens, whowere prevented from seeing by birth defects or experimental closing of theeyelids at birth, did not develop properly. this finding provided the importantknowledge that proper development depended on the ability of the system tofunction (also see box 22).more recent developments include neuroanatomical tract tracingtechniques to analyze the circuitry of the brain. these techniques takeadvantage of the fact that neurons absorb certain substances, whichsubsequently move from the axonal endings to the cell body or from the cellbody to the axonal endings. these tracer substances can be made visible in anumber of ways, and their presence or absenceoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy53mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in specific regions of the brain indicates whether a region has connections tosome other region. in other words, the substances allow investigators todemonstrate a connection between the region of the brain in which thesubstance was placed and the region to which it was transported. sometimes itis possible to visualize the tracers, through high magnification with an electronmicroscope, in axonal endings that contact one specific neuron. such highresolution studies have determined that these connections are often to a specificpart of a neuron and occur in a highly predictable pattern. in addition, by usingmore than one of these tracing substances at a time, it is possible to mapmultiple pathways of connections among neurons and neuron groups.complementing the anatomical research have been electrophysiological studiesof brain pathways and systems. such efforts not only establish circuitryinformation but often shed light on the functional relationships between certainregions (because physiological responses to stimulation, such as excitation andinhibition, can also be measured).much of the present understanding of the networks of the brain has comefrom anatomical and physiological studies such as those described above. thiswork has generated conceptual frameworks that have greatly advanced ourthinking about the brain and that have been borrowed by computer scientistswho are attempting to build "thinking" computers. a key framework from thesestudies is the concept of parallel distributed processing of information. rarely isthere just one brain pathway for a certain type of information; instead, manypathways, involving tens of millions of neurons, run parallel to each other.nevertheless, information is selectively distributed to specific regions of thebrain by functionally distinct processing streams. this organization underliesthe brain's ability to store, process, and mediate hundreds of kinds ofinformation simultaneously and reliably.overlying the anatomically defined neural systems are the chemicalsystems of the brain. it is common for particular neurotransmitter substances topredominate in specific brain nuclei, and thus knowledge about the actions ofthese neurotransmitter substances must be added to knowledge of the knownanatomical connections of a particular brain region. the functional importanceof the interaction of anatomical and chemical systems is particularly wellillustrated in a region of the brain known as the substantia nigra. this regioncontains many neurons that contain the neurotransmitter dopamine, and the lossof these neurons is responsible for most of the effects noted in parkinson'sdisease (plate 32).techniques for defining these chemical systems began to be developed inbiochemical studies, which isolated bioactive neurochemicalsoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy54mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from specific brain regions. as these neurochemicals were characterized, theireffects in discrete nuclei were assessed by a variety of techniquesšforexample, injecting tiny amounts of the neurochemical into the brain andrecording the physiological response, or injecting the substance and measuringchanges in an animal's behavior. a major breakthrough in the study ofneurochemical systems was the development of antibody labeling techniques, orimmunocytochemistry, in which antibodies are obtained that recognize and bindto a specific neurochemical. the antibodies can be tagged in various ways andused to visualize the neurochemical's specific locations in the brain. very soonafter this discovery, researchers had developed specific antibodies thatrecognized a number of neurochemicals (or their synthetic enzymes), anddetailed maps of the locations of these neurotransmitters in the brain began toemerge. throughout the past 10 years, detailed maps of the locations of scoresof neurotransmitters and neuromodulators have been generated. furthermore,techniques have been developed that combine tract tracing methods withimmunocytochemistry and thus reveal simultaneously the connections andneurochemistry of discrete brain regions. finally, the changes in these mapsduring development and following injury have been and continue to be activelyexamined.neurons come in many shapes and sizes, and containdifferent chemicalsneurons are the signaling cells or basic functional units of the brain(box 31). each neuron has three major parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon.the cell body is the neuron's powerhouse and contains the biosyntheticmachinery for making proteins and other molecules needed by the cell.extensions of the cell body (processes), called dendrites, normally form amultitude of branching patterns, accounting in part for the many differentshapes neurons exhibit. most of the surface area of neurons is in the dendrites,which are the primary receiving areas for signals from other neurons. neuronshave only one axon extending from their cell bodies; the axon transmits neuralsignals from the cell body to other cells. all neurons are electrically charged(like a battery) as a result of different ion concentrations inside and outside thecell. when a neuron is excited, ions flow through the cell's membrane, and thevoltage difference between inside and outside is briefly reversed. this voltagereversal, called an action potential, is propagated down the axon to its endings,where it causes the release of the neurotransmitters stored within these endings.many different kinds of neurochemicals are transported back andoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy55mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.forth to the cell body in axons, sometimes along specialized protein structures(microtubules) that are like railroads along which little packets (e.g., vesiclescontaining neurotransmitters) of material can travel. (these same packets aresometimes responsible for transporting the pathwaytracing substancesmentioned in the previous section.) axons are important in developmentbecause directed growth of the axon from the developing neuron to its intendedtargets is critical to proper development of a whole brain. although such growthis affected by a host of chemical cues and mechanisms, the transport of certain"trophic" factors by the axon is a key aspect of the growth process.box 31not all neuroscience research isconcerned with neuronsglia are the supporting cells of the brain and are not involved insynaptic transmission. more numerous than neurons, glial cells perform avariety of functions. for example, they constitute the insulating myelinsheaths that cover many axons. microglia ingest debris from brain injuryor normal cell death. another type of glial cell guides the migration ofdeveloping neurons. following brain injuries, glia proliferate and formscars. as researchers develop new methods to encourage injured axonsto regrow, such scars could present a serious barrier.the bloodbrain barrier is a physical barrier between the blood andbrain tissue, formed by special junctions between the cells lining thecerebral blood vessels. the brain is exquisitely sensitive to changes inacidity, extracellular protein content, and other factors. the bloodbrainbarrier protects the brain from these changes by preventing manychemicals from entering the brain's extracellular spaces. however, thebarrier also prevents many therapeutic agents, including anticancer andantibiotic drugs, from reaching the site of tumors or infections. researchhas revealed some mechanisms for bypassing the bloodbrain barrier andhas identified conditions under which the barrier is disrupted.in addition to the more than 100 major neuronal types defined by size andshape, neurons differ in the kind of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators theyproduce. more than a hundred of these neurochemicals have been identified,and the list continues to grow. some act to excite or to inhibit other neurons,and some act in subtle ways to enhance or depress these effects. investigation ofthe regional location of specific neurotransmitters has indicated a role for theneurotransmitter acetylcholine in alzheimer's disease. analysis withimmunocytochemistry in many regions has further revealed thatoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy56mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many neurons contain and release more than one neurochemical at a time.moreover, the balance of functionally important neurochemicals may changeduring development. sometimes one cell type can be the locus for significantneurological dysfunctionsšas mentioned earlier, the specific population ofcells that are damaged in parkinson's disease. all of these factors must bestudied to map the structural and functional organization of each region of thebrain and spinal cord.researchers also employ electrophysiological techniques at the cellularlevel of analysis, which often involves the penetration of individual cells withmicroscopically small electrodes to study the activity of a single cell. a recentlydeveloped physiological technique that shows great promise is the use ofvoltage and ionsensitive dyes (plate 33). these dyes are fluorescentsubstances that are taken up by neurons and that change colors depending onthe voltage state of the cell or the ion content of the cytoplasm inside theneuron. special microscopes can record these color changes (in response to avariety of experimental manipulations) and provide images of the changes overtime and in discrete regions of the neuron. researchers have applied thistechnique to the study of regional activation of specific neuronal types, activityof specific neurotransmitters, and activity of developing neurons.another recently developed technique, in situ hybridization, employsspecially synthesized pieces of nucleic acids that have a sequencecomplementary to the rna that codes for specific proteins within neurons.these complementary pieces, which can be tagged with radioactive labels, bindto the rna of interest; exposing brain tissue to these probes, the presence andquantity of rna coding for specific proteins can be visualized and measured(plate 34). this technique is particularly valuable because it can measure,through the changes in rna synthesis, the effect of many variables, includingneural activity, on genetic regulation of protein synthesis.considerable overlap occurs between investigations at the cellular level,such as those described here, and investigations at the systems, synaptic, andmolecular levels. in many respects, the individual cells are the nodal pointswhere the various molecular and genetic processes combine to give rise to thestructural and gross functional organization of the nervous system. thus,investigators at many levels of the neural hierarchy must consider theinformation their efforts generate within the context of the neuronal types towhich their data may apply.synapses and microcircuits filter vast numbers of messagessynapses are highly specialized regions of neurons at whichcommunication between cells takes place. structurally, most synapsesoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy57mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are polarized, in that the sending part of one neuron (an axonal ending) makescontact with the receiving part of another neuron (usually a cell body ordendrite). between these two components is a small space, called the synapticcleft. when an action potential occurs in the sending, or presynaptic, neuron, itcauses the release of neurotransmitter substances into the synaptic cleft. thesesubstances diffuse across the space and bind to specific receptor molecules onthe receiving, or postsynaptic, neuron. because each neuron is studded withliterally thousands of synapses, any one synapse contributes only a tiny amountto excitation or inhibition of a cell. an action potential is produced if theexcitatory inputs to the cell outweigh the inhibitory inputs (figure 32).underlying this process are complex biophysical mechanisms related to theproperties of the neuronal membrane and to the precise location and distributionof different kinds of inputs.the structural aspects of synapses and synapse formation are most oftenstudied using an electron microscope. such investigations have delineated manyof the cellular specializations that occur at the synapse and have described thefunction of these specializations. one of the most interesting phenomenadocumented by electron microscopic studies is the retraction of presynapticaxonal endings, which results from various types of damage to the presynapticcell. such retraction can be transient or permanent and, depending on thenumber of lost synaptic inputs, can fundamentally change the balance of inputsto the postsynaptic cell. the loss of synapses may also cause structural changesin the postsynaptic cells, which are often visible in regular microscopicanalysis. for example, in many large neurons of the cerebral cortex, dendriteshave tiny projections called dendritic spines. the density of these spines, whichprovide even more surface area for synapses, has been shown to decrease withadvanced age, an effect that can also occur in certain neurological disease states(plate 35).the physiology of synaptic transmission has been investigated using avariety of electrophysiological techniques in a wide range of animal species.these experiments, combined with chemical analysis, provide a rich picture ofthe many events that occur in the synaptic endings and in the postsynapticneurons: ionic changes, the release of precise amounts of neurotransmitters, andactions, in the synaptic cleft, of enzymes that sometimes degradeneurotransmitters and thus end their effects. for example, researchers know thatthe amount of transmitter released depends on changes in the intracellularconcentration of calcium in the axonal ending. this characteristic provides amechanism by which synaptic transmission can be modified or regulatedoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy58mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(varying the amount of transmitter that is released changes the likelihood ofaction potential generation in the postsynaptic cell). this ability to change iscalled plasticity and is another hallmark of neural information processing thatcomputer scientists would like to reproduce in "thinking" computers.figure 32 an action potential tracing. the action potential, the basis ofneuronal signaling, is an electrical impulse generated by a change in thepermeability of the cell membrane to sodium, calcium, potassium, and otherions. adapted from kandel and schwartz, 1985.regulation of synaptic transmission has a number of interesting effects. ithas been known for a long time that when a neuron is repeatedly stimulated, itoften stops firing, despite continued stimulation. this process is known ashabituation and is an adaptive response that helps filter out stimuli. researchershave shown that repeated stimulation of a presynaptic ending results eventuallyin a decrease in the calcium entering the ending. the synapse then "loses itsstrength," so that presynaptic action potentials result in decreased release ofneurotransmitter. a reverse mechanism, called sensitization, helps strengthenparticular inputs.by balancing inputs and filtering out unnecessary information, thesemechanisms are probably critical to the microcircuitry involved in learning andmemory. many different brain regions are likely to be involved in variousaspects of memory and learning, but a common theme for all of them is thestrengthening of certain inputs over others on the cellular and synaptic levels.many investigators in the field of computational neuroscience are concernedwith defining theoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy59mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mathematical constraints of these processes. their goal is to develop a deeperunderstanding of the nature of information storage in the brain and how itdiffers from information storage in conventional computers.messages can change molecular states and geneticexpressionneural signaling comprises much more than stimulusresponse patterns.the molecular chemistry involved in transducing neural signals is an area ofintense scientific interest and often serves as the point at which pharmacologicaltreatments intervene. excitation and inhibition of a neuron are mediated by ionchannels that selectively regulate the flow of small ions, especially sodium,calcium, potassium, or chloride ions. each ion channel is a complex moleculethat is embedded in the cell membrane and contains a pore through whichparticular ions can pass. most ion channels are either open or closed; thesestates are often ''gated," or determined, by specific external influences. somechannels are gated by the action of neurotransmitters, others by the voltagedifference across the membrane, and still others by mechanical stimuli, asoccurs in peripheral nerve endings to signal touch and pressure on the skin. theregulation of gated channels gives rise to action potentials and involves manydifferent types of biochemical reactions that have implications for all kinds ofexcitable membranes in the body, including skeletal and cardiac muscle cells,egg cells of the ovary, and certain immune system cells.the first step in synaptic transmission is the binding of a neurotransmitterto a receptoršsimilar to a key in a lock. some receptors actually form an ionchannel when activated, and neurotransmitter binding to the receptor changesthe structure of the pore so as to facilitate or inhibit ions from crossing themembrane. a specific type of acetylcholine receptor, which mediates musclemovement, is part of an ion channel, as are certain receptor subtypes for gammaaminobutyric acid (gaba), the receptor at which certain tranquilizers, such asvalium®, act. other neurotransmitterreceptor complexes, however, initiate acomplicated cascade of biochemical reactions that culminate in the structuralmodification of distinct ion channels. such cascades involve socalled secondmessenger molecules, which function to activate other molecules.cyclic adenosine monophosphate (camp), a nucleotide molecule, is thebest understood of these second messengers. camp is formed after manyneurotransmitters attach to their receptorsšincluding the type of receptor fornorepinephrine that mediates increases in heart rate and is blocked by the betablocker drugs that many heart patientsoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy60mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.take. at this receptor, the binding of transmitters causes the linking of thereceptor to a protein, called a g protein, which transduces the signal byactivating an enzyme (adenylate cyclase) that in turn causes the production ofcamp (figure 33). camp then activates other enzymes (protein kinases) thatcause phosphate groups to be added to other molecules, some of which mayinteract with the ion channel proteins. to make matters even more complex,some g proteins are inhibitory and some excitatory to this cascade. otherfigure 33 the synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (camp) thatresults when transmitter (t) binds to the betaadrenergic receptor (r) ismediated through a transducer, or gprotein (g). gtp = guanosinetriphosphate; gdp = guanosine diphosphate. adapted from kandel andschwartz, 1985.overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy61mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.second messengers are lipids such as diacylglycerol, which activates proteinkinase c in a cascade of chemical reactions usually distinct from that involvingcamp. calcium, sometimes bound to proteins such as calmodulin, is yet a thirdsecond messenger that functions to activate a number of different enzymes. it isimportant to note that the chemical reaction cascades involving the three secondmessengers described here often intersect at key molecular points, allowing thedifferent messenger systems to interact with each other.second messenger systems are a good example of the concept that theeffects of synaptic transmission are not limited to the regulation of ion channelsand the resulting excitation or inhibition of action potentials. synaptictransmission also influences, to a greater or lesser degree, all of the biosyntheticprocesses of the cell, from the synthesis of neurotransmitters and receptors tothe synthesis of proteins necessary to maintain the cell's structure. such effectsare the late consequences of cell activation and involve the regulation of geneticexpression.certain genes found in human cells, including brain cells, are similar toviral genes implicated in cancer. these socalled protooncogenes have beenfound in brain cells, and it is thought that these genes function as thirdmessengers because they code for proteins that in turn regulate gene expression.soon after nerve injury, the expression of one of these oncogenes, called cfos,increases. the functional importance of this increase is not known but, amongother possibilities, may well have important consequences for cellular repair. asmentioned previously, neurons synthesize different amounts ofneurotransmitters and other neurochemicals depending on the developmentalstage of the organism and other factors. the genetic regulation that controls thebalance of these biosynthetic processes is another area with critical implicationsfor normal and pathological brain functioning as well as for the response of thebrain to injury.neuroscientists are also investigating the genes contained in cells of thenervous system through gene mapping gene and protein sequencing techniques,and antibody techniques. for example, antibodies can be used to isolate asubstanceša complex protein, for examplešwhose molecular structure is notknown but whose presence is critical to some aspect of neural function. oncethe molecular structure is known, it is then possible to find the gene that codesfor that protein. conversely, one can also use the genes as starting points toisolate and characterize a specific protein. application of techniques that permitthe isolation and sequencing of proteins has elucidated the structure of theacetylcholine receptor mentioned earlier (figure 34). the receptor is composedof four large, related molecules (called subunits, and one of these is repeated sothat five molecules makeoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy62mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.up the receptor) that are arranged in a shape that resembles a thick spool. thecenter of the spool is open and provides a channel through which ions can pass.each subunit of the receptor is coded by a separate messenger rna (mrna),which have now been sequenced, leading to a greater understanding of thestructures of the genes themselves. changes in gene expression, measured byassay of the mrnas for each subunit, have shown that, in the developingjunction between nerve and muscle, release of specific peptides from thegrowing axons causes activation of the acetylcholine receptor genes andstimulation of receptor synthesis. such experimental strategies can now beapplied to the study of the molecular and genetic effects of neurotransmitters,neuromodulators, and hormones that affect brain cells and, ultimately, behavior.figure 34 a threedimensional model of the "spoolshape" acetylcholinereceptor. adapted from kandel and schwartz, 1985.the application of molecular biological and genetic techniques inoverview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy63mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 32the genetics of color visionon the deepest surface of the retina lie the primary receptors of thehuman eye, called rods and cones. rod cells, responsible for blackandwhite vision in dim light, are far more numerous than cone cells, whichenable us to perceive colors. although isaac newton discovered the colorspectrum some 300 years ago, it was not until the late eighteenth centurythat scientists began to understand the basis of color vision: lightabsorbing proteins called pigments that have overlapping but distinctsensitivities to particular wavelengths of the visible spectrum. there arethree classes of cone cells: those containing red pigment, thosecontaining green pigment, and those containing blue.scientists now know that colorblindness, or the inability todiscriminate red and green, results from alterations in the genes thatencode these color pigments in the cone cells. that deficiencies in redgreen discrimination are more common in males than in females isexplained by the fact that the gene responsible for the variation is locatedin the x chromosome. males will be colorblind if the single x chromosomethey inherit from their mother carries the trait; females will be affected onlyif both their x chromosomes are variant. aberrations in blue sensitivity,which affect males and females equally, are rooted in a gene on another,nonsex chromosome.in hopes of supplementing the findings of these classic geneticstudies, jeremy nathans and his colleagues at the johns hopkinsuniversity school of medicine applied modern scientific techniques to thepuzzle of abnormal color vision (nathans, 1989). using dna hybridization,they isolated the genes that code for the color pigments of the cone cellsand compared their structures in people with normal and variant colorvision. interestingly, they discovered that although people have only onecopy of the gene that codes for red pigment, they have two or threecopies of the gene that codes for green pigment. when multiple copies ofa gene exist next to each other in this way, the copies have a tendency torecombine in peculiar patterns when cell division occurs, a phenomenoncalled unequal homologous recombination. of the 25 subjects studied bynathans with abnormal redgreen discrimination, all but one had dna thathad been shuffled as a result of unequal homologous recombination,confirming the hypothesis that when green pigment genes rearrangethemselves "unequally" or irregularly, deficiencies in color vision result.although much remains to be learned about the roles of cones andpigments in color vision, the work of nathans and his colleagues yieldsinteresting clues to the genetics behind what we see and what we cannotsee.overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy64mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.neuroscience is very recent and quite promising. recent landmarksuccesses in neurogenetics have direct application to human health. asscientists identify and characterize ion channels, proteins, receptors, andneurotransmitters that play a role in disease, they gain clues to the location ofthe genes that control the production of these elements (box 32). already someneurological diseases are yielding to this approach. the genetic locus forhuntington's disease was discovered by an interdisciplinary group ofresearchers and has led to a test that predicts with remarkable accuracy whethera person at risk for huntington's will develop the disease. the abnormal(mutated) genes for duchenne's muscular dystrophy and neurofibromatosishave also been identified. in the case of muscular dystrophy, identification ofthe defective gene led to isolation of the protein dystrophin, for which the genecodes. information about dystrophin may well permit scientists to designtreatment strategies to replace the defective protein. identification of the genefor neurofibromatosis is also beginning to lead researchers to important cluesabout the mechanism of that disease (see box 21). advances such as these arethe necessary first steps in disease prevention, but further progress depends onbasic scientific investigation into the regulation and expression of neural genesand the functional consequences of that expression in the brain.references and bibliographydudai, y.1985. genes, enzymes, and learning in drosophila. trends in neuroscience8:18œ21.german, d. c., k. manaye, w. k. smith, d. j. woodward, and c. b. saper. 1989. midbraindopaminergic cell loss in parkinson's disease: computer visualization. annals ofneurology26:507œ514.kandel, e. r., and j. h. schwartz, eds. 1985. principles of neural science. new york: elsevier.nathans, j.1989. the genes for color vision. scientific american260(2):42œ49.pavlov, i. p.1927. conditioned reflexes: an investigation of the physiological activity of thecerebral cortex, g. v. anrep, trans.london: oxford university press.shepherd, g. m.1988. neurobiology, 2nd ed.new york: oxford university press.tank, d. w., sugimori, j. a. connor, and r. r. llinas. 1988. spatially resolved calcium dynamicsof mammalian purkinje cells in cerebellar slice. science242:773œ777.the following sources were also used as background for preparation of thischapter but are not cited specifically in the text.darnell, j., h. lodish, and d. baltimore. 1986. molecular cell biology. new york: scientificamerican books, inc.kelner, k. l., and d. e. koshland, eds. 1989. molecules to models: advances in neuroscience.papers from science 1986œ1989. aaas pub. no. 8917s. washington, d.c.: americanassociation for the advancement of science.kuffler, s. w., and j. g. nichols. 1977. from neuron to brain: a cellular approach to the functionof the nervous system. sunderland, mass.: sinauer assoc., inc.ottoson, d., and w. rostène, eds. 1989. visualization of brain functions. new york: stocktonpress.overview of neuroscience research: a closer look at the neuralhierarchy65mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4computer and information technology inbiomedical and neuroscience researcha complex of computerbased resources that can greatly enhanceneuroscience research is an attainable goal. current trends in informationtechnology offer an unprecedented opportunity for neuroscientists to expandtheir use of hardwon data and to communicate these data more effectively toother scientists. in addition, the sheer mass of neuroscience informationaccumulated to date and the accelerating rate at which new results are beingobtained and reported are becoming major driving forces for the kind oforganization, structure, and accessibility that computerbased resources canprovide. the attractiveness of the present opportunity is also strengthened bythe increasingly intimate role of various computerbased instruments andapplications in neuroscience research. this chapter describes how a complex ofelectronic and digital resources for neuroscience might work in the future, andsupports this description with examples obtained in part from the task forcesorganized to provide advice to the committee and the open hearings thecommittee sponsored. the chapter also discusses the increasing reliance ofbiomedical research on computerized resources and the current trends incomputer science and information technology that make the goal of a complexof resources attainable.a neuroscience laboratory of the future will use a varietyof computerbased toolsthe neuroscience laboratory of the future may seem incredible from ourpresent viewpoint. but a neuroscientist who had fallen asleep overcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research66mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the microscope in 1970 would awaken today to an equally incredible vision ofcolor graphics workstations, shiny compact disks containing masses of data, andelectronic mail messages from colleagues worldwide. any projections of thefuture we might generate today are likely to fall short, in some respects, of whatwill be possible by 2010.the following scenario illustrates how an experiment might be done in aneuroscience laboratory of the future. (the physiological, anatomical, andbiochemical processes it describes are consistent with known aspects of neuralfunction.) although it is hypothetical and overly simplified, it makes explicitthe vision of a family of interrelated databases and other computerbasedresources for neuroscience research. further, it illustrates how threedimensional graphics, databases, networks, and electronic journals willcontribute to research that proceeds more rapidly and efficiently than anythingwe can imagine today, transcending present conventional informationboundaries.the futuristic scene opens in the laboratory of jane smith, who is studyinga brain region recently implicated in a particular behavioral disorder thatprovides a model for human schizophrenia. she uses a new, highly sensitivetracttracing technique to map this area in rodents that have been geneticallyengineered to express an altered form of a specific gene. these animals areinteresting because they are also deficient in a specific learning task, and thisbehavioral deficit is quite similar to a behavioral deficit observed inschizophrenic patients. to examine tissue blocks from her experiments for thepresence of tracer substances, dr. smith uses a microscope connected to acomputer workstation, which allows her to record the data onto maps of thebrain region and to store all of the data in a digital format. this recordingmethod permits rapid computer visualization of the data in three dimensions.in her examination, dr. smith finds a tiny labeled cell group (area x)embedded in the larger nucleus whose existence has not, to her knowledge,been reported before. while she has the map from her experiment on the videoscreen, dr. smith calls up the threedimensional anatomical database for thisbrain region and splits the screen to allow sufficient comparisons of her newmap with other maps of the nucleus that have been deposited in the database.she looks at maps from normal animals and maps from genetically engineeredanimals to see if area x exhibits the same general structure in both groups. oneof the maps seems to show a group of cells quite similar to area x. dr. smithasks the computer to enlarge that map and show its precise location, comparedto her map. (the computer can do this because neuroscientists of the futureroutinely include with their datacomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research67mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.maps certain landmark designations that are used to align and bring intoconformity maps from different investigators.)dr. smith finds that the two groups of cells are in precisely the samelocation and that the structures of the cells match. she then types a message,which is automatically forwarded to the scientist who contributed the map,requesting more information about his work. later that afternoon, dr. smithreceives a message from robert green, who says he had noticed this cell groupin certain kinds of labeling experiments but that it was not his primary interest.nevertheless, he has attached all the data he has regarding this experiment to hismessage, with an offer to help in any way he can. dr. smith electronicallythanks dr. green and asks him if he is aware of any chemical characterizationof these cells. as the reply is negative, dr. smith enters the neurochemicaldatabase for this region and pulls up maps showing the distribution of a varietyof neurotransmitters. she finds a map of the distribution of a particular protein(zeta) that clearly includes area x and, again, asks for more information. adocumentary summary appears at the side of the screen describing theidentification of protein zeta by antibody techniques. the summary also statesthat protein zeta has a specific distribution in the brain and that researcherssuspect that it affects potassium channels in the cells' membranes, making thechannels less likely to open during synaptic transmission. dr. smith transfersthe references for these observations into her personal reference files and asks ifprotein zeta has been sequenced. the reply is that it has been partiallysequenced by a dr. ungaro in italy and that the partial sequence is available in aspecial part of the protein identification resource (pir) reserved forpreliminary data. (dr. ungaro, like dr. green, is pursuing another interest andhas deposited the partial sequence for use by other investigators.)dr. smith enters the pir and calls up the partial sequence for protein zetaon one side of the screen. on the other side, she retrieves information about thegene that has been altered in her experimental animals. the computer displaysthe base pair sequence for the gene, followed by the rna sequence for whichthe gene codes. from the rna sequence, the computer displays the expectedprotein sequence. dr. smith instructs the computer to run a comparison of theexpected protein sequence with the partial sequence of dr. ungaro anddiscovers a strong match. she immediately types a message to dr. ungaroregarding this match and says that she would like to follow up on thisinformation. dr. ungaro replies that he is happy that the information was usefuland that he will amend the pir entry to reflect the probable match and her planto pursue further study.a few weeks pass, during which dr. smith completes another groupcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research68mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of experiments. her studies show that cells in area x are responsible for thelearning deficits in her genetically engineered animals and that protein zeta is anabnormal form that results from the genetic alteration. the protein disrupts thepotassium channels by interfering with cyclic amp, but a new drug thatincreases the effectiveness of cyclic amp blocks this effect in dr. smith'sanimals. moreover, this drug completely alleviates the learning deficits in theseanimals. dr. smith submits these data to an electronic journal, transferring hermanuscript text, photomicrographs, sequence comparisons, and other datadirectly from her computer to the journal. the journal electronically transmitsthe manuscript to reviewers. eventually, the manuscript is published inelectronic and conventional formats, and the accompanying data are depositedinto the appropriate databases. work in other laboratories then begins todocument the biochemical mechanisms that have been discovered and the newdrug's effectiveness in human schizophrenics.as new experiments proceed, dr. ungaro's protein is finally sequenced,and this information, along with dr. smith's data, is moved by pir's editorsfrom the preliminary data files of the pir into its main files of verified data. dr.green's contribution is acknowledged in the manuscript and in the anatomicalbrain database. such documentation is of great use to investigators who havebecome interested in protein zeta and its role in schizophrenia. a contributionindex database keeps track of the results of data deposits such as those of drs.green and ungaro, and such records are often submitted, along with authoredpublications, to university tenure and promotion committees.parts of this scenario could be implemented today; others await furthertechnological, and perhaps sociological, advances. but the useful, coordinatedcomplex of resources suggested in the story will not evolve on its own; it mustbe planned and put into place. it is the consensus of this committee that now isthe time to begin that effort.critical breakthroughs, importantopportunitiescomputers and computer graphics help scientists obtainnew imagesneuroscience is an inherently visual science, and in this way it differs fromother scientific fields, based on mathematical calculations, that already havebenefited from advances in computer science. the widespread use of computersin neuroscience had to wait for major technological breakthroughs in computergraphics, which depended in large measure on increases in the power ofindividual computers and the associated steep decrease in the cost of thatpower. in 1945,computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research69mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it cost approximately $1,000 to perform 1 million computer operations. in 1970,the same number of operations cost less than 6 cents; in 1980, they cost 0.1cent. by 1997, this cost is expected to decrease by a factor of 100. in terms oftime, in 1945, 1 million operations took a month; they took 0.1 second in 1980and, in 1990, in the case of some of the most powerful workstations, roughly2.5 milliseconds (u.s. congress, office of technology assessment, 1990).such trends are continuing in the present decade.more than power, the memory capabilities of a computer determine itscost. again, consistent increases in memory, accompanied by decreases in cost,have occurred over the past three decades (figure 41). in 1965, a computerwith 64 kilobytes (kb) of memory cost about $200,000 (bell, 1988) and wasused, for example, in expensive satellites and space probes, such as voyager ii.today, computers of that size cost about $100 and are used to drive popularcomputer games (e.g., the small, handheld version of nintendo®, gameboy®).why is a computer capable of running voyager ii necessary for a computergame toy with a tiny video screen? the answer is that the graphics of the toyand the ability to interact with those graphics require far more computer powerthan is required by calculations (table 41). today's computer graphicsšfromthe dazzling special effects of movies to the variety of the evening newspromotionsšcould not have been accomplished without the recentimprovements in computer hardware and software.computer graphics is a subspecialty of computer science pioneered byivan sutherland and others in the early 1960s (goldberg, 1988). the work ofthese early investigators and the people they trained led to the development ofthe first primitive graphics workstation less than 20 years ago. the associationfor computing machinery, one of two major associations of computer science,has a specialinterest graphics group that holds a convention every year. inaddition to scientific presentations and workshops, this convention includesseminars on various kinds of graphics applications, a computer graphics artshow, and exhibits from numerous computer hardware and software companies.the almost 40,000 who now attend this convention, ranging from hollywoodartists to automotive engineers to defense contractors, are an indication of howpervasive, and accessible, computer graphics have become in industry andgovernment (acm siggraph, 1989).the use of computer graphics in biomedical research is also becomingpervasive (albeit not as quickly as in such fields as earth mapping, physics, andspace science) and is evolving into the concept of scientific visualization,sometimes called visualization computing (national academy of sciences,1989). in 1987 the nationalcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research70mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.science foundation convened a panel to consider scientific visualization inmany fields, including biomedical science (mccormick et al., 1987). this panelobserved that the human eye recognizes geometric and spatial relationshipsfaster than it recognizes other relationships and that the visual display of datawould be more efficient for human pattern recognition than displays of numbersand text. thus, visualizationfigure 41 the cost (in dollars) of computer memory (in megabytes), whichhas decreased steadily since 1970. dram = dynamic random access memory.chart provided by mark duncan of askmar, derived from a graph by frankura of hewlettpackard.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research71mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computing draws on computer graphics, image processing, computeraideddesign, signal processing, and user interface studies, with the goal of''transforming the symbolic into geometric reality, [and] offering a method tosee the unseen" (mccormick et al., 1987).table 41 text versus image data: byte requirementsapplicationexampleapproximate no. of bytesrequiredword processingone computer screen oftext, 25 rows × 80characters/row2,000 (2 kb)image processinglowendamagnetic resonance andcomputed tomographyimages262,144 (256 kb; 100times more informationthan a screenful of text)1,310,720 (1.25 mb)highendbcomputeraided design(cad; architecture andengineering applications)volumetric imagingcrealistic threedimensionalimages with shadows,highlights, reflections, andtransparencies4,294,967,296 (4 gigabytes;16,000 times moreinformation than amagnetic resonance orcomputed tomographyimage)abbreviations:bit = binary digit, of which there are only two possible: 0 and 1;byte = the number of bits (usually 8) that represent one character;kilobyte (kb) = 1,024 bytes;megabyte (mb) = approximately 1 million bytes;gigabyte = approximately 1 billion bytes;terabyte = approximately one trillion bytes.a 512 × 512 pixel display (8 bits / pixel).b 1280 × 1024 pixel display (8 bits / pixel).c 1k × 1k × 1k voxel display (32 bits / voxel).one of the most successful applications of scientific visualization inbiomedical science has been the modeling of molecular structures from dataderived from xray crystallography. in the past, such structures were inferredfrom the numerical coordinate data obtained in complex experiments and thendrawn by hand or modeled with sticks and balls to represent atoms or othermolecular components. these representationscomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research72mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.depended on the imagination of viewers and their ability to visualize threedimensions from a flat plane and a dynamic image from a static one. now,computer graphics use mathematical data to generate a moving, dynamic, threedimensional structure that can change its shape as a consequence of"experimental" conditions entered into the computer or that can be rotated toachieve a different perspective (plate 41). these dynamic computer models aresufficiently similar to the in vivo molecules that they may soon help scientiststo predict which drugs might stop viruses, how genes are turned on and off, orhow two molecules interact with each other (howard hughes medical institute,1990). not only are these models useful for data analysis but they greatlyenhance the communication of research results by making those results muchmore accessible to scientists and nonscientists alike (u.s. congress, sciencepolicy study, 1986).virtually every kind of data used in neuroscience can be collected, stored,analyzed, and visualized on a computer. the raw data from some techniques arealready collected directly into computerreadable form. for example, in ct,pet, and mri scans, the data are collected in the computer as numbers, whichthe computer uses to form images on its monitors. the images can be displayedin a monochrome scale of gray, or they can be enhanced by assigning colors tocertain numerical ranges. in all presentday, computerbased image processing,the numerical data rather than the images are stored, because the images can berecreated from numbers at any time. increasingly, electrophysiological data anddata from eeg and erp studies are also collected in computerready form.later, the traces of electrical activity can be graphically reconstructed on acomputer for analysis (plate 42).anatomical data can be computerized in a variety of ways. for example,election microscopic photographs of brain tissue can be digitized, and regionsof these photographs can be analyzed for total surface area or volume usingreadily available software programs. one group has reconstructed threedimensional images of the complex innervation patterns of the cells responsiblefor body equilibrium from a montage of many electron micrographs (ross et al.,1990). sections of whole brains have also been digitized and the sectionscombined in a threedimensional display so as to allow rotation and slicing ofthe brain in any plane of section; information regarding neurochemistry or othervariables can then be overlaid on specific regions (plate 43; toga, 1989). aneffort to digitize brain sections is under way at the comparative mammalianbrain collection (cmbc), housed at the university of wisconsin and michiganstate university, to increase the usefulness of this important archival collection(w. welker, j. johnson, and s. greenberg, cmbc, personal communication,computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research73mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1990). beyond its uses in basic science, digitization is also important to clinicalneuroradiology. when xrays are transformed into digital files, the images canbe reconstructed in distant locations. this relatively easy method of transmittingimportant medical records has spurred great interest in building a networksystem to transmit such images among hospitals (banks et al., 1986; elliot etal., 1990).until recently, researchers were forced to trace individually stainedneurons by hand using a special accessory on a light microscope. now,however, these drawings can be done automatically with a computerizedconfocal microscope that reconstructs neurons in three dimensions (figure 42).the neuronal images can be studied on their own or used as templates to displaydifferential inputs to specific parts of a neuron. computer graphics can also beused to display data from pharmacological and neurochemical studies, whichnormally generate numerical data. the computer can transform numericalmeasurements, such as dose, response magnitude, and time, into threedimensional contoured histograms. such wideranging capabilities giveinvestigators unprecedented flexibility in the collection, viewing, analysis, andcommunication of neuroscience research data.increased use of computers in data collection and analysis is apparent fromthe number of private companies that now market computer hardware andsoftware for neuroscience applications. at the society for neuroscience annualmeeting in 1990, 10 companies exhibited workstations useful for neuroscienceresearch, and 43 companies offered software packages that did almosteverything from threedimensional reconstructions of neurons to quantificationand graphic display of fluorescent color changes in ionsensitive dyeexperiments. the companies marketing these tools included microscopecompanies, such as zeiss and leitz, as well as traditional computer firms, suchas apple and ibm.further evidence of the increasingly important role of scientificvisualization in neuroscience comes in the priority given to biomedicalcomputing in universities and government laboratories. for example, stanforduniversity, washington university, the university of pittsburgh, carnegiemellon university, and the university of north carolina, among others, haveelectrical engineering or computer science departments with sections devoted tothe development of technologies, especially graphics and imaging, forbiomedical data collection and analysis. researchers from these departmentswork in conjunction or in collaboration with counterparts from biomedicaldepartments; some departments also have formal ties to the federally supportedsupercomputing efforts (twedt, 1990). at the national institutes of health,many individual institutes maintain branches in which computercomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research74mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientists and software developers work on applications pertinent to the needsof intramural researchers. for example, when a group of researchers at thenational institute of mental health (nimh) developed a new experimentaltechnique and computer software for visualization and image analysis of brainglucose metabolism, the software was freely shared with any investigatorinterested in using the new technique (goochee et al., 1980). nih alsomaintains a division of computer research and technology that, in addition tonih administrative computing oversight, conducts advanced research into suchareas as computer modeling of molecular structure, image processing, andscientific workstation development (national institutes of health, division ofcomputer research and technology, 1989). nih and the national sciencefoundation also provide a number offigure 42 a spinocervical tract neuron from an adult cat's spinal cord. thelower portion of the figure shows the horseradish peroxidase (hrp)filled cellthat occupies one tissue section. the upper portion is a computergeneratedreconstruction from 12 60micronthick sections. the cell was identified andstained by m. j. sedivec, appalachian state university, and l. m. mendell,state university of new york, stony brook; the reconstruction was performedby j. j. capowski, eutectic electronics, inc. this photo appeared on the coverof the journal of neuroscience, march 1986, and was reproduced withpermission from oxford university press.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research75mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.grants to develop useful computer tools for scientific research purposes(national center for research resources, 1990; national science foundation,1991). finally, the national library of medicine (nlm) has developed manyeasily accessible biomedical databases. in addition, the nlm's center forbiotechnology information, in conjunction with its efforts to develop usefulscientific databases and database linkages, is concerned with the incorporationof computer graphics as user interface tools (national library of medicine,1986).considering the primitive state of computer science, especially computergraphics, only 20 years ago, the contributions of these technologies to thevisualization of biological processes are quite remarkable. future workpromises to permit scientists to view data in entirely new ways and to integratethose data to a degree never before possible.database technologies help organize our knowledgea major impact of computer technology has been to enable virtuallyanyone to collect, store, and access many types of data in digital form and toorganize data files into discrete units or collections called databases. althoughthe term database is relatively recent, the concept is as old as symbols carvedinto clay. the ancient egyptian records of a grain harvest were databases, aswas the census taken by julius caesar; the yellow pages is a modern example.computer databases thus reflect the same kind of diversity that other collectionsof information have shown throughout history. one can classify databasesaccording to what kind of data they contain, how broadly accessible they are,and how formally or informally they are structured (box 41).databases can be word, number, image, or sound oriented (williams,1990). wordoriented databases are the most prevalent, and the recent growth intheir use has been phenomenal. in 1976 there were 750,000 online searches ofwordoriented databases (e.g., fulltext databases, bibliographic databases, anddatabases containing information synthesized from numerous sources.) in 1988,however, this number rose to 28.3 billion separate queries (figure 43).although less common, the use of number, image, and soundorienteddatabases is also growing. in 1989 there were more than 5,000 databases of allkinds, which were offered by nearly 900 vendors; they contained nearly 5billion records (compared with 52 million records in 1975). these statistics donot include the hundreds of thousands of private databases in use by individualresearch scientists for their own purposes.in terms of accessibility, databases range from entirely public, such asthose available on line in libraries, to entirely private, such ascomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research76mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.those kept by an individual scientist for his or her own reference. for example,databases printed out on paper or available on floppy or optical disks (e.g.,compactdisk, readonlymemory, or cdroms) can be sold or distributed tothe public and thus used in any location. current contents, a popular weeklypublication listing the tables of contents of selected scientific journals, is nowavailable in computerreadable form on disks. other databases might besemiprivate orbox 41relational databases versusobjectoriented databasesthe database management system most widely in use today is therelational system. in a relational database, information is organized intables. many of the tables typically have common fields, allowing the userto associate separate tables and to ask questions about the relationshipsamong different pieces of data. a relational neuroscience database, forexample, might include the following two tables: a list of drugs, includingtheir behavioral effects and the types of neurotransmitters through whichthey exert these effects, and a list of anatomical structures, including thepredominant cell type in these structures and the neurotransmitter typeassociated with these structures. because these two tables have a field incommon (the neurotransmitter field), the database user can ask thecomputer to briefly link the two tables and to generate a list of drugs andtheir predominant anatomical sites of action.one of the major advantages of a relational system is that each pieceof data must only be entered once, thus reducing the possibility of error onthe initial entry and when updating is required. should new researchindicate that cocaine, for example, exerts its effects by acting on twoneurotransmitter systems instead of only one, this new data can be addedto the database and will remain linked to all other pieces of information towhich it has a relationship. relational databases are typically used fortextual and not for image data.database management systems that use objectoriented techniquesrepresent the cutting edge in database technology and are expected toprogress rapidly in the coming decade. these systems are designed tosupport applications with data structures (such as images) that do not fiteasily into the tablebased structure of the relational system. in an objectoriented system, data need not conform to a standard representation,such as a table, because each piece of data is treated as a separateentity and is stored with its own set of instructions for interacting with otherdata. this system allows for much greater flexibility in the kinds of datathat can be included in a database, and also in the kinds of queries thedatabase can support.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research77mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semipublicšshared by a specific group of peoplešsuch as several scientistsworking together on a particular project.figure 43 growth of online searches of wordoriented databases between1974 and 1988. adapted from williams, 1990.the range of database structures is also broad. formally structureddatabases are administered, maintained, updated, and edited in a centrallocation. these databases are generally readonly and include bibliographicreference databases, repositories of historical or archival material, certain typesof scientific databases, and directories of various sorts. at the opposite end ofthe spectrum are informal databases, which are administered, maintained, andupdated by users. the user group can be large and membership can be open toeveryone, as with the computer bulletin boards that have become so popular.but an informal database can also be structured by a small group of scientistsšfor example, to keep a "lab notebook" together. sometimes databases combineboth informal and formal components in a unified complex of files. such acomplex might include a bulletin board component, to which users could adddata annotations, and a readonly component containing bibliographic referencematerial. advances in computer technology make such multicomponentdatabases feasible by enabling the user to move freely from one componentcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research78mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to another. even entirely separate databases are now collectively accessible bysoftware programs that guide users from one database to another. the flexibilityto be gained with the different kinds of databases ensures continuing increasesin use patterns.the growth of biomedical databases mirrors the general trends describedearlier. retrieval of information from the scientific literature is basic to theconduct of biomedical research. yet over the past 30 years, the number ofbiomedical investigations, especially in the field of neuroscience, has increasedsubstantially, with many of these efforts branching into related subdisciplines.computer technology was applied to the management of this expansion by thenational library of medicine, the lead agency for managing and indexingbiomedical and scientific literature. in 1964 the nlm created the medicalliterature analysis and retrieval system (medlars), a computerized systemthat catalogs and indexes the library's holdings. in the early 1970s the nlmintroduced medline, which provides online access to nlm's records overtelephone lines. using a carefully formulated and controlled list of key words,known as the medical subject headings (mesh), users can obtain bibliographicreference lists from medline for a broad range of scientific topic areas.today, in addition to medline, the nlm offers a number of differentkinds of online databases of scientific information, including information ontoxic substances (toxline and its related databases, the toxicology databank [tdb] and the registry of toxic effects of chemical substances[rtecs]) and medical information related to cancer (the physician data query,or pdq), among others. databases such as tdb and pdq, which are oftencalled factual databases, are more than simply bibliographic records becausethey contain synthesized information from a variety of sources (nationallibrary of medicine, 1986). the nlm collaborates with other parts of nih,with universities, and with other research initiatives to develop a broad range ofdatabases for scientific research and medical practice, to establish directories ofthese resources, and to design useful interfaces among them. in its longrangeplan, articulated in 1986, the nlm defined a number of trends for the future,including databases containing image data, fulltext storage and retrieval, andelectronic publishing of scientific literature.especially prominent among the biomedical databases developed outsideof the nlm are the protein sequence and genome databases, which serve atleast 23,000 scientists (table 42). these databases provide a mechanism bywhich extensive, complicated sequence and structural data can be compared towhat is already known. comparisons using such databases are many times moreefficient than comparisonscomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research79mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research80mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.done by hand and have resulted in new discoveries by database users (seebox 21). these databases are also a valuable source of experience andknowledge for those involved in developing analogous resources forneuroscience. for example, each of the protein sequence and genome databaseswas developed independently, often by an individual scientist, and each has adifferent history of funding, administration, oversight, software development,and data organization (smith, 1990; vela, 1990). although efforts are nowunder way to integrate these databases, such integration is not withoutconsiderable difficulty and expense.ideally, users should be able to access information from a number ofprotein or genome databases, but currently this is impossible becauseindependent development has resulted in quite separate database structures. forexample, some of the early databases (e.g., the protein identification resource[pir] and the protein data bank [pdb]) were developed from isolated files ofinformation without the use of a database management system for indexing andretrieving entries. this strategy worked only as long as the number of entrieswas relatively small and the databases stood alone. present efforts to link thepir and pdb must first establish a database management system for each andcreate links between the two database environments. the national center forbiotechnology information at the nlm is devising linkage software that willmake pir and the genetic sequence data bank (genbank) accessible bysimilar means and commands. genbank has also been working to strengthen itslinks to the european molecular biology library (embl) and the japanesedna data bank. in contrast, the genome data base (gdb) at johns hopkinshas planned for linkages to other databases from its inception.the databases also display important differences in software developmentand the availability of analytical tools. pir includes some analytical software,whereas pdb makes only the code available for analysis, which often leaves theuser confronted with unfamiliar software. other databases, such as genbank,spend up to 50 percent of their budgets to develop software for analyticalpurposes and for database conversion to more modern management systems.making these conversions is time consuming and costly, but also necessary toextract the most useful information from these resources.the protein sequence and genome databases reflect a variety of fundingmechanisms. genbank, a collaborative project of los alamos nationallaboratory and intelligenetics, inc., is supported by the broadest range ofsources, including the national science foundation (nsf); the departments ofdefense, energy, and agriculture; and nih, through the nlm, the nationalcenter for research resources,computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research81mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and the national institute of general medical sciences. pdb receives fundsfrom nsf, nlm, and doe. the howard hughes medical institute, a privateagency, currently funds the gdb and the online mendelian inheritance in man(omim) database. however, in the near future, gdb and omim will besupported by federal funding.in an effort sponsored in part by the nsf and nlm, the corporation fornational research initiatives is developing an experimental national digitallibrary system (dls). the initial target databases are medlars and thegdb and omim systems at johns hopkins university. dls will network thesedatabases and employ ''knowledge robots" (knowbots®) 1 to initiate and managecomplex, multipledatabase searches. this system makes it unnecessary forusers to know any details of how to search a database, where the database islocated, or even how many different databases exist (cerf and kahn, 1988).it is clear that much can be learned from the experiences of the protein andgenome databases. but as noted in the previous chapter, neuroscience datadiffer significantly from protein and gene sequence data and present complexproblems in terms of threedimensional displays and integration across varieddata types. despite the growing use of database technology in individualneuroscience laboratories, relatively few steps have been taken to constructdatabases for general use by neuroscientists. understandably, mostneuroscience databases either target specific regions of the brain, or aredesigned as an organizational system (to which data can be added by the user)or as a method for making archival data more accessible. some of theneuroscience database development efforts receive targeted funding; others donot. these efforts are important because they demonstrate a growing scientificneed and address the various kinds of data inherent in neuroscience, especiallyimages. we describe two such efforts below.a neuroscience information management system called brain browser hasbeen developed for use on macintosh computers by a team of neuroscientistswith computer expertise (bloom, 1989). the system is based on hypercard ®,which organizes information in a relational manner, similar to crossreferencedindex cards. contained within the system is information regarding 300 brainregions in the rat, including 900 separate circuits, and references. in addition,the system includes a complete stereotaxic atlas for the rat brain, which can beused as a graphicbased interface to access circuitry data (figure 44). ratherthan being a selfcontained, readonly system, brain browser can be expandedby users, who may add "index cards" of their own references and data andcustomize the database for their own use and that of others (if they share theirentries).computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research82mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 44 a typical computer screen from the brain browser softwareprogram. figure courtesy of floyd bloom, scripps clinic and researchfoundation. reprinted with permission of raven press.another group of neuroscientists and computer scientists from threeuniversities is developing computer tools for highresolution capture, storage,and organization of neuroscience data (hillman et al., 1990). their objective isto construct threedimensional color atlases, based on real images of brainsections, that are linked to other image, text, and numerical data regarding theanatomy, chemistry, and physiology of specific brain regions. this work is alsointended to develop useful software for the extraction of important features andfor interfaces that allow transitions from one data type to another. all efforts arefocused on one brain region, the thalamic nuclei. such a focus allows theinvestigators, who are already expert in thalamic function, to assess moreadequately the usefulness and feasibility of the tools being developed.these two examples may obscure the fact that the development of usefultools to manage neuroscience information is really in its embryonic stages. themajority of neuroscientists use computers for word processing or to organizereferences and, sometimes, their data images. these are highly individualapproaches and vary widely in sophistication. the next section on networksargues that electronic transmission of data sets, including images, most likelywill be ancomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research83mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integral part of science in the future. whether neuroscience will be ready forthis kind of future depends on the actions taken now to develop the ability toorganize data and combine that organization with data collection.electronic networks greatly increase communicationthe scientific enterprise is composed of men and women who generateideas, design ways to test those ideas, collect data, and communicate the ideasand data in a variety of ways. the communication of ideas and results is asimportant to the growth of knowledge as the data themselves. scientists meet atformal gatherings, discuss experiments with their colleagues, publish papers,and talk to each other by telephone and electronic mail. one of the major goalsof computer network development is to create a communication environmentthat is as free of barriers as possiblešan environment that can support the rapidcommunication of ideas and images at every stage of experimentation anddiscovery. some have envisioned this environment as a "nationalcollaboratory"2 (lederberg and uncapher, 1989). its cornerstone would be vastnetworks of electronic links built on a foundation that was begun little morethan 20 years ago.the first multipurpose wide area network (wan) was developed in 1969to link computers at 30 research campuses whose work was supported by thedepartment of defense. called arpanet, the network allowed the sharing oflarge, expensive computers and facilitated electronic message delivery amongwidely scattered university and industrial research sites throughout the unitedstates. arpanet was extremely successful because of a specially developedmechanism for routing messages, called packet switching. packet switching isunlike the circuitswitching mechanism that connects one telephone to another;no actual circuit is established when a message is sent over a packetswitchednetwork. rather, the messages are broken up into packets, like envelopes, withaddress information attached. these packets move from one network node toanother, as a letter moves from post office to post office until it reaches itsdestination. electronic messages arrive within fractions of seconds, however,not days (kahn, 1987).local area networks (lans) link computers across short distances (withinan office building or among university laboratories, for instance) and are oftenlinked themselves to national and international wans. since their introductionin the 1970s, more than 5 million lans have been installed. in 1973, thedefense advanced research projects agency (darpa), which funded thedevelopment of arpanet'scomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research84mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.packetswitching technology, began a project to develop technology tointerconnect different packetswitching networks. a series of computercommunication protocols were developed for this purpose, along with"gateways" to interlink different lan and wan computer networks. the socalled tcp/ip protocol suite that resulted is used today to interconnect 5,000networks in 35 countries supporting more than 300,000 computers that rangefrom supercomputers to workstations and even personal computers. the system,which is called the internet (quarterman, 1989), is operated on a collaborative,cooperative basis involving government, military, university, and industrialresources and thousands of volunteers who keep the system operating.in 1988, the national science foundation began work on the nsfnet tointerconnect a small number of supercomputer centers and to sponsor thecreation of intermediatelevel, or regional, networks to provide access to thensfnet and its supercomputing resources. some 13 supercomputer centersand 400 universities are linked to the nsfnet, along with more than 2,000other networks whose traffic the nsfnet supports. the nsfnet and its"entourage" are now an integral, vital component of the international internet.the full utility of such largescale networking can be realized only ifstandards are established to enable effective communication among thecomputer systems that constitute the network (national academy of sciences,1989). the internet activities board and its subsidiary groups, the internetresearch and engineering task forces, are responsible for guiding research anddevelopment of standard protocols for internet computer communication. thequest for useful, yet practical, standards for the communication of numeric, text,image, and other signals data continues and could play an important role in thecreation of an effective national neural circuitry database.one of the most critical limitations of networks for scientific applicationsis the capacity, or bandwidth, of the present links. bandwidth refers to theamount of data that can be transmitted per second. for example, nsfnetbegan with links capable of transmitting 56 kilobits of information per second.a fulltext article from a scientific journal averages 20 kilobytes, or 160kilobits; an abstract averages 16 kilobits. thus, nsfnet's initial bandwidthwas sufficient to transmit three to four abstracts, but not even one entire journalarticle, per second. in 1989, nsfnet upgraded its system to links capable oftransmitting 1.5 megabits per secondšlarge enough for 10 fulltext articles orapproximately 100 abstracts. upgrades now in progress will increase thensfnet backbonelink bandwidth to 44.7 megabits per second, almost a 30fold increase in the amount of information transmitted every second. traffic inthe nsfnet backbone has reachedcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research85mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nearly 5 billion packets per month, and the rate of increase is still substantial.the introduction of 45 megabitpersecond capability into the nsfnet is anintermediate step in the race toward gigabit(a billion bits)persecond service,which will be needed as communication of image data becomes more prevalent.a single line drawing or simple blackandwhite picture represents thesame amount of data as an entire journal article of text. an uncompressedtransmission rate of 180 megabits per second is required to run a color movie ona conventional tv screen in real time. computergenerated images on highresolution screens require much more: 1.44 x 109 bits per second. consequently,for useful multimedia network transmission, transmission rates will have toreach at least the gigabitpersecond range or higher. (a gigabit equals theinformation contained in 80,000 doublespaced pages of text.)the importance of building a nationwide highbandwidth network isunderscored by the attention such a network is receiving from policymakers. anearly proposal for a nationwide system of electronic links amongsupercomputers and libraries was made by senator albert gore in 1979, and theresulting legislation was considered by congress in 1990 and is beingreintroduced this year (gore, 1990). in 1985, congress passed senator gore'ssupercomputer network study act, authorizing the office of science andtechnology policy (ostp) to analyze the need for such a network. citing thelack of adequate network technology for "scientific collaboration or access tounique scientific resources" and the aggressive efforts of japan and europe toupgrade their networks, the ostp report, issued in 1987, stronglyrecommended that federal resources be allocated to upgrade existing networksand undertake the research necessary to advance network technology evenfarther. in 1988, the national research council's national research networkreview committee issued a report that expanded the specific recommendationsmade by ostp but also strongly recommended the implementation of anational research network. this recommendation was strongly endorsed in1989 by the national academy of sciences' panel on information technologyand the conduct of research (national academy of sciences, 1989). a furtherindication of the attention being devoted to this issue was a report entitled thefederal high performance computing program, delivered to congress in 1989by the president's science advisor, d. allan bromley (office of science andtechnology policy, 1989). this program plan again recommended a phaseddevelopment of a national research and education network, now commonlycalled nren. three major objectives specified by all of these initiatives were(1) to upgrade the bandwidth of the backbone networks currently servingcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research86mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.science and education to at least gigabitpersecond speed beginning in the midto late 1990s; (2) to develop appropriate technology and communicationstandards that would significantly improve the ability to communicate overelectronic networks; and (3) to increase the ubiquity of networking (the nrenprogram, in particular, proposes to establish connectivity between 1,000research and education institutions).some electronic collaboratory groups are forming nowa critical mass of enthusiasm has been building among legislators,policymakers, and scientists about the possibilities offered by networktechnology to provide an infrastructure for enhanced scientific collaboration.an interesting project to realize the collaboratory concept is now under way(schatz, 1991). the project's objectives are to encode, in digital form, allknowledge of the community of biologists who study the worm caenorhabditiselegans and to construct an integrated computer environment to manipulate thisknowledge across the internet. there are about 500 scientists in thismultidisciplinary "worm community," representing genetics, anatomy,physiology, biochemistry, and neuroscience, and the community has always hada high degree of openness in communication and data sharing. for example, formore than a decade, the group has maintained a newsletter of news and researchfindings to which anyone may contribute. on numerous occasions, thenewsletter has reported significant research in advance of formal publication,thus functioning as an electronic bulletin board.genetic mapping is a major aim of the worm community, as it is of manyscientists engaged in the study of invertebrate models (national researchcouncil, 1985). alan coulson and john sulston have already established aphysical map database of c. elegans genes, using dna fragments that theymade or that were sent to them by other researchers (coulson et al., 1986).about 70 percent of the worm's 100 millionbasepair genome has been mappedthus far. this information, updated monthly through bitnet and internet, iscontained within a digital database that is distributed to several sites; fromthere, the database can be accessed by modem or direct electronic connectionby any worm laboratory.the current initiative intends to draw on the successful experience of thephysical map database and newsletter to build an electronic worm community.plans include making the entire body of c. elegans knowledge available indigital form and constructing strong electronic platforms for informalcommunication and to support powerfulcomputer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research87mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.analysis and annotation, as well as retrieval. this project in many ways could bea "test bed" for neuroscience because it involves the conversion of many typesof data into digital forms suitable for inclusion in a coordinated, multimediaresearch resource. for example, so much is known about the neurons that makeup the worm's nervous system that each neuron's developmental lineage, wiringdiagram, and physical location are understood. the organization of this neuralinformation into a mixed textnumericalimage database would be oftremendous value to future work with data from more complicated organisms.the openness of the worm community offers another important model fordevelopers of computerized resources for neuroscience because a major portionof the current project involves the inclusion of informal data in the database andthe establishment of electronic means of communication. these informal datainclude everything from recipes for laboratory reagents to intermediateexperimental results. how the various kinds of informal data are handled, howcontinued openness is encouraged and rewarded, and how interfaces aredesigned for the most efficient use of resources by the community will beapplicable in the larger context of neuroscience. most important, because theworm community cannot answer all the questions posed by the incorporation ofthese technologies into the field of neuroscience, consideration of the wormcommunity's efforts will help to focus the design of specific pilot projects in thelarger neuroscience context.conclusionthe role of electronic networks in biomedical science can be expected toexpand as network capabilities are upgraded. with these upgrades and theimplementation of such projects as the national digital library system and theworm community initiative, the formation of national or internationalcollaboratories becomes a more realistic goal for many fields of science. forneuroscience, highresolution computer imaging and highbandwidthnetworking are converging, and major obstacles to the integration of enablingtechnologies in the research enterprise are quickly diminishing. by beginningnow, the integration of these technologies into neuroscience will be ensured. asan added benefit, integrating these technologies into a field as complex asneuroscience will help to generate new ways of conducting scientificexploration that will be applicable to all of biomedical and biological science.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research88mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesacm siggraph. 1989. computer graphics: siggraph '89 conference proceedings23(3).banks, g., j. k. vries, and s. mclinden. 1986. radiologic automated diagnosis. ieee195:228œ239.bell, c. g.1988. toward a history of (personal) workstations. pp. 1œ47 in a history of personalworkstations, a. goldberg, ed. new york: acm press.bloom, f.1989. databases of brain information. chapter 13 in threedimensional neuroimaging,a. toga, ed. new york: raven press.capowski, j. j., m. j. sedivec, and l. m. mendell. 1986. an illustration of spinocervical tract cellsand their computer reconstruction (cover). journal of neuroscience6(3).cerf, v., and r. kahn. 1988. the digital library system: the world of knowbots, vol. 1. reston,va.: corporation for national research initiatives.coulson, a., j. sulston, s. brenner, and j. karn. 1986. towards a physical map of the genome ofthe nematode caenorhabditis elegans. proceedings of the national academy of sciencesusa83:7821œ7825.elliot, l. p., s. k. mun, s. c. horii, and h. benson. 1990. digital imaging network system (dins)evaluation report. washington, d.c.: department of radiology, georgetown universitymedical center.goldberg, a., ed. 1988. a history of personal workstations. new york: acm press.goochee, c., w. rasband and l. sokoloff. 1980. computerized densitometry and color coding of[14c] deoxyglucose autoradiographs. annals of neurology7(4):359œ370.gore, a.1990. networking the future. washington post, july 15.hillman, d. e., r. r. llinas, m. canaday, and g. mahoney. 1990. concepts and methods of imageacquisition, frame processing, and image data presentation. pp. 3œ38 in threedimensional neuroimaging, a. toga, ed. new york: raven press.howard hughes medical institute. 1990. finding the critical shapes. bethesda, md.: howardhughes medical institute office of communications.kahn, r. e.1987. networks for advanced computing. scientific american257:136œ143.lederberg, j., and k. uncapher, cochairs. 1989. towards a national collaboratory: report of aninvitational workshop. rockefeller university, new york city, march 17œ18.mccormick, b. h., t. a. defanti, and m. d. brown, eds. 1987visualization in scientificcomputing. siggraph computer graphics newsletter21(6):1œ13.national academy of sciences. 1989. information technology and the conduct of research.washington, d.c.: national academy press.national center for research resources. 1990. biomedical research technology resources: aresearch directory. pub. no. 901430. bethesda, md.: national institutes of health.national institutes of health, division of computer research and technology. 1989annual report.bethesda, md.: national institutes of health.national library of medicine. 1986. obtaining factual information from data bases: report oflong range planning panel 3. bethesda, md.: national institutes of health.national research council. 1985. models for biomedical research: a new perspective.washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 1988. toward a national research network. washington, d.c.:national academy press.national science foundation. 1991. guide to programs. pub. no. 038000005855. washington,d.c.: u.s. government printing office.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research89mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.office of science and technology policy, executive office of the president. 1987. a research anddevelopment strategy for high performance computing. washington, d.c.november 20.office of science and technology policy, executive office of the president. 1989. the federalhigh performance computing program. washington, d.c.september 8.quarterman, j. s.1989. the matrix. new york: digital press.ross, m. d., l. cutler, g. meyer, t. lam, and p. vaziri. 1990. 3d components of a biologicalneural network visualized in computer generated imagery. acta otolaryngologia(stockholm)109:83œ92.schatz, b. r.1991. building an electronic scientific community. pp. 739œ748 in proceedings of the24th annual hawaii international conference on system sciences, ieee computersociety, vol. 3.smith, t. f.1990. the history of the genetic sequence databases. genomics6:701œ707.toga, a., ed. 1989. threedimensional neuroimaging. new york: raven press.twedt, s.1990. biologists find speed, imaging powers of supercomputers key to research. thescientist(aug. 20):10œ11.u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1990. critical connections: communication forthe future. otacit407. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.united states congress, science policy study. 1986. the impact of the information age on science.hearings, vol. 10. pub. no. 570950. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.vela, c.1990. overview of u.s. genome and selected scientific databases. background paperprepared for the committee on a national neural circuitry database, institute of medicine.williams, m. e.1990. the state of databases today: 1990. pp. viixivin computerreadabledatabases: a directory and data sourcebook, k. y. marcaccio and j. adams, eds. detroit,mich.: gale research, inc.notes1. knowbots is a registered trademark of the corporation for national research initiatives.2. the concept of a national collaboratory does not ignore the essentially international characterof science. responsibility for the infrastructure of each national collaboratory should rest, as ittraditionally has, with the governmental agencies of each nation that places a priority onscientific excellence. the international collaboratory would be created simply by establishinglinks among these national resources.computer and information technology in biomedical andneuroscience research90mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5building consensus, identifying needsin meeting its charge, the committee consulted more than 150neuroscientists and computer and information science experts who contributedadvice, comments, and suggestions regarding the desirability, feasibility, andpossible ways of implementing electronic and digital resources to enhanceneuroscience. as outlined in the introduction to this report, the committeeobtained these contributions through four mechanisms. the first was thepreparation of two background papers. one considered the development,administration, architecture, use patterns, and funding of genome and otherscientific databases (vela, 1990). the other described the results of a onedaymeeting of computer scientists from various disciplines who had been involvedin the defense mapping agency's (dma) program to digitize cartographic data(downs et al., 1990). the meeting was held to assess what could be learnedfrom the dma's experience that might apply to implementation of a nationalneural circuitry database.the second mechanism was the organization of four task forces composedof neuroscientists and computer information specialists. each of the groups metfor two days and were organized around neuroscience topic areas; they included35 invited participants in addition to specific committee members. (appendix acontains a description of the themes and a list of participants of each task force.)third, the committee solicited input from a number of other sources as anadditional information mechanism. letters were sent to the present officers andcouncil members, as well as the past presidents, of the societybuilding consensus, identifying needs91mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for neuroscience describing the study and inviting opinions and suggestions.similar descriptions with a request for input were also published in selectedscientific journals (for examples, see appendix b).finally, symposia and open hearings were held in washington, d.c., sanfrancisco, and chicago. invitations to these events were sent to members of thesociety for neuroscience within roughly a 300mile radius of each meetinglocation. the program for each meeting included scientific presentations by aleading neuroscientist and by a scientist from the field of genetics or molecularmodeling with experience in the use of computer and information technology intheir research. also on the agenda were demonstrations of prototype braindatabases and brain imaging technologies. finally, each meeting included anopen hearing component in which selected committee members reviewed someof the issues being considered in the study and subsequently opened the floor tocomments and suggestions from those in attendance. (appendix c contains listsof speakers and demonstrators.)the input received through these mechanisms reflected a wide variety ofexperiences and outlooks. among the neuroscientists involved, some werealready committed to the development of computer resources for researchpurposes, some had no such commitment and were more neutral, and somewere frankly skeptical. in addition, they held a variety of posts, ranging fromjournal editors to postdoctoral fellows and from those employed in largelaboratories to those working in singleperson operations. individuals in chargeof library resources, scientific database administration and design, andbiomedical computer applications were especially valuable participants. eachsubdiscipline of computer sciencešincluding database design, graphics,software development, networks, and hardware designšwas represented. inaddition, participants came from academic departments, governmentlaboratories, and private industry.some separation of the topics covered in each of these informationgathering activities was apparent. participants in the open hearings and thosewho responded to the committee's requests for opinions were concerned largelywith three issues: (1) the kind of database and the kinds of data that would beuseful to them in their research, (2) the possible institution of standard methodsof data collection, and (3) funding of the proposed project. in addition to thesematters, task forces devoted substantial time to technical issues andadministration, oversight, and implementation strategies. this chapter attemptsto capture the richness of the discussions that took place throughout theseactivities and outlines the data on which the committee's recommendations arebased.building consensus, identifying needs92mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.building a useful resource complexthe data that are included must be useful to neuroscientiststhe complexity of neuroscience dictates that the scope of the data includedin any complex of computerized resources eventually must be quite broad.although most participants viewed the establishment of such resources asdesirable, some felt that traditional archives of neuroscience information (e.g.,libraries and journals) were adequate, thus obviating the need to expend scarcefunds on computerized information complexes. these dissenting views werecountered by evidence, presented by experts from medical libraries andscientific databases, that clearly indicated an integral role for computerized datastorage and retrieval, including the linking of scientific databases, in futurelibrary services. the majority of those giving input to the committee envisionedthe proposed complex of resources as necessarily containing more kinds ofinformation than are now or could in the future be contained in library referencematerials and published journals. for example, a journal article, available fromthe library in fulltext format with data graphs and figures, rarely presents allthe data that are availablešdata that could be included in a digital format. agraphically formatted synthesis could greatly facilitate understanding bymaking the information visual. in addition, archival brain material, such as thatcontained in the yakovlev brain collection or the comparative mammalianbrain collection, is not available at all in libraries; it could be made much moreaccessible through electronic networks and digital storage methods. finally, thevision of a complex of resources for neuroscience includes the incorporation ofinformal data, such as preliminary results and interpretations, which wouldprovide a far richer base of information for research than is currently available.(although later sections of this chapter expand upon these nontraditional kindsof information, they are mentioned here as components of the data that may beincluded in the proposed resource complex.)given the vision of resources that go well beyond what may reasonably beobtained from libraries, nearly every participant had an idea of what kinds ofresearch data would be most useful. although these suggestions reflected abroad range of possibilities, most participants saw two major data categories ascritical. the organizing structure for information about the brain isneuroanatomy, which provides a construct for the functional expression of brainactivity. therefore, it will be necessary to conjoin anatomy and function, andthis combination should guide decisions regarding the inclusion of highlyspecific kinds of data.building consensus, identifying needs93mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.primary among the anatomical data categories is information about thepathways that interconnect brain regions. representing such pathways in threedimensions and in relation to standard brain atlas maps is highly desirable andcan serve a number of purposes. viewing a particular pathway allows animmediate appreciation of its complexity and may reveal the connectionsamong specific areas of interest. depiction of those parts of the pathway that arewell documented as well as those parts that are tentative or unknown wouldstimulate additional research to complete the mapping of the pathway. thepathway map could also serve as an interface or entry point to archives ofrelevant bibliographic references.most important, a pathway map could function as the skeleton on which tohang information from multiple levels of the brain's hierarchy. for example, atthe cellular level of the hierarchy, the structural features or morphology ofdifferent cell types are important. because each brain region contains sets ofneurons with different structures, it is often important to know which structuraltype actually contributes to a pathway to a distant brain region and whichstructural type contributes only local connections. the neurochemistry of theneurons in the pathway is also of interest at both the cellular and the systemslevels. therefore, a number of participants requested that the proposed resourcecomplex support the ability to associate patterns of neurotransmitter distributionwith structural pathways. one scientist suggested that both visual and tabularmaps of the chemical systems of the brain would be of great help in his work.such maps would include the neurotransmitters, as well as the distribution ofspecific receptor types and of drug binding sites in the brain.there was consensus that any anatomical map must be related to function,but the functions requested reflected the hierarchical level at which individualscientists were working. those studying cognitive processing and human brainfunctions viewed the association of brain regions with specific aspects ofbehavior as necessary to the usefulness of the map. clinical neuroscientistswere interested in the association of behaviors (e.g., tremor, memorydysfunctions, motor deficits) with particular brain regions. basic researchers,studying the electrophysiological responses of individual neurons or singleionchannel responses, wanted the map to contain information about thesephenomena. enthusiasm for including many kinds of synapticlevel informationwas especially high among computational neuroscientists, which reflects theirinterest in analyzing the functional consequences of ion channel diversity, interms of the nonuniform spatial distribution of channels and the varied responseproperties of individual channels. finally, some investigators interested in thedevelopment of the nervous systembuilding consensus, identifying needs94mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.saw particular benefits in including brain maps of different species at differentdevelopmental points as a way of comparing species.other kinds of data that were cited as central to neuroscience research wereprotein and gene sequence and gene mapping data relevant to the brain. manydevelopmental neuroscientists, through the use of simple organisms such asworms and fruit flies, are now mapping the genes that control neuraldevelopment. as the genes that code for receptors and other molecules areidentified, these data become useful for researchers at other levels of the neuralhierarchy. recent breakthroughs in identifying the genes responsible for suchdiseases as muscular dystrophy and neurofibromatosis herald a new era indefining the underlying causes of neural dysfunction. against this backdrop,most task force participants felt a pressing need to include genetic informationin any future computerized resource. their suggestions ranged from theestablishment of linkages to existing genome databases to establishment of abrainspecific gene database.although the examples given above are not exhaustive of all thesuggestions made to the committee, they illustrate the necessity, in the longterm, of including specific kinds of data at each level of the neural hierarchyand the appropriateness of starting with the structural anatomy of the brain.computerized resources must include a variety ofcapabilitiesacceptance and full use of computerized resources require certain featuresor capabilities, apart from the actual data. for example, in molecular modeling,the data are the coordinates obtained from crystallographic analysis. a usefulcomputerized resource must include the capability to transform thosecoordinates into threedimensional images and, further, to move these figures todepict the binding of drugs to the molecule's active site. this capability isafforded by the design of the software and the interfaces the user manipulates toachieve the desired outcome. for neuroscience, the capabilities needed willagain reflect the diversity of experimental questions that can be asked. althoughit is impossible to separate completely the scope of the data to be included fromthe capabilities of the systems that might be designed, many participants,especially those with expertise in database development, stressed the value ofdefining desired capabilities early in the planning stages.many of the participants providing input to the committee wereexperienced in the development of prototype systems for research or education,and this group suggested that certain capabilities were essential. for example,the ability to browse through various kinds of data is critical to offering usersmultiple entry points to accessbuilding consensus, identifying needs95mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information specific to their needs. simultaneous display of textual and graphicdata or textual and numerical data was also suggested as a necessary feature.these capabilities alone, however, may not be sufficient to ensure use of theproposed resources to their full potential. therefore, the committee andparticipants discussed more specific features, designed around the needs ofneuroscientists from different subspecialties.from the neuroscientists' point of view, an important systems capabilitywas the display of data with varied levels of realism. for example, a neuron canbe depicted as (1) a photomicrograph (taken through the microscope), (2) a twodimensional (flat) line drawing, or (3) a fully reconstructed threedimensionalobject. if a researcher were interested simply in identifying the cell type, theabstract, flat drawing might suffice. but if he or she were interested in assessingthe method used in a particular experiment and in whether the neuron exhibitedany changes indicative of injury, the actual photomicrograph might benecessary. in the ideal case, users could choose the level of abstractionappropriate to their experimental needs.another capability requested by neuroscientists was the ability to extractarbitrarily defined subsets of data. using the pathway map as an example, aninvestigator might want to know the locations of all cells in the pathway thatcontained a specific neurotransmitteršacetylcholine, for example. anothermight want to see all neurons in the pathway that had axons that branched. yetanother might want to know where in the pathway receptors for a specific drugwere located. one participant commented on the sometimes puzzling mismatchbetween the locations of receptors for a certain neurochemical and the locationsof cells that contained that neurotransmitter. in his view, the ability to extractreceptor and transmitter information and to correlate the two maps would bequite useful. in another neuroscientist's view, the results of computationalmodeling were a data set well worth extracting. by displaying simultaneouslythe activity of multiple circuits, it is possible to visualize parallel processing inaction.another helpful feature for clinical neuroscientists and those involved inhuman imaging is the ability to compare different brain images by preciseoverlaying or coregistration of the images. each brain differs from every otherin its exact shape and internal organization. in addition, technical factors, suchas how a pet scanner is aligned or the placement of the subject's head, canaffect the orientation of the images that are obtained. schemes for minimizingor correcting for these differences, to facilitate the comparison of different typesof images (pet, mr, or ct), have been developed and are being evaluated inmost major imaging centers. the task force concerned withbuilding consensus, identifying needs96mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.human imaging discussed these strategies at length, which include the use ofcertain landmarks visible in every brain and the use of atlases that describecoordinates for most major brain regions. more complex approaches useexperimentally defined algorithms to ''warp" one brain image to another. oncethese mechanisms are validated, their inclusion, as tools, in a complex ofcomputerized resources would allow investigators to pool images, obtain moredata, and thereby gain the maximum benefit from each experiment. becausehuman subjects are rare and imaging experiments costly, this kind of capabilityis particularly desirable. efforts are already under way to share human imagesamong distant centers. known as brain map, the activity is being coordinatedby a team of investigators at the johns hopkins university medical school(science, 1990).whatever capabilities the proposed complex of resources might include,the consensus of participants in the committee's consultation process was thatthese features must be defined by the needs of the users. many participantsemphasized the need for a handson effort to generate a comprehensive list ofdesired capabilities.different types of databases are requiredthere was an overwhelming consensus among all participants that anational neural circuitry database as a single entity was unworkable.participants advocated instead a complex of different kinds of databases,combined with electronic communication facilities and other online researchtools, that would be interlinked to provide a resource for neuroscience research,education, and clinical applications. in addition, a number of investigators,citing the international character of science, called for the establishment of linksto and relationships with computerized resources outside the united states.throughout the task force meetings and open hearings, there was substantialdiscussion of the kinds of databases that would be of use to neuroscience. it wasthe task forces, however, that gave the matter its most indepth consideration.consequently, the definitions that follow derive largely from task forcerecommendations. this emphasis on their work is probably a result of thespecial efforts made to include in these groups individuals with expertise indatabase administration and development, as well as those with interest in theconcept of electronic collaboratories.one general theme that emerged was that a complex of electronic anddigital resources should include databases with varied levels of accessibility.some of the databases should be public resources and accessible by anyone;others should be private and used only by individualbuilding consensus, identifying needs97mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.investigators or small groups. still others should be semiprivate or semipublic,for use by a possibly large, but finite, group of investigators. within thosegeneral categories, the task forces identified several different kinds of databasesthat are expected to be useful for neuroscience. reference databases would contain references to published journalreports and review papers and would be accessible to as wide a groupof users as possible. these databases might be built on the kind ofinformation contained in more traditional databases, such asmedline, but they would be organized around graphicrepresentations of brain structures. the images would represent currentconsensus views of various brain systems and might also show thoseareas that required additional research. the committee learned fromindividuals working with the genome databases that attempts are nowbeing made in that community to incorporate graphic representationsinto those databases. the essentially visual character of neurosciencedata underscores the critical importance of images to the presentationof information about the brain. data banks would contain source or primary data, with references, thatcould be deposited by investigators coincident with publication of theirresearch in standard scientific journals. data banks would allow usersto view the complete data set from experiments and might contribute toinsights that would not be possible with standard journal formats.these kinds of databases are already in use in the chemical sciencesand in the protein and gene sequencing and mapping communities(vela, 1990). informal resources include bulletin boards and electronic mail forexchange of research methods, ideas, and sometimes raw data; theseresources might also be used to share software packages. informalresources are highly flexible and are often designed in response tospecial user needs. as discussed in the previous chapter, they are animportant part of efforts in the worm community to facilitate opencommunication and exchange (schatz, 1991). national and international registries or directories wererecommended by each task force and by many other participants toprovide listings of different kinds of information. for example, itwould be helpful to have a registry of all neuroscientists who are nowdeveloping or who have developed computerized data collectionstrategies, or who have devised databases for storage and retrieval ofdata, references, or other research information. among the respondentsto the committee's request for opinions and the open hearingparticipants, approximately 30 individuals were working on databasesor imaging protocols for basic and clinical neuroscience applicationsšand the committee had been unaware of their efforts. another use forsuch a registry would be to list data that are available for sharing.building consensus, identifying needs98mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. research collaboration databases are semiprivate or semipublicdatabases set up by defined groups of investigators for work onspecific projects. such databases would contain raw data files, methodsdescriptions, and other information useful to the conduct of the project.a preliminary survey of longdistance collaborative activities inneuroscience carried out by study staff reinforced therecommendations of the task forces regarding this kind of database.1the survey revealed that approximately 25 percent of all paperspublished in one year in brain research and the journal ofneuroscience were reports of collaborative work done by two or moregeographically distant u.s. laboratories. further, study staff asked 10randomly chosen investigators from these groups if electroniccommunication facilities, including image transmission, would havehelped their work. all responded in the affirmative. specialty databases can also be set up by defined groups. for example,task force 3 (see appendix a) suggested that such a database wouldbe of great use in brain studies with pet or mr imaging. if thedatabase were composed of multiple components, including references,tools for matching or warping one brain image to another, and aregistry of available data, this specialty complex could aid the transferof information regarding human brain structure/function relationshipsto a wide group of experts.in summary, this section has outlined some of the key components of auseful complex of electronic and digital resources, including a number ofdifferent kinds of databases containing information from all levels of the neuralhierarchy. the capabilities afforded by the complex to browse through the data,compare images, and extract specific subsets of information would enhance theconduct of neuroscience research and provide assistance extending far beyondwhat is now available. but the actual implementation of this complex is asubstantial undertaking, and an understanding of its challenges is essential forsuccess.the challenges aheadtechnological needs require planning and attention to themost likely advancesalthough the current state of computer and information technology hasreached a point that makes the proposed complex of computerizedbuilding consensus, identifying needs99mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources possible, a number of technical requirements must still be addressed.such topics received a great deal of attention during the task force deliberations.in the three major areas of databases, networks, and imaging technologies,imaging is the most advanced, from a technological standpoint, and therefore islikely to present the fewest barriers to direct application to neuroscience.database and network technologies, although sufficiently mature to be appliedto neuroscience in a productive manner, will require more modification. totransmit complex images, for example, networks must be upgraded according tothe plans formulated for the national research and education network. thetask forces were unanimous in their support for careful planning to implementhighbandwidth network links, with special attention to the concomitantupgrades of the local area networks that link researchers inside universities withthe national networks. the task forces also emphasized that the use of opticaldisks or other mass storage media to transmit data physically should beencouraged to obviate complete dependence on network links.database management technology presents the most difficult technicalchallenge in the initial implementation of the proposed resource complex.currently, the most popular and most useful database design is the relationaldatabase; yet these databases cannot meet all of the eventual needs of theneuroscience community because they do not handle image data well andcannot display image and text data simultaneously. objectoriented databasemanagement systems can handle image data, but they may not be widelyavailable during the 1990s. database developers from the task forces thereforerecommended starting with relational models and planning for the eventualconversion to objectoriented systems.certain approaches may aid this planning. for example, the entityrelationship model is a database design tool that is used to plan therelationships to be set up in a database. in this model, definitions of individualitems and their relationships are established before the database is constructed.these definitions are useful to plan both relational and objectorientedmanagement systems. an additional advantage to this approach is that, oncecompleted, it provides a record of the defined relationships, which facilitateslater modifications. the model currently is being used at the national center forbiotechnology information at the national library of medicine in its effort tolink genbank and the protein information resource databases.another critical aspect of database design is user interfaces. this area isquickly emerging as a unique subspecialty of computer science, combininghuman factors research with interface software design and query languagedevelopment. interfaces must be easy to use, yetbuilding consensus, identifying needs100mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.powerful enough to enable the user to extract needed information. balancingthese two qualities is rarely easy, and many task force participants argued forspecial attention to this issue. they also recommended early involvement ofuser interface specialists and examination of the experiences of genomedatabase developers in the design of useful interfaces.underlying both database and user interface design questions is thechallenge of developing software that allows data to be accessible and usable.indeed, hardware problems are minimal compared with the problems associatedwith developing software. for example, neuroscientists currently use a varietyof computers that run on different operating systems and employ a wide rangeof software tools; as a result, communication among these systems is severelylimited. the task forces made a number of recommendations regarding thisproblem. one was to develop platformfree software for the databases thatwould be independent of the operating system being used in the localcomputing environments and that could circumvent compatibility barriers.however, a better approach might be to design translation programs that couldbridge the differences between software programs. in the experience of manyparticipants, software development represents a major portion of the costsassociated with database development. therefore, active encouragement of socalled "shareware" development may produce savings. shareware is softwaredeveloped by individuals that subsequently is shared free of charge with others.examples include software developed in government laboratories, such as thatdeveloped for image analysis of results from deoxyglucose experiments (seechapter 4). the disadvantage of shareware is that often it is not as finely tunedor as carefully maintained as commercially developed software and requiresthose using it to make modifications for their own needs.the general theme in the task force software discussions was theadvantage of being open to a variety of strategies. also noted, however, was theneed to develop software tools that were directly applicable to research issues.for example, the human imaging group (task force 3) identified the need forimprovements in the software for registering images with one another. in taskforce 4, participants were acquainted with recent advances by industry andacademic research centers in designing software for fast searches of data withina database, including scientific databases. a consensus emerged through thesediscussions that computer scientists must work in close collaboration withneuroscientists to address the complex problems of software development.another area of technological challenge is the mechanism of databuilding consensus, identifying needs101mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.storage. numerous storage options are available, but the choice depends onneuroscientists' needs for specific kinds of data transmission. for example,transmission over networks is compatible with central storage of data inmainframe computers. because networks currently are inadequate for imagetransmission, however, transportable media such as optical disks or cdromsare an attractive alternative. another advantage of transportable storage mediais that they may increase accessibility to information, allowing a wider usergroup, including international users. one computer expert cautioned, however,that the physical organization of the data through these storage mechanismsshould not be confused with the logical organization of the data themselvesšsuch confusion would limit access to the data.the final technical topic covered by the task forces was the developmentof technical standards for data exchange. the technical issues inherent instandards development are closely related to certain research issues and were ofgreat concern to those who attended the committee's open hearings orcontributed written commentary. the issue of standards is explored in thefollowing section.standard formats are necessary, but they must evolvethe task forces outlined four categories of technical standards that need tobe developed and examined. first, for data representation, standard dataexchange formats are required for textual and numerical data and for thegeneration of images and graphics. second, for algorithm representation,mechanisms for conveying new algorithms should be considered for a variety ofpossible applications. third, standard userinterface packages should beconsidered as a way to reduce the barriers to the actual use of a givencomputerized resource. finally, standard communication protocols should beexpanded to provide the dynamic range of data accessibility required forresearchoriented databases. each of these categories reflects the fact thatcoordinated computer resources require a high level of standardization tofunction smoothly. data represented in a multitude of ways, with differingalgorithms and with different mechanisms for data access, are often difficult toextract. communication is further limited by different computing environmentsand the ability of these environments to accommodate data in forms suitable fortransmission.how database developers approach these technical requirements can havemajor consequences for the usefulness of the resource. many neuroscientistswho commented on this issue expressed fears that standards might be imposedon them to which they would have difficulty adapting. but the task forcesemphasized that standards shouldbuilding consensus, identifying needs102mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolve from experience and should be based on the needs of users. theirphilosophy was that if a standard method or format worked well, usually peoplewere willing to expend a little extra effort to take advantage of the resource forwhich the standard was designed. in addition, some suggested that establishingliaisons and joint efforts between the neuroscience community and standardsdevelopment groups (e.g., the standards working groups of the internetactivities board) would help to increase awareness in broader usercommunities of the special requirements of neuroscience data.the evolution of standards must also begin with an awareness of thespecific scientific needs of the user community. one area of concern inneuroscience is that of nomenclature. disagreements over the names of brainnuclei and subnuclei have been common since the beginning of neuroanatomy.synonymous terms are widespread but avoidable barriers to communication. anumber of participants asked for efforts to establish clear definitions of terms.others suggested that the nlm expand the medical subject headings (mesh)in neuroscience subject areas. it might also be worthwhile to follow the lead ofthe genome databases, which hold regular meetings of user representatives anddatabase managers to discuss nomenclature, as well as other issues.the committee heard from several neuroscience groups that are alreadyattempting to develop standards. one of these was the imaging community,whose members are seeking effective methods for comparing images. astrategy that is being explored is the general use of an atlas of the human brainas a standard reference frame for expressing neuroanatomical coordinates andregional boundaries. establishing such a standard might also help to define therange of variability in human brain structure, something that currently is notknown. clinical and basic neuroscientists also suggested standard annotation ofexperimental data. in human imaging studies aimed at defining structure/function relationships, certain baseline information is now recorded in highlyindividual ways, which limits its usefulness. at a minimum, such informationmight include age, handedness, sex, educational level, or any characteristicfeature of the subject or experimental group. basic scientists interested incomparing images (e.g., maps of receptor binding or immunocytochemicallocalization) asked that images be tied to precise annotative informationregarding experimental conditions, calibrations, chemical methods, animalweights, and other appropriate data.in summary, any discussion of standards touches on technical, scientific,and sociological issues (see national academy of sciences, 1989). althoughstandards development is necessary and cannot bebuilding consensus, identifying needs103mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ignored, the clear majority of participants in the committee's consultativeprocess were in favor of allowing most standards to evolve, based on handsonexperience and careful consideration of users' needs. what is critical to keep inmind is that the design of usable standards, which do not involve largeinvestments of individual user's time, will determine, in part, whether anelectronic or digital resource will be widely used.technology drives sociological changethe sociology of science can be defined as the ways in which scientistswork and how they interact. different scientific fields and subspecialties maydisplay varying sociological attributes. yet as most of us have witnessed in oureveryday lives, the incursion of technology can produce very profound changesin sociological patterns. in each of the committee's consultative activities, fromtask force meetings to open hearings, the question was asked: how will theincorporation of electronic and digital resources in neuroscience changeneuroscience and neuroscientists? the challenge for the future is to understandthe technology's possible effects and to begin to develop the policies andapproaches necessary to cope with these effects.one of the advantages of electronic communication and the establishmentof informal databases will be the ability to share data with one's colleagues orwith the entire community. data sharing can greatly increase the amount ofinformation gleaned from each experiment and thereby quicken the progress ofinvestigation. in addition to publication of the results of an experiment or study,data sharing could comprise very preliminary data or complete data sets. yetdespite the benefits that can be expected, there are also perceived risks for theinvestigator wishing to share data (fienberg et al., 1985; national academy ofsciences, 1989). one risk is the investment of time in an activity that results inno tangible benefit to the investigator. methods for assigning credit to scientistswho contribute data to databases are rudimentary at present. because journalpublications and other formal mechanisms for assigning credit for specificscientific concepts and results carry substantial weight as benchmarks of anindividual's success in science, the matter of proper credit is important. anotherrisk involves the rights of human research subjects. the strict guidelines thatprotect the privacy and identity of human research subjects were developedbefore electronic networks and digital databases were in common use. thesharing of data (e.g., pet and mri data) obtained from studies of humansubjects will require additionalbuilding consensus, identifying needs104mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.consideration of methods to ensure confidentiality. throughout its activities, thecommittee heard strong arguments against any imposed policy of data sharing.rather, identification of the risks and disincentives to sharing should be apriority, followed by formulation of policies to provide meaningful incentivesand protections for investigators who share their data. finally, formal attentionshould be paid throughout the development and use of computerized resourcesto the ethical issues involved in data sharing, including those pertaining to theprivacy of human research subjects.task forces and other participants explicitly identified the risks theyperceived from data sharing and possible strategies for lessening those risks.first, methods must be developed to ensure that proper credit is assigned tothose who contribute data for sharingšespecially if the sharing is with a groupthat extends beyond formal collaborators. the responsibilities of theinvestigator who shares the data, as well as those who use the data, need to bedefined. mechanisms to protect all involved parties require careful reflectionand measured policy formulation. for example, journals devoted to genemapping and protein and gene sequencing are beginning to require thatinvestigators deposit their raw data as a condition of publication. participantssuggested that a close examination of the benefits and difficulties attaching tothese journal practices would be helpful to the neuroscience field. anothersuggestion was to encourage university tenure committees in their decisionmaking processes to consider certain type of data sharing, particularly sharingof peerreviewed data, as comparable to journal publication and teachingcompetence. it was clear from the discussions that neuroscientists, and much ofthe biomedical science community, are only beginning to grapple with theissues inherent in data sharing. given this context, continued analysis anddiscussion are likely.another area of concern to participants was how to ensure thatcomputerized resources would be accessible to more than just a few wellfunded laboratories. the technological capabilities resident in neurosciencelaboratories cover a fairly broad range. restricting access by limiting theresources' usefulness to only highly sophisticated computer systems would behighly undesirable. participants also noted, however, that the recent trends ofcomputers becoming more powerful and, at the same time, cheaper willcontinue unabated. in addition, computing style eventually diffuses withinspecific user communities. therefore, although initial planning phases mightconcentrate on more sophisticated hardware, it is likely that such computerswould be generally available at lower cost only a few years down the line.nevertheless, many participants saw the developmentbuilding consensus, identifying needs105mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of mechanisms to increase access across a range of technological capabilities asan important goal.there is understandable resistance to the integration of technology into theway people work. one senior administrator, who had seen the development ofcomputerized molecular modeling, expressed surprise about how long it tookinvestigators to embrace the technology and begin to benefit from it (see alsonational academy of sciences, 1989). throughout the committee's activities,awareness of this kind of resistance brought repeated cautions that it would beunreasonable to expect everyone to view the establishment of computerizedresources for neuroscience with the same enthusiasm. to deal with this reality,most participants endorsed continued discussion and communication within theneuroscience community. some even suggested that professional societies (e.g.,the society for neuroscience) might play a role in fostering communicationabout these issues.a final sociological issue raised by the committee's activities relates tochanges in the work force that result from greater use of technology. it isbecoming more and more common for one person in a laboratory to be the''computer expert." this person is called on to solve software problems andmake the laboratory's computers work effectively to support the group'sresearch. ten years ago, these people were often undergraduate students, manyof whom were not planning to pursue a biomedical science career. increasingly,they are individuals who are trained in science but who also have experienceand interest in the technology that supports that science, thus earning the title"scientistprogrammers" (anderson, 1989). as valuable as such people are,their career possibilities are relatively constrained. jobs, promotions, and tenuretraditionally are based on publication of research results, not the development ofuseful technologies to conduct research. a complementary dilemma facescomputer scientists who are interested in biomedical science applications butfind it difficult to publish such work in the computer science literature. manyparticipants stressed the value of scientistprogrammers to the work of theirlaboratories and voiced the hope that reward structures could be improved forthis new segment of the neuroscience work force.the sociological implications of the increasing role of computer andinformation technology in research touch many who work in the neurosciencefield (denning, 1987), and consideration of these issues should be an integralpart of planning for the future. a common theme among the topics covered inthis sectionšsociological issues, the needed technical applications, and thedevelopment and acceptance of standard data formatsšis the absence ofexperience on which beneficialbuilding consensus, identifying needs106mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policies can be founded. mechanisms to gain such experience constituted amajor topic of discussion for the task forces.strategies for building a base of experiencepilot projects are good starting pointsalthough uniformly supportive of the longrange goal to integratecomputer and information technology into neuroscience research, all four taskforces strongly recommended the establishment of pilot projects, so that a badlyneeded base of experience could be built. these views led to the concept of atwophase effort. the specific kinds of pilot projects that were suggesteddiffered from one group to another, but through communication among the taskforces, the suggestions coalesced into a unified concept for the committee'sconsideration. rather than separate entities, pilot projects should represent acoordinated "family" of efforts with certain goals in common. motivating thesuggestion of pilot projects was the belief that such an approach would allow"inhouse" development, controlled by the eventual users of the tools andresources being examined. the importance of this kind of development wasstressed by several task force members with backgrounds in database designand administration, as well as by the group that considered the defensemapping agency's experience in developing computerized tools (downs et al.,1990).a consensus emerged that groups of investigators should constitute thispilot project program. each of the groups would involve neuroscientistsworking on a specific topic, some or all of whom would be geographicallyseparated. task force members with experience developing databasesemphasized the importance of a single, clear, unifying concept behind eachgroup; they recommended that each group be organized around neurosciencetopic areas but include clear technological goals and objectives. most important,organization around neuroscience topics would ensure that the building of theexperience base proceeded in concert with continued research and discoveryabout the brain and its functions.the suggested goals of such a program were generated from discussions ofresearch and technical needs, challenges, and opportunities, which weredescribed in the first two sections of this chapter. although each pilot projectwould not necessarily address each issue, the overall goals of the program as awhole would be the following: develop digital data collection and storage methods for data at multiplelevels of the neural hierarchy.building consensus, identifying needs107mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. identify the kinds of data, level of resolution, and experimentalinformation necessary to facilitate new insights and stimulate research. examine and evaluate the various capabilities (e.g., browsing, graphicinterfaces) that can increase use of the resources and enhance access tomeaningful information. develop a variety of databases, ranging from formal, consensusdatabases to informal databases for research collaboration. develop and experiment with different software for translation acrossdifferent computing environments, for user interfaces, for networktransmission of images, for data searching, and for image generationand comparison. begin to develop standard data formats, nomenclature, and datacollection schemes, and to evaluate the evolution of these standards. gain experience in data sharing and communication through electronicmeans, including networks and transportable media. communicate with others in the program to share and evaluateexperiences and technological developments.the task forces considered a number of factors in relation to theneuroscience topic areas that might be chosen for the pilot project program. onewas the differences among subspecialties of neuroscience in their computer"readiness"šthat is, the degree to which the data in a specific field are alreadyin digital form. for example, most of the data from human imaging studies arein digital form; a pilot group working in that area could focus its work on thegoals of standards development or data sharing. in contrast, a group whose dataare largely in photographic or other nondigital forms might concentrate ondeveloping digital data collection mechanisms.different neuroscience subspecialties can also be separated by the"horizontal" versus "vertical" range over which they extend in the neuralhierarchy. those involved in mapping the locations of differentneurotransmitters or receptors might confine the majority of their researchquestions horizontally to the cellular or systems levels of the hierarchy. incontrast, researchers interested in pain, sleep, or substance abuse are ofteninterested in information that extends vertically to almost every level of thehierarchy. because such groups may well have different data collection andmanagement needs, including a range of neuroscience subspecialties in the pilotprojects would be advantageous.in addition to groups that vary in readiness and research focus, task forcemembers also suggested the inclusion of groups with different kinds ofcomputer expertise. first, individuals with programming and computer graphicsexpertise are needed. (some of these expertsbuilding consensus, identifying needs108mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.might be scientistprogrammers; others might be computer experts who lack astrong working knowledge of biology.) second, the expertise of informationtechnology and networking personnel should be tapped. finally, databasespecialists should be involved. again, each program group would notnecessarily include all of these expertsšchoices would be based on the group'sdefined goals. the task forces recognized that the inclusion of computer andinformation science experts presented difficulties in that such arrangements arenot typical of the personnel structure in most federally funded biomedicalresearch projects. to offset these difficulties, task force members suggested thatsources of technical expertise, such as the national center for biotechnologyinformation, university computer science departments, or supercomputerresearch centers, be explored to ensure onsite availability of computer scienceexpertise.finally, some task force members felt it was important to includeneuroscientists with various degrees of computer experience. neuroscientistswith very little experience can provide insights about the usefulness ofprototype user interfaces and data organization schemes, as well as thefeasibility of standards protocols and methods for converting data to digitalforms. further, communication among neuroscientists with such variedexperience will ensure an understanding of the needs of the larger neurosciencecommunity.in summary, the task forces made specific suggestions regarding thecritical need to begin to build a base of experience in the incorporation ofcomputer and information technologies into neuroscience research. in addition,they made recommendations on the composition of pilot project groups and thegoals for the overall program. to coordinate these groups and provide a focusfor applying the experience they gain to the longrange goal, the task forces alsorecommended to the committee that a coordinating structure be established.coordination, oversight, and evaluation will be neededa key area of consensus among the task forces was that pilot projectsrequired coordination and that oversight and evaluation mechanisms werecrucial to the eventual implementation of a complex of computerized resourcesfor neuroscience (see also national academy of sciences, 1989). theexperiences of the task force members involved with development of thegenome databases underscored this need: each of the genome databases haddeveloped independently, and interlinking these disparate systems was provingto be troublesome (smith, 1990). on the other hand, an excess of centraloversight and planning can isolate users from the development process, asoccurredbuilding consensus, identifying needs109mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the modernization efforts of the defense mapping agency (downs et al.,1990). therefore, task force members considered it essential to establish abalance.the structures suggested for coordination of the pilot projects were varied.two of the task forces envisioned a multidisciplinary advisory board orcommittee that would be responsible for coordinating the pilot project activitiesand, possibly, for quality or editorial control of the contents of the database.another task force assigned the responsibility for coordination to a hostinstitution or core facility for each project. this host institution would documentand evaluate the communication and collaboration achieved through the pilotproject and evaluate standard data formats and software tools. in this scheme,the final evaluation in advance of implementing the longrange goal of anational effort would be conducted by a board composed of neuroscientists andcomputer scientists. finally, the fourth task force suggested that regularmeetings among the different pilot projects be held to validate data, assessneeds and progress, and coordinate the exchange of software, protocols, andoperational methods. in addition to these meetings, the task forces suggestedthat a nonprofit organization, similar to the human genome organization(hugo), be established. this organization would be responsible for longrangeplanning and coordination among various federal funding agencies.the task forces did not enumerate the responsibilities appropriate to thesevarious oversight structures. nevertheless, they made numerous suggestionsabout what tasks eventually could be assigned to such boards or organizations.for example, a consensus brain database requires editors to ensure the qualityand accuracy of the information it contains. in addition, the efficient use oflarge databases normally requires some training. therefore, a service andeducational component was recommended. another suggestion was theestablishment of boards for reviewing publications and data submitted to acomprehensive brain database.by the close of the committee's activities, there was a strong consensusthat the longrange goal of building a complex of computerized resources forneuroscience was technically feasible and that the realization of this goal wouldgreatly enhance neuroscience research. the necessity of building a base ofexperience from which to realize this goal was reinforced throughout themeetings and open hearings. key aspects of this base of experience shouldinclude the involvement of neuroscientists with computer and informationscientists in pilot projects, the coordination and oversight of individual pilotprojects, and careful attention to the sociological and ethical issues inherent inthe use of computerized resources for science.building consensus, identifying needs110mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.funding the effort is an important issuethe committee's activities took place against the backdrop of anexceptionally difficult year in biomedical research funding. it was a year inwhich emergency meetings were called to assess the effects of the funding crisison the future of biomedical science in the united states, and in which manyissues of science or the scientist contained an article about decreasing awardrates for grants or the disincentives to entering science as a career (bloom andrandolph, 1990; culliton, 1990; national academy of sciences and institute ofmedicine, 1990). understandably, this climate left its mark on the opinions ofthe participants in each of the consultative activities.nearly all participants argued that, if the establishment of a complex ofelectronic and digital resources for neuroscience were important enough toundertake, appropriation of additional funds for its establishment would benecessary and justified. most participants and respondents were enthusiasticabout the potential benefits to be gained from greater integration ofcomputerized resources in neuroscience and considered the additionalinvestment to be justified. as might be expected, the majority of thoseexpressing this view were neuroscientists with extensive experience in usingcomputers for their research. yet the task force groups and open hearingsincluded neuroscientists with a range of computer experience. as the variousmeetings progressed, most neuroscientists who had moderate to minimumcomputer experience (and were often initially skeptical about the value ofcomputerized resources) became excited about the advantage such tools mightoffer for their research. nevertheless, despite this general enthusiasm, a fewparticipants and respondents were opposed to the initiatives being consideredšfor two main reasons. first, they did not see enough benefit to justify theexpenditure of funds. second, they were concerned that the initiative mightcause scarce funds to be sequestered and funneled to a small group of seniorscientists. committee members carefully considered all of these views as theydeveloped their recommendations.referencesanderson, g. c.1989. new initiatives aim to emancipate "scientistprogrammers."the scientist(sept. 18):23.bloom, f. e., and m. a. randolph, eds. 1990. funding health sciences research: a strategy torestore balance. washington, d.c.: national academy press.culliton, b. j.1990. biomedical funding: the eternal crisis. science250:1652œ1653.denning, p. j.1987. the science of computing: a new paradigm for science: americanscientist75:572œ573.building consensus, identifying needs111mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.downs, a., b. waxman, and c. pechura. 1990. technological implications of cartography andremote sensing for a national neural circuitry database. background paper prepared forthe committee on a neural circuitry database, institute of medicine.fienberg, s. e., m. e. martin, and m. l. straf, eds. 1985. sharing research data. washington,d.c.: national academy press.national academy of sciences. 1989. information technology and the conduct of research.washington, d.c.: national academy press.national academy of sciences and institute of medicine. 1990. forum on supporting biomedicalresearch: nearterm problems and options for action. summary of meeting held june27, 1990. washington, d.c.: national academy press.schatz, b. r.1991. building an electronic scientific community. pp. 739œ748 in proceedings of the24th annual hawaii international conference on systems sciences, ieee computersociety, vol. 3.science. 1990. what's on your mind?check brain map (briefings). vol. 250:1203.smith, t. f.1990. the history of the genetic sequence databases. genomics6:701œ707.vela, c.1990. overview of u. s. genome and selected scientific databases. background paperprepared for committee on a national neural circuitry database, institute of medicine.note1. this preliminary survey was conducted by elizabeth meyer and constance pechura. for adescription of the methods used, contact the institute of medicine, division of health sciencespolicy.building consensus, identifying needs112mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6the brain mapping initiative: committeeconclusions and recommendationsan environment of opportunity now exists to enhance neuroscience by amore global incorporation of computer and information technologies into theresearch enterprise. yet it is also apparent from the experiences of otherscientific disciplines, including the gene mapping community, that to ensure thegreatest benefit, these technologies must be incorporated with care and with aclear vision of the intended goal. when such efforts are successfully realized,the benefit can be a great increase in our understanding of normal andpathological processes in biology. as in all biomedical research, increasedknowledge and understanding lead to improvements in human health.the longrange goalneuroscience is immensely diverse in its methodology and levels ofinquiry. to achieve true understanding, this diverse information must becoordinated into a meaningful picture. the burden of this coordination rests onindividual neuroscientists, who necessarily spend the majority of their timeinvestigating the many highly specific processes of the brain. placing thosedetailed, specific data into the larger context of the multiple levels of brainorganization and of all other relevant information is almost impossiblešforseveral reasons. neuroscience, like many other scientific fields, is divided into arange of specialties. the diversity of research methods generated by suchspecialization makes it unlikely that any one individual can achieve sufficientexpertise in every method to allow for a learned interpretationthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations113mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of every reported finding in neuroscience. more important, the mass of detailedinformation being generated at every level of neural organization is impossibleto grasp with conventional means. the investigator seeking information at evena single hierarchical level or in regard to a specific neurobiological mechanismis often daunted by how widely scattered that information may be throughoutscores of different journals, review papers, symposia summaries, and books.computer and information sciences have made impressive advances in thepast decade. the development of database technology has given all fields ofscience new ways of organizing and retrieving data, and research into evenmore sophisticated database designs is beginning to bear fruit. emerging objectoriented database technology, for example, will permit improved manipulationand exchange of electronic images, it is hoped, by the end of this decade. suchan advance is of particular importance to neuroscience, characterized by manyas a "visual science." graphic imaging is another area of computer science thathas grown rapidly to a high level of sophistication. generation of two andthreedimensional graphic images is becoming fast and simple, and the abilityto interact with such images has endowed researchers with a high degree offlexibility in the use of these images. the combination of highquality graphicscapabilities and powerful data collection and analysis workstations promises tobe an unprecedented resource for neuroscientists. it is already the case thatsubstantial amounts of neuroscience data are collected and analyzed using avariety of computers and workstations, which run many different softwareprograms and employ a wealth of utilities and tools. further, the infrastructureis now under construction to link these and other, more highly developedcomputerized research environments through highspeed computer networkscapable of transmitting text and image data in reasonable time frames.the capabilities afforded by the recent advances in computer science nowprovide the opportunity to put into context the explosion of information on thebrain, its circuitry, and its functions. therefore,the committee recommends that the brain mapping initiative be establishedwith the longterm objective of developing threedimensional computerizedmaps and models of the structure, functions, connectivity, pharmacology, andmolecular biology of human, rat, and monkey brains1 across developmentalstages and reflecting both normal and disease states.the committee envisions this objective to be accomplished in twothe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations114mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.phases, beginning with phase 1 pilot projects, which will provide an experiencebase for the fulfillment of phase 2.the maps and models noted above would constitute a brain mappinginitiative, but the committee's vision has a broader scope: not a singleentitydatabase but a complex of interrelated, integrated databases accessible fromindividual laboratories. this resource would also incorporate additional toolsand utilities that would allow users to interact with the data to form newassociations, achieve nonstandard structural views, or otherwise change the datapresentation parameters to test new hypotheses or obtain replication of specificexperimental data in other systems, regions, states, or species. the committeerecognizes the enormity of such an undertaking and that its successfulimplementation will require a transformation in the way information isacquired, communicated, and analyzed by neuroscientists.the committee views this endeavor as a longterm project to beaccomplished in two phases. phase 1 would comprise the organized initiation ofseed or pilot projects with the overall goal of gaining experience in theincorporation of the required technologies and applying that experience to thelongrange planning of phase 2. in addition, pilot projects would bring focusand utility to information technology research in areas useful to neuroscienceresearch. phase 2 would be the construction of a complete family of maps andmodelsšall the elements necessary to provide a complex of electronicresources to enhance neuroscience research.despite the broad scope and difficulty of such an effort, a number ofreasons argue for initiating the project at this time. aspects of the technologicalapplications are, in fact, already being developed in a number of scatteredprototype projects in individual neuroscience laboratories. these includeprototype databases and threedimensional reconstructions of brain structuresand cells. exchange of digital data files and data format standards is alsoevolving among certain neuroscientists from various subspecialties. to ensurethe coordinated establishment of an integrated group of resources useful to theentire neuroscience community, however, the committee believes it is critical toplan the implementation fully and with great care. this planning should bebased on experience with, for example, the use and development of standarddata formats, methods of handling different kinds of data, methods of oversightand evaluation, and approaches to quality control and data security. in addition,this planning and the initial implementation steps should be managed andcoordinated from the outset in a manner that facilitates crossfertilization ofideas and openness to emerging technologies. such coordination will furtherensure the greatest general benefit and efficient use of fiscalthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations115mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources through planned integration of a variety of databases and other digitalresources.phase 1: implementationphase 1 projects will be the first step in approaching thechallengeto achieve the longrange goals noted above, the committee formulated anumber of other recommendations, the first of which relates to the initiation ofphase 1.the committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects or consortia.these projects should be peerreviewed by neuroscientists and computerscientists; they should also be investigator initiated, involve geographicallydispersed laboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels ofcomputer experience. the projects should develop common formats for theexchange of data and focus on different types of computer data representations(geometric, structural, image, and free text). selection of projects should be onthe basis of research quality and value to the evolution of a complex ofcomputerized resources for mapping the brain.the phase 1 projects are intended to form a base of experience and providethe necessary infrastructure for the successful development of phase 2 of thebrain mapping initiativeša comprehensive brain mapping effort. each pilotproject would be a consortium of several (three to six) research groups with theprimary goals of mapping brain anatomy, chemistry, and functions and forgingthe pathways for the integration of computer and information technology intothe overall neuroscience research effort. consortia could be organized amonggeographically distinct institutions or as centers housed within a singleinstitution. if the centers approach were to be adopted, special attention shouldbe given to involving investigators from geographically distant institutions asusers of the resources being developed. although the phase 1 projects should beindividually organized around specific research interests, as a whole theyshould represent the diversity of neuroscience questions. (that is, theorganization should include both basic and clinical neuroscientific groups.) inaddition, research topics should reflect the vertical hierarchy of the brain, frombehavior to cells or molecules, as well as the horizontal range of inquiry, fromphysiological to anatomical to chemical approaches. finally, close collaborationwith computer scientists will also be necessary. beyond these general goals,many specific issues shouldthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations116mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be addressed by the phase 1 projects, including kinds of databases, the scope ofthe data to be included, sociological issues, and architectural and technicalrequirements. these issues were discussed during task force meetings and openhearings and are summarized in chapter 5.the kinds of databases to be explored will vary because of the broadrange of information that is useful to working scientists. for example, publishedreports from journals are a primary source of scientific data, but other, informalinteractions, including scientific meetings and individual discussions, oftenprovide scientists with deeper understanding. the databases developed for theneuroscience field should attempt to include both kinds of information. phase 1projects could investigate the usefulness of the following kinds of databases:reference databases, data banks, informal databases, international registries anddirectories, research collaboration databases, and specialty databases (seechapter 5). each of these database forms needs to be thoroughly investigated byphase 1 projects; however, certain resources should be implementedimmediately.the committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceed internationallyand recommends that an international registry of neuroscience databases andcontacts be established so that appropriate linkages can be created in the future.such a registry, which should be available through computer networks,would help to identify what resources are currently available and also provide amechanism by which efforts could be coordinated. further, it would enablecurrent investigators to develop interaction with others with whom datacollection strategies, design problems and solutions, and other related issuescould be discussed. it is expected that such a registry would initially containvery few groups or databases but that it would grow as the phase 1 projectsproceeded.the committee recommends the establishment of an archive of public domainsoftware, accessible through computer networks.the committee expects that phase 1 projects will have special needs fornovel software. public domain software is available at little or no cost to anyonewho wants to use it, and these programs should be explored. in addition, suchan archive would encourage the formation of neuroscience ''news groups," orgroups of users with similar interests, who could communicate by computerbulletin boards or electronic mail.the scope of the data to be included in phase 1 projects must bethe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations117mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.broad to be genuinely useful to neuroscience research, both immediately andeventually for phase 2. although some kinds of data have universalapplicability to all branches of neuroscience, other kinds are necessary only forspecialized groups of investigators. in addition, the range of data coveredshould include normal and pathological states; it should also reflect changesthat occur during development and aging. in many respects, the kinds of data tobe included are relatively easy to define. the incorporation of diverse types intoa unified whole, however, will present a sizable challenge to phase 1investigators and managers.there was consensus among the task forces and support from the widerneuroscience community that anatomical data were the key data element andmight well serve as the "backbone" with which other data types can beassociated (see chapter 5). an analogy can be made that basic brain anatomicalmaps or atlases are similar to landsat images. detailed information, such asprecise connections, neurochemistry, cell types, and physiological responseproperties, can all be mapped onto those basic images in much the same wayroads and other landmarks can be mapped onto landsat images (downs etal., 1990). moreover, the level of resolution can change in both landsat andbrain images: it can be adjusted up or down depending on the sensitivity of the"sensors" employed. thus, the location of pyramidal cells in a particular corticalarea could be mapped from mediummagnification light microscopicexamination. from higher level magnification (light or electron microscope),the differential location of neurotransmitter substances or receptors could bemapped onto a threedimensional reconstruction of the pyramidal cell. at yet ahigher level, using sensitive electrophysiological sensors, the differentiallocations of ion channels could be mapped. such maps, which are prepared nowlargely by hand, are important contributions to the construction ofcomputational models of neuronal function.as outlined in chapter 5, sociological issues present some of the mostvexing problems in establishing any database or implementing any largescaleinitiative. such matters are intimately joined with how people work on a dailybasis, the traditions they hold, and, often more important, how they are investedpersonally in their work. understandable sensitivity exists in such areas, andcareful attention to these issues is necessary for those involved with thedevelopment and planning of electronic resources.including investigators with different levels of computer expertise in phase1 projects will facilitate greater acceptance of computer technology byemphasizing the varied needs of the neuroscience community and openingimportant channels of communication. in terms of datasharing,the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations118mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sharing, the committee assigns no value judgment to either end of thecontinuum of possible actions; that a continuum exists, however, must berecognized and dealt with. the priority that phase 1 projects place onestablishing collaborative groups will dictate that attention be paid to datasharing mechanisms. as part of this effort, phase 1 projects should exploremethods to ensure that preliminary data are clearly labeled and that propercredit will be given to those who contribute data for sharing. the committeealso encourages examination of the effects of policies already in placešthosedeveloped by the journals devoted to gene mapping and protein and genesequencingšthat require data deposit as a condition of publication. in addition,the committee supports the concept that university tenure committees shouldbegin to consider which kinds of data sharing should be viewed as evidence ofprofessional competence, comparable to journal publication and teachingevaluations.if electronic resources are to be accepted and utilized, scientists must trustthe accuracy of the information contained within the resource. therefore, phase1 projects must begin to find ways to ensure such accuracy, especially ofinformation included in reference databases, data banks, and registries.mechanisms are needed to ensure the appropriate use of different levels of dataand to permit the deletion of information that becomes obsolete. suchmechanisms may include management of the database by an editor (or group ofeditors) who is an expert in the field and whose function would be analogous tothat of a journal editor.another important sociological issue facing phase 1 projects is theacceptance of standards for data representation, data entry, nomenclature, andmethods of data annotation. currently accepted methods of representing datalack the level of precision required for coordinated computer resources. thecommittee thus agrees with the views of task force and other study participantsthat such standards are needed but that they should evolve from experience andshould be based on the needs of users, rather than imposed from some outsidesource.in terms of the proposed complex's technical and architecturalrequirements , definition and specification are impossible in the absence of aconcerted, handson effort to construct a usable computer resource. thecommittee received valuable advice from its members, from task forceparticipants, and from other experts with experience in these kinds of efforts(see chapter 5), and this advice is encompassed in a general framework in fourareas that should be explored by phase 1 investigators. database managementtechnology is the first: in database planning, phase 1 investigators areencouraged to seek input from such resources as the national center forbiotechnologythe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations119mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information at the national library of medicine and from nationalsupercomputing centers, including the national center for supercomputingapplications and the ohio and pittsburgh supercomputing centers. particularlydesirable is the involvement of established, successful university programs inbiomedical computing research.computer networks are the second technical requirement area to beconsidered. the future of national and international computer networks isparticularly promising for the development of a brain mapping effort. thecommittee strongly endorses international expansion of internet,implementation of the proposed national research and education network, andthe upgrades planned for existing wide area network infrastructures, such asnsfnet. phase 1 projects should keep abreast of the developments in networkcapabilities and remain aware of the policies that underlie concomitant upgradesof universitycontrolled local area networks.compatibility of computer hardware and operating systems is the thirdarea for consideration in the architectural and technical requirements for a brainmapping effort. it will be important to identify the operating systems thatneuroscientists use and to develop software that runs on various kinds ofsystems. another approach to compatibility is the design of data interchangeformats that allow for translation from one software program to another. theseand other approaches should be explored; however, care should be taken not tolimit compatibility by limiting access. a balance should be struck betweenadvanced access mechanisms, such as highspeed networks, and moretraditional mechanisms, such as telephonebased connections among personalcomputers. in addition, different kinds of data storage options should beexplored.finally, there are technical issues relating to the development of standards,as well as the sociological issues mentioned in the previous section. theidentification of effective standards should be an early priority for phase 1projects because the initial design of databases and communication protocolsmust take such standards into consideration. in this area, the committeeencourages interaction between phase 1 investigators and the internet activitiesboard's engineering task force, which conducts specific development projectsfor network data transmission. the committee also suggests cooperation withthe national information standards organization (niso), which is responsiblefor the development of standards for library applications.phase 1 projects should be centrally organizedfor phase 1 projects to provide the proper basis for the developmentthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations120mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of a coordinated brain mapping effort, communication among the consortia andsome type of central oversight are needed.the committee recommends that an administrative structure be established tocoordinate phase 1 activities. this brain map advisory panel (bmap) shouldbe composed of neuroscientists and computer and information scientists, withadditional input from funding agency administrators. the panel would beresponsible for the overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortiaand for the development of necessary policies relating to establishment of abrain mapping effort. the committee also recommends that the advisory panelbe responsible for consideration and development of editorial functions andpolicies relating to the ethical and sociological issues that will arise, including,but not limited to, correctness of information and quality control, intellectualproperty rights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.the panel could also coordinate action by funding agencies andother,related scientific initiatives. finally, the panel would undertake the longrange planning of phase 2.as described earlier, the issues confronting the phase 1 projects are manyand diverse, ranging from sociological to highly technical areas. each of theconsortia will need the kind of central clearinghouse for information that theproposed panel can provide. for example, the panel can examine variousapproaches to database design and weigh the outcomes against the scientificneeds of both specialized groups and the neuroscience community as a whole.of particular value to the coordinating function of the bmap would beestablish contacts with other groups, including the astrophysics, earth mapping,and global change research communities, to share information and discusscommon issues. an additional resource might be the telescience testbedprogram of the national aeronautics and space administration.the panel can also collate measures of the actual use of developingresources and of successful incentives for data sharing from among the variousconsortia to obtain a clear picture of what works and what does not. in addition,the panel could gather information from the consortia about emerging trends inthe computer industry that might affect the development of phase 2, suggestmore efficient datahandling methods, or facilitate more effectivecommunication protocols.mechanisms for integrating the developing technologies into the workpractices of neuroscientists will be another area of the panel'sthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations121mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concern. providing quality service, education, and training is essential for thesharing and effective use of research data. the panel's role in phase 1 should beto develop an infrastructure to provide these components. appropriate serviceswould include reliable access, distribution of data through a variety of means,and documentation of database contents. in addition, consulting support forlocal problems will be needed. phase 2 efforts will also require several kinds oftraining at diverse sites and the development of training materials. inclusion ofpanels and demonstrations at relevant scientific meetings should be explored asoptions. the construction of a dynamic infrastructure will promote stronginteraction among development, service, and educational activities that willsignificantly increase the usefulness of the resource.the oversight provided by the panel should not occur in completely "topdown" manner because such an approach could isolate the consortia from eachother and slow the transfer of important findings and developments.mechanisms should be found for organized crosscommunication among theconsortia and the panel. one way to accomplish this communication would beto include representatives from each consortium on the panel. anothermechanism that deserves serious consideration is to hold regular meetings ofconsortia investigators. such an approach has been successful for certaingenome databases. for example, the principal investigators from eachconsortium could meet semiannually or quarterly to present their work andidentify the advances made and the barriers encountered. the meetings thuswould provide the opportunity to validate data, assess needs and progress, andcoordinate the exchange of software, protocols, and operational methods. theymight also be used as a vehicle to obtain input from experts in neuroscience,computer science, or industry who are not involved in the phase 1 projects or onthe panel but who have special skills that can be brought to bear on particularproblems and issues. the panel could also participate in these meetings to offerinput, receive requests for needed action, and provide a record of theproceedings.another responsibility of the panel would be to coordinate theestablishment of the international registry of neuroscience databases andcontacts, and the archive of public domain software that the committee hasrecommended be established. in addition, the coordination of phase 1 projectswith other national and international efforts is extremely important. therefore,the committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of the brainmapping initiative maintain a close relationship with the gene mapping andsequencing community andthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations122mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the human genome project, and with other scientific computing efforts,including network initiatives such as nsfnet and the proposed nationalresearch and education network. as part of these efforts, the committeefurther recommends that linkages be established with protein sequence andgenome databases to enhance access to information about brainspecific genes.phase 1 projects will require additional fundingspecial challenges related to funding confront the implementation of thephase 1 projects. the first is to determine a basic funding approach. there arethree ways in which federal dollars are provided for biomedical research. one isby a contract mechanism in which a government agency funds projects that itproposes, which are completed by an outside investigator according to acontract written by the government agency. the government agencies thenoversee and supervise such projects. contract mechanisms are often used by thedepartment of defense to fund research, but they represent a much smallerportion of the funding provided by nih and adamha for biomedical research(adamha, 1988; national institutes of health, 1989). the other mechanism,which is more typical of adamha, nih, and nsf funding, is that of grants toinvestigators or groups of investigators for research projects that are proposed,accomplished, and supervised by the investigators themselves (investigatorinitiated). the third funding mechanism, cooperative agreements involvingresearchers and their universities, is currently used by the nsf for someprojects and functions like a combination grant/contract. the committeereceived a great deal of input about the relative merits of these mechanisms,especially regarding grants versus contracts. generally, it favors the use of grantmechanisms and cooperative agreements for funding the proposed initiative.this judgment is based on the committee's belief that the development of usableresources should be intricately combined with the research itself, and this dualtask can best be done by scientists actively involved in the research. the limiteduse of contracts, however, may confer advantages during some aspects of phase1 activities. therefore,the committee recommends that federal funding agencies develop requests forapplications and/or cooperative agreements to support the formation ofconsortia and the activities of the brain map advisory panel. limited use ofcontract mechanisms should also be considered when appropriate to the overallgoals of the initiative.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations123mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the second challenge is the fact that the proposed phase 1 organization isnot typical of the current administrative or funding structures employed by thefederal agencies responsible for the biomedical sciences. the typical structureof nih and adamha funding is that individual institutes provide funding forindividual grants (r01s) or program project grants (p01s) for specific researchprojects related to the institute's overall research program goals. review of suchgrants on the basis of scientific merit is accomplished either through the nihdivision of research grants' study sections or through an individual institute'sscientific review groups.the proposed oversight panel and consortia, each consisting of groups ofinvestigators (similar to program project groups), constitute a structure thecommittee considers essential to the success of the brain mapping initiative.such a structure, however, will require flexibility in the typical biomedicalfunding mechanisms noted above and cooperation among different agencies.the committee is not recommending a reorganization of the federal biomedicalresearch complex; nevertheless, it sees a critical need for greatercommunication and cooperation among the components of the complex.further, this communication and cooperation might be extended to includeagencies outside the public health service, such as the departments of defenseand energy, as well as private agencies, foundations, and universities thatprovide resources for biomedical science. to this end,the committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the brain mapping initiativebe international in scope and that they be funded by multiple sources in acoordinated fashion. the structure for administering the funding should ensureprogram stability and effectiveness. possible funding structures include theidentification of a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formaladministrative structures among two or more agencies.the committee is also sensitive to the current fiscal restraints on the entireu.s. biomedical research effort (national academy of sciences and institute ofmedicine, 1990; lederman, 1991). given this reality, there is understandableconcern among scientists that large initiatives pose a threat to the survival orhealth of individual investigatorbased research. in the case of the brainmapping initiative, these fears are unfounded. the project proposed here wouldconstitute a very small part of the entire neuroscience research effort. moreover,the history of neuroscience abounds with examples of how technologicaladvances have provided the tools with which major discoveriesthe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations124mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have been made, discoveries that have led directly to significant reductions inhuman suffering. incorporation of computer science and informationtechnology, to their full potential, into neuroscience research represents atechnological advance that will be analogous to, and may even rival, thedevelopment of the oscilloscope and the electron microscope. it is important toreiterate that these proposals are aimed toward coordinating what would bewidely separated activities into a unified effort. only an effort of this kind canprovide the kind of coordination and careful planning for the future that usesscarce resources efficiently and effectively and ensures greater use of theemerging technology by the neuroscience community as a whole. therefore,the committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposed brainmapping initiative justify the investment of necessary resources andrecommends the appropriation of additional funding to support theestablishment of phase 1 projects.phase 1 projects will require a certain amount of timeand supportfive years is the minimum time that should be allowed for phase 1 projectsto reach the level of expertise and technological development necessary toinitiate phase 2. further, as phase 2 is initiated, the phase 1 projects should bekept in placešfor a period of time to be determined by the advisory panelšand, possibly, phased out gradually as phase 2 begins or simply incorporatedinto the larger initiative.the budget for phase 1 can be estimated at $10 million per year, with anexpected duration of five years. this amount is based on establishing fiveconsortia groups, each with a $2 millionperyear funding level. the $2 millionwould be distributed among consortia participants; thus, individual fundinglevels could range from $200,000 to $400,000 annually. this funding would beused to cover the costs of investigator research support, computer systems,software and software development, establishment of necessary local areanetworks, and travel for consortia participants. the advisory panel would alsorequire support from these funds to cover travel and administrative costs.phase 2: longterm integration and itspotential benefitsthe brain presents some of the most fascinating, complex questions inbiological science. neuroscience has amassed a substantial body of knowledgeabout the structures of the brain and their specific functions, but in many waysthis mass of knowledge is only a beginning.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations125mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it is now time to fit the millions of pieces of the puzzle into place and bringneuroscience to a point at which it can begin to alter the course of manydiseases and disabilities. the proposed brain mapping initiative will allowinvestigators studying the brain to view data in new ways, to share data witheach other, and to access needed data from any of the neurosciencesubspecialties. so enabled, neuroscientists will map the brain and its functionsto a degree only faintly imaginable even 20 years ago. the brain map that isthus generated can be reasonably expected to contribute greatly to theimprovement of human health and the alleviation of some of the mostmysterious and intractable of human diseases.our society faces an already large and still growing burden from diseasesthat affect the brain. many of these diseases are multifactorial, making themdifficult to understand and difficult to treat. for example, addiction to cocaineand other drugs has reached epidemic proportions (gerstein and harwood,1990). understanding the receptor systems of the brain that mediate these drugs'effects and the brain regions that are affected is critical to achieve the kind ofuseful treatments that have eluded us for years. but the problem becomesexceedingly more difficult if the secondary effects of drug abuse are considered.a 1988 national household survey conducted by the research triangle instituteand the national institute on drug abuse indicated that about 9.3 millionwomen in highfertility age brackets (15œ35 years) had used an illicit drug atleast once in the year previous to the survey. with the overall expected birthrate for a group in this age bracket taken into account, these figures suggest aprobable range of 350,000 to 625,000 annual fetal exposures to one or moreepisodes of maternal drug consumption (gerstein and harwood, 1990; u.s.general accounting office, 1990). not only are many of these babies bornaddicted to drugs, but the development of their brains has been altered, leadingto attention deficits and learning disabilities, among other problems. we needdesperately to understand and treat drug addiction, but we also need tounderstand and treat or prevent the developmental deficits it causes. thepressure to accomplish these goals is increasing rapidly. in another five years,the drugdamaged children born this year will be entering the school systems ofmany large cities in the united states. these schools will also be dealing withother children who have been neurologically damagedšas a result ofmalnutrition, lead poisoning, lack of adequate maternal prenatal care, anduntreated childhood diseases (institute of medicine, 1989). the resulting toll onour precious human resources is obvious.every year, half a million children and adults experience brain and spinalcord injuries (national advisory neurological and communicativethe brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations126mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disorders and stroke council, 1989). most often, these injuries lead to paralysisand lifelong disabilities. the mass of neuroscience research conducted to datehas brought us to the threshold of being able to prevent the devastating effectsof these injuries, but traversing that threshold will depend on the discoveries tobe made in the next decade. the same conditions apply to the treatment andprevention of alzheimer's disease. in the previous decade, we identified someof the locations of damage caused by this disease, documented some of thebiochemical processes that are associated with that damage, and tested a varietyof pharmacological agents for their ability to slow the disease process. yet hereagain, we merely stand at the threshold.it is enlightening to remember that virtually every system of the body isaffected by brain activity either through the central nervous system or theperipheral nerves that constitute the sensory systems and the autonomic nervoussystem. thus, the study of neuroscience has the potential to contribute to thedevelopment of treatments for many diseases that are typically not consideredneurologicalšfor example, certain endocrine disorders, cardiac arrhythmias,and gastric ulcers. in addition, many systemic disease processes result inneurological problems that often have a metabolic basis but that are notcompletely understood. examples of these problems include the chronic painand nerve disorders that result from diabetes and the mental retardation causedby thyroid insufficiency.an excellent climate of opportunity currently prevails to expand ourknowledge of brain functioning during the coming decade. seizing thisopportunity, however, requires a concerted, interdisciplinary effort on the partof basic and clinical neuroscientists worldwide. it is becoming clear that thescientific enterprise in general relies increasingly on the use of sophisticatedmethodologies and computer technologies. this committee has considered howthe full potential of computer technologies in neuroscience research can berealized. it strongly believes that realization of this potential through theestablishment of the brain mapping initiative is essential to ensure the greatestbenefit to society from neuroscience research.summary of recommendations1. the committee recommends that the brain mapping initiative beestablished with the longterm objective of developing threedimensional computerized maps and models of the structure,functions, connectivity, pharmacology, and molecular biology ofhuman, rat, and monkey brains across developmental stages andreflecting both normal and disease states. the committee envisionsthis objective to be accomplished in two phases, beginning withphase 1 pilot projects, which will provide an experience base forthe fulfillment of phase 2.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations127mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2. the committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects orconsortia. these projects should be peerreviewed byneuroscientists and computer scientists; they should also beinvestigator initiated, involve geographically dispersedlaboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels ofcomputer experience. the projects should develop commonformats for the exchange of data and focus on different types ofcomputer data representations (geometric, structural, image, andfree text). selection of projects should be on the basis of researchquality and value to the evolution of a complex of electronicresources for mapping the brain.3. the committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceedinternationally and recommends that an international registry ofneuroscience databases and contacts be established so thatappropriate linkages can be created in the future.4. the committee recommends the establishment of an archive ofpublic domain software, accessible through computer networks.5. the committee recommends that an administrative structure beestablished to coordinate phase 1 activities. this brain mapadvisory panel (bmap) should be composed of neuroscientistsand computer and information scientists, with additional input fromfunding agency administrators. the panel would be responsible forthe overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortia andfor the development of necessary policies relating to establishmentof a brain mapping effort. the committee also recommends that theadvisory panel be responsible for consideration and developmentof editorial functions and policies relating to the ethical andsociological issues that will arise, including, but not limited to,correctness of information and quality control, intellectual propertyrights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.6. the committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of thebrain mapping initiative maintain a close relationship with thegene mapping and sequencing community and the human genomeproject, and with other scientific computing efforts, includingnetwork initiatives such as nsfnet and the proposed nationalresearch and education network. as part of these efforts, thecommittee further recommends that linkages be established withprotein sequence and genome databases to enhance access toinformation about brainspecific genes.7. the committee recommends that federal funding agencies developrequests for applications and/or cooperative agreements to supportthe formation of consortia and the activities of the brain mapadvisory panel. limited use of contract mechanisms should also beconsidered when appropriate to the overall goals of the initiative.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations128mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8. the committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the brainmapping initiative be international in scope and that they be fundedby multiple sources in a coordinated fashion. the structure foradministering the funding should ensure program stability andeffectiveness. possible funding structures include the identificationof a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formaladministrative structures among two or more agencies.9. the committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposedbrain mapping initiative justify the investment of necessaryresources and recommends the appropriation of additional fundingto support the establishment of phase 1 projects.referencesalcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration (adamha). 1988. adamha fundingmechanisms for grants and awards. rockville, md.: u.s. department of health andhuman services.downs, a., b. waxman, and c. pechura. 1990. technological implications of cartography andremote sensing for a national neural circuitry database. background paper prepared forthe committee on a national neural circuitry database, institute of medicine.gerstein, d. r., and h. j. harwood, eds. 1990. treating drug problems, vol. 1. washington, d.c.:national academy pressinstitute of medicine. 1989. research on children and adolescents with mental, behavioral, anddevelopmental disorders: mobilizing a national initiative. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.lederman, l. m.1991. science: the end of the frontier?science251(jan. 11, insert): 1œ19.national academy of sciences and institute of medicine. 1990. forum on supporting biomedicalresearch: nearterm problems and options for action. summary of meeting held june27, 1990. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national advisory neurological and communicative disorders and stroke council. 1989. decadeof the brain: answers through scientific research. nih pub. no. 882957. bethesda,md.: u.s. department of health and human services, national institutes of health.national institutes of health. 1989. nih data book. pub. no. 901261. bethesda, md.: u.s.department of health and human services.u.s. general accounting office. 1990. drug exposed infants: a generation at risk. testimonybefore the committee on finance, u.s. senate. pub. no. gao/thrd9046.washington, d.c.: u.s. general accounting office.note1. these species are intended as starting points. the committee also recognizes the need toinclude data from other, vertebrate and invertebrate, species.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations129mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the brain mapping initiative: committee conclusions andrecommendations130mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes131mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atask force topics and rosterstask force 1task force 1 met in washington, d.c. on january 30 and 31, 1990. thegroup examined the issues related to establishing a complex of automatedresources for neuroscience research from the perspective of those working inneurophysiology, neuroanatomy, and other fields in which the hierarchicalcharacter of neural systems must be considered.gordon m. shepherd,* yale university school of medicinevinton cerf,* corporation for national research initiativesdavid g. amaral, salk institutejoseph capowski, eutectics electronicsedward g. jones, university of california, irvine, college of medicinedavid lipman, national center for biotechnology informationclifford lynch, university of california, oaklanddavid a. mccormick, yale university school of medicinescooter morris, genentechclint potter, national center for supercomputing applicationsbruce schatz, university of arizonaterrence j. sejnowski, salk institute* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitry database.task force topics and rosters133mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.task force 2task force 2 met in washington, d.c. on february 1 and 2, 1990. thegroup examined the relevant issues in relation to mapping the presence ofneurotransmitters, receptors, or changes in glucose metabolism, blood flow, orion concentration in specific regions of the brain (i.e., autoradiographic anddensitometric data).joseph t. coyle,* johns hopkins university school of medicinediane c.p. smith,* xerox corporationmichael j. kuhar, nida addiction research centercharles molnar, washington universityvirginia m. pickel, cornell university, school of medicinearthur w. toga, university of california, los angelesoleh tretiak, drexel universitystanley j. watson, university of michigan school of medicineturner whitted, numerical design ltd.william yamamoto, george washington university medical centertask force 3task force 3 met in irvine, california, on march 5 and 6, 1990. the groupexamined the issues from the perspective of those involved in human brainimaging, including pet scanning, mri visualization, ct scanning, and thecombination or overlaying of these images.marcus e. raichle,* washington university school of medicinejerome r. cox,* washington universitykaren j. berkley,* florida state universityverne s. caviness, massachusetts general hospitalalan evans, montreal neurological institutepeter fox, johns hopkins university school of medicinedavid laberge, university of california, irvinemartin reite, university of coloradolarry squire, veterans administration medical center, san diegochris wood, los alamos national laboratorytask force 4task force 4 met in irvine, california, on march 7 and 8, 1990, andexamined the issues in relation to the generation of a comprehensive* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitry database.task force topics and rosters134mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.brain mapping project aimed toward the storage and possible display oforganized knowledge about the structure and functions of the brain.donald j. woodward,* university of texas health science centerjames kajiya,* california institute of technologyfloyd e. bloom, scripps clinic and research foundationdean hillman, new york university medical centerrichard lucier,* johns hopkins university school of medicinebruce mccormick, texas a & m universitygeorge paximos, university of new south wales, australialarry w. swanson,* university of southern californiadavid van essen,* california institute of technologyjames winget, silicon graphicskwangi yu, trw* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitry database.task force topics and rosters135mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bsamples of requests for opinionsthe following request for opinions was published in the society forneuroscience newsletter, trends in neuroscience, communications of theassociation for computing machinery (acm), and the journal of nih research.request for opinions concerning a national neuralcircuitry databasethe institute of medicine of the national academy of sciences has formeda study committee to examine the desirability, feasibility, and possible ways ofestablishing a national neural circuitry database (nncd). it is planned thatthe report of this committee, including specific recommendations, will be issuedin january 1991. under consideration is an nncd that would contain textualand graphic information on the anatomy, physiology, chemistry, andpharmacology of rat, monkey, and human brains. the database would, throughtwo and threedimensional graphic display, permit the users to rotate or sliceimages in order to access various types of information regarding brain structureand function. further, such a database could allow for the electronic storage andtransmission of neuroscience data; thus, the database could function as a vehiclefor basic and clinical neuroscience research collaboration and data sharing.the study committee recognizes the critical need for any eventual nncdto be planned carefully with the highest priority assigned to the needs of thepotential users in the neuroscience community. therefore,samples of requests for opinions136mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee invites any interested persons to offer their opinions, suggestionsand/or concerns on this matter in writing to:constance pechura, ph.d.national academy of sciencesinstitute of medicine, room 3242101constitution avenue, n.w.washington, d.c.20418please confine your comments to no more than two, singlespaced,typewritten pages. it would be most useful if comments were received by april30, 1990, but all comments received by may 31, 1990, will be considered.the study is being conducted by the institute of medicine/nationalacademy of sciences with funds provided by the national institute of mentalhealth, national institute on drug abuse, and national science foundation.the following letter was sent to the current and past presidents andcouncilors of the society for neuroscience.december 21, 1989dear :there have been discussions among members of the society forneuroscience for a number of years regarding the everburgeoning amount ofdata generated by neuroscience research and how the management of this vastknowledge base is becoming impossible for individual investigators. suchdiscussions often include the possibility of establishing some kind of databasefor neuroscience, and a few neuroscientists have begun to develop small,prototype databases for their own areas of interest. in response to theseinterests, the national institute of mental health, national institute on drugabuse, and the national science foundation have requested the institute ofmedicine/national academy of sciences to form a study committee to examinethe desirability, feasibility, and possible ways of establishing a national neuralcircuitry database (nncd). i agreed to chair this committee, composed ofneuroscientists and computer scientists, because i believe that such a projectrequires the kind of careful consideration and objective assessment that an iomstudy can provide. in addition, although the usefulness of an nncd might beimagined, the actual establishment of such a resource would present a dauntingchallenge in terms of organization, planning, and funding. therefore,samples of requests for opinions137mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.i would like the committee to draw from as broad a range of experience andexpertise as possible. with that commitment in mind, i am inviting you, thecurrent and past presidents and councilors of the society for neuroscience, tooffer your thoughts, suggestions, and concerns regarding our study.the kind of nncd that we have been charged to assess would be intendedas a resource for basic and clinical neuroscience. it would not be a simplebibliographic reference source; rather, it would contain textual and graphicinformation on the anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and pharmacology of rat,monkey, and human brains. it is envisioned that the database would, throughtwo and threedimensional graphic displays, permit the users to rotate or sliceimages in order to access various types of information about brain structure andfunction. further, such a database could allow for the electronic storage andtransmission of neuroscience data; thus, it could function as a vehicle forresearch collaboration and data sharing.although we also intend to request opinions from neuroscientists throughpublished solicitations and open forum meetings, i feel that your experience inthe leadership of the society can lend a special perspective to this issue. pleasesend your reply to the iom study director, dr. constance pechura (listedbelow); she will compile the responses and send copies to me. connie will alsobe available by phone if you have any questions or need any additionalinformation.i greatly appreciate your time and thought in responding to this request.with best regards in the new year,sincerely,joseph b. martin, m.d., ph.d.chairmancommittee on a national neural circuitry databasesamples of requests for opinions138mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clists of speakers and demonstrators insymposia and open hearingsneuroscience symposium and open hearingnational academy of scienceswashington, d.c.june 15, 1990carla j. shatzstanford university school of medicine''correlated neural activity and visual system development"richard j. robertscold spring harbor laboratory"predictive sequence motifs in proteins"gordon shepherd*yale university school of medicineopen hearing: "creating a national neuroscience resource"* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitrydatabase.lists of speakers and demonstrators in symposia and open hearings139mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.washington computer demonstrationswarren youngscripps clinic & research foundationsteve wertheimharvard universitysteve greenberg, wally welkeruniversity of wisconsinarthur togauniversity of california, los angelesneuroscience symposium and open hearinguniversity of californiasan franciscojune 26, 1990robert l. macdonalduniversity of michigan"regulation of single channel properties of native and cloned gaba areceptors"robert langridgeuniversity of california, san francisco"computational molecular biology"david van essen*california institute of technologyopen hearing: "creating a national neuroscience resource"san francisco computer demonstrationswarren youngscripps clinic & research foundationarthur togauniversity of california, los angelesjonathan nissanovdrexel university* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitrydatabase.lists of speakers and demonstrators in symposia and open hearings140mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.neuroscience symposium and open hearingnorthwestern universitychicago, illinoisjuly 12, 1990christof kochcalifornia institute of technology"computing optical flow in men, monkeys, and machines"peter l. pearsonthe johns hopkins university"the development and implementation of databases for mapping the humangenome"donald woodward*university of texas health science centeropen hearing: "creating a national neuroscience resource"chicago computer demonstrationssteve wertheimharvard universityarthur togauniversity of california, los angelessteve greenberguniversity of wisconsinjonathan nissanovdrexel university* member, institute of medicine committee on a national neural circuitrydatabase.lists of speakers and demonstrators in symposia and open hearings141mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.samples of requests for opinions142mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indexaadenosine monophosphate, 6062, 69advisory bodies, 1617, 18, 110, 121123,128129alcohol abuse, 7, 8, 18, 34, 4142, 44, 45,124alcohol, drug abuse, and mental healthadministration, 8, 18, 44, 45, 124algorithms, 11, 97, 102anatomy and anatomical data, 2, 10,7374, 103, 118, 136axons, 5556, 58, 96behavioral studies, 51bloodbrain barrier, 56brain function and, 3, 6, 14, 15, 25, 26,5356, 9394cerebral cortex, 4, 5, 6, 32, 34, 39, 40,51, 53, 58, 118magnetic resonance imaging, 9, 3940,5253, 73, 9697, 99pain, 3536, 37pilot projects, 15, 115schizophrenia, 6, 38, 39, 6769substance abuse, 5, 34, 35visual perception, 4, 3132, 33, 34see also neuronsanimal studies, 14, 50, 51, 53, 6769, 82,95, 114, 115, 127drug studies, 34, 55genetic studies, 8788monkey studies, 14, 32, 51, 114pain, 37visual perception, 32antibodies, 43, 55, 62architecturesbrain, 6, 10computer, 3, 117, 119120parallel processors, 54arpanet, 84artificial intelligence, 54, 59association for computing machinery, 70attitudes, 17, 106, 111axons, 5556, 58, 96index143mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bbasic research, 2, 19, 21, 23, 52, 94, 103,116behavioral factors, 3, 15, 4853, 94genetic influences, 15, 50, 51schizophrenia, 3738, 40, 67substance abuse, 5see also motor functions;sensory perceptionbibliographic databases, 9, 77, 78, 94, 98,117binding, biochemical, see receptorsbiochemistry, 2, 10, 25, 52, 53, 6065, 74behavioral effects, 51databases, 9, 12, 17, 2930, 6869,7982, 94, 98developmental processes and, 57, 126genetic regulation, 27immunocytochemistry, 55, 5657neuronal, 5457, 58pain, 36, 37pilot projects, 15schizophrenia, 6, 27, 3840, 68substance abuse, 5, 34, 35visual perception, 4, 33see also molecular processes;pharmacologybloodbrain barrier, 56blood flow, 52brain browser, 82, 83brain map, 97brain map advisory panel, 1617, 18,121123, 128129brain mapping initiative, 3, 8, 1319, 26,4445, 114129brain nuclei, 5, 31, 34, 50, 53, 54, 67brain research, 99bromley, allan, 86ccaenorhabditis elegans, 8788cancer, 30, 53, 62cartography, 10, 91cdrom, 102cerebral cortex, 53, 58, 118electrical activity, 51schizophrenia, 6, 39, 40substance abuse, 5visual perception, 4, 32, 34clinical research, 2, 6, 19, 21, 23, 37, 52,94, 116behavioral/emotional disorders, 52pain, 6, 37collins, francis, 30communication, 1, 2, 8, 23disorders, 41pain research, 36social aspects, 104107software, 15, 101see also consortia;networkscomputer simulations, 14, 22, 73pattern recognition, 4, 71visual perception, 33xray crystallography, 89, 7273confidentiality, see privacy rightsconsortia, 15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123124, 128contracts, federal, 18, 123124coordination, 2, 2223, 25advisory bodies, 1617, 18, 110,121123, 128129brain mapping initiative, 3, 8, 1319,26, 4445, 114129consortia, 15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123124, 128databases, 10, 1516electronic collaboratory groups, 8788longterm, 125127pilot projects, 13, 1415, 109110,120123index144mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professional organizations, 7, 10, 23, 43,70, 74, 9192symposia, 10, 23, 92, 139141see also standardscorporation for national research initiatives, 82cost and cost analysescomputer operations, 6970database software, 81imaging technology, 97mental disorders, 41, 44neurological diseases, 7, 41, 44, 126research financing, 8, 1819, 105, 125substance abuse, 34, 41coulson, alan, 87current contents, 77ddata banks, 98, 117databases, 12, 8, 911, 1516, 23, 67,7684, 91, 9799, 100, 107 108, 114,117attitudes about, 17bibliographic, 9, 77, 78, 94, 98, 117biochemical processes, 9, 12, 17, 2930,6869, 7982, 94, 98brain mapping initiative, 3, 8, 1319,26, 4445, 114129coordination of, 10, 1516evaluation, 16genome, 9, 12, 29, 41, 7982, 8788, 91,95, 98, 103, 105, 128images in, 911, 77, 83, 8586, 9397,9899, 100, 114, 117, 136informal data in, 77, 88, 93, 98, 104,108, 117international issues, 11, 1516, 17, 81,97, 9899, 117, 128management of, 3, 10, 11, 22, 29, 77,79, 81, 82, 8384, 100101, 119120molecular data, 9, 12, 17, 2930, 6869,7982national neural circuitry database, 3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 138objectoriented, 77, 100, 114online, 9, 76, 7982, 97pain, 6, 37preliminary findings data, 12protein sequencing, 9, 12, 17, 2930,6869, 7982, 95, 105, 128public, 9798published articles, standards for inclusion in, 12, 92, 110, 119relational, 77, 82, 100schizophrenia, 67, 4041, 6769software, general, 81, 101substance abuse, 5, 35textual data, 11, 76, 93, 96, 102, 116, 117universityassociated, 82, 83, 97visual perception, 33data storage, 101102, 107defense advanced research projectsagency, 84defense mapping agency, 10, 91department of agriculture, 81department of defense, 10, 18, 81, 8485,91, 124department of energy, 18, 44, 81, 82, 124department of veterans affairs, 8, 44developmental processes and stages, 14,27, 50, 9495, 114, 127neurochemistry, 57, 126schizophrenia, 6, 37, 40visual defects, 32, 53index145mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.diseases and disorders, 7, 9, 14, 4142, 53cancer, 30, 53, 62cost of, 7, 41, 44, 126motor functions, 5051neurofibromatosis, 30, 65, 95neurological, general, 1, 7, 21, 27,4142, 43, 53, 5657, 65, 95, 114,118, 126, 127pain, 56, 3537visual deficits, 4, 31, 32, 33, 53, 64see also injuries;mental illness;substance abusedigital graphics, 7374cartography, 10, 91dna, 64, 81, 87dopamine, 67, 34, 38, 40, 54drug abuse, see substance abuseeeducation, 110, 122learning processes, 15, 51, 59, 67electroencephalographic recordings,5152, 73electron microscopes, 43, 54, 58, 73, 125electrophysiology, 43, 54, 73, 94, 118behavioral research, 5052eventrelated potential, 52, 73ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118neuronal, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 68, 94, 118pain, 36visual perception, 33, 52emotion, 3, 15, 25, 27, 32, 34, 36, 4853see also mental illnessethics, 16, 105, 110, 118119, 121privacy rights, 16, 104105, 121see also intellectual propertyeuropean molecular biology library, 81evaluation, 15, 23databases, 16data sharing and, 12, 16, 23, 104, 105,108, 118119imaging techniques, 9697peer review, 12, 1415, 17, 105,116117, 128pilot projects, 13, 1415, 108, 109110,116117, 122, 128eventrelated potential, 52, 73ffederal government, 78, 23, 44, 4546,7476, 8182, 128129brain map advisory panel, 1617, 18,123124, 128129contracts, 18, 123124grants, 18, 111, 124networks, 8587national neural circuitry database, 3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 138national research and education network, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128nsfnet, 910, 17, 8586, 120, 123,128see also specific agenciesthe federal high performance computing program, 86foundations, 8, 18, 44, 46freedom of information, 16, 121public domain, 16, 17, 9798, 117120,128free text, see textual datafunding, 78, 12, 13, 44, 4546, 8182,92, 111, 121, 123125brain map advisory panel, 16, 1819,121, 128129foundations, 8, 18, 44, 46grants, research, 18, 111, 124index146mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ggenbank, 81genetics, 25, 27, 30, 6065, 92, 122123behavioral, 15, 50, 51color vision, 64dna, 64, 81, 87emotion, 15learning, 51neurofibromatosis, 30rna, 57, 63, 68schizophrenia, 67, 38, 4041, 6769genomes, 6, 17, 27, 62, 110, 113,122123, 128animal studies, 8788databases, 9, 12, 29, 41, 7982, 8788,91, 95, 98, 103, 105, 128human genome project, 17, 110, 123,128networks, 8788geographical factorsconsortia, 15, 116, 128laboratory locations, 12, 14, 116117, 128geometric data, 116glia, 56gore, albert, 22, 86grants, research, 18, 111, 124graphics, 7, 89, 13, 14, 26, 6776, 96, 98,102, 114, 136computer simulations, 4, 89, 14, 22, 33,71, 7273hypercard, 82pain, 37standards, 11, 9899visual perception, models of, 4, 33see also images and image processinggusella, james, 30hhistorical perspectives, 32, 50, 64, 70, 78,124125howard hughes medical institute, 8, 44hubel, david, 32humancomputer interface, 11, 12,100101, 102103, 109see also graphicshuman genome project, 17, 110, 123, 128hypercard, 82iimages and image processing, 7, 9, 11, 26,3940, 74, 91, 100, 108 , 114, 116computer simulations, 4, 89, 14, 22, 33,71, 7273databases, 911, 77, 83, 8586, 9397,9899, 100, 114, 117, 136evaluation, 9697magnetic resonance imaging, 9, 3940,5253, 73, 9697, 99networks, 910, 82, 83, 88, 100, 102,103, 108objectoriented databases, 77, 100, 114pattern recognition, 4, 71pet scanning, 6, 9, 3940, 52, 53, 73,9697, 99see also graphics;vision and visualizationimmunocytochemistry, 55, 5657informal data, 77, 88, 93, 98, 104, 108, 117information management, 1, 3, 22, 2630,4344databases, 3, 10, 11, 22, 29, 77, 79, 81,82, 8384, 100101, 119120index147mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.injuries, 7, 21, 27, 52, 56, 62, 126127pain and, 56, 36, 37visual perception, 33institute of medicine, 1, 22, 136intellectual property, 12, 16, 104, 105,118119, 121public domain, 16, 17, 9798, 117120,128intelligenetics, inc., 81international brain research organization, 43international perspectives and programs,18, 43, 117, 124125, 129databases, 11, 1516, 17, 81, 97, 9899,117, 128networks, 9, 85, 87, 97, 117, 120research policy, 2, 23internet, 85, 87, 120ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118jjapanese dna data bank, 81journal of neuroscience, 99llearning processes, 15, 51, 59, 67legal issuesfreedom of information, 16intellectual property, 12, 16, 104, 105,118119, 121privacy rights, 16, 104105, 121public domain, 16, 17, 9798, 117120,128local area networks, 8485, 100, 120los alamos national laboratory, 81mmacarthur foundation, 8, 44magnetic resonance imaging, 9, 39,5253, 73, 9697, 99magnetoencephalography, 52mathematics, 5960, 73, 116memory, 94animal/human, 51, 59computer, 26, 70, 102mental illness, 1, 7, 27, 4142, 43, 44, 52affective disorders, 7, 4142national institute of mental health, 1, 2,22, 23, 75schizophrenia, 67, 27, 3741, 52, 6769microcircuits, 26, 5760national database, 3neural, 3, 26, 27, 35, 5354, 59, 85microprocessors, 26models, 22, 88, 100, 114117brain mapping initiative, 3, 8, 1319,26, 4445, 114129computer simulations, 4, 89, 14, 22, 33,71, 7273molecular, 92, 95, 106molecular processes, 2, 14, 25, 57, 6065,114, 127antibodies, 43, 55, 62databases, 9, 12, 17, 2930, 6869, 7982emotion, 15modeling, 92, 95, 106pet scanning, 6, 9, 3940, 52, 53, 73,9697, 99schizophrenia, 40substance abuse, 5visual perception, 4, 33xray crystallography, 89, 7273see also genetics;protein sequencing;receptorsmonkey studies, 14, 32, 51, 114motor functions, 33, 34, 36, 48, 5051, 94index148mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nnathans, jeremy, 64national academy of sciences, 86national center for biotechnology information, 100, 109, 119120national center for research resources, 81national digital library system, 88national information standards organizations, 120national institute for general medicalsciences, 82national institute of mental health, 1, 2,22, 23, 75national institute of neurological disorders and strokes, 41national institute on drug abuse, 1, 2,22, 23, 126national institutes of health, 78, 18, 44,45, 7476, 81, 124see also specific institutesnational library of medicine, 9, 22, 76,79, 8182, 100, 103national center for biotechnologyinformation, 100, 109, 119120national neural circuitry database, 3, 11,14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 138national research and education network, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128national research council, 86national science foundation, 1, 2, 8, 18,22, 23, 44, 7071, 7576, 81, 82nsfnet, 910, 17, 8586, 120, 123, 128networks, 1, 78, 910, 11, 14, 2122, 23,83, 8488, 93, 100, 108 , 120communications software, 15, 101, 108,120data standards, 10, 11, 15, 85, 87, 92,9899, 102104, 108, 109, 110, 116,119, 120images, 910, 82, 83, 88, 97, 100, 102,103, 108international perspectives, 9, 85, 87, 97,117, 120internet, 85, 87, 120local area, 8485, 100, 120neural, 2, 25, 27national neural circuitry database, 3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 138national research and education network, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128nsfnet, 910, 17, 8586, 120, 123, 128online databases, 9, 76, 7982, 97public domain, 16, 17, 9798, 117120,128social aspects, 104107standards, 10, 11, 15, 85, 87, 116university, 85, 120wide area, 84, 85neural hierarchy, 2, 3, 10, 15, 27, 4865,94, 95, 99, 107, 108neurons, 27, 43, 5565, 74, 94axons, 5556, 58, 96circuitry, 3, 26, 27, 35, 5354, 59, 85electrophysiology, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60,68, 94, 118ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118networks, 2, 3neurochemistry, 5457, 58synapses, 27, 5762, 68, 94see also receptorsneurofibromatosis, 30, 65, 95newton, isaac, 64index149mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nonprofit organizations, see foundationsnsfnet, 910, 17, 8586, 120, 123, 128oobjectoriented databases, 77, 100, 114office of naval research, 44office of science and technology policy,86online databases, 9, 76, 7982, 97organizational issues, 2, 8, 84, 121122research hierarchy, 3, 2728, 31see also coordination;information managementoscilloscope, 43, 125ppagels, heinz, 21pain, 56, 3537parallel processors, 54pattern recognition, 4, 71pavlov, ivan, 50peer review, 12, 1415, 17, 105, 116117,128pew charitable trusts, 8pharmacology, 14, 35, 52, 60, 74, 114, 127dopamine, 67, 34, 38, 40, 54see also substance abusephysiology, 2, 14, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 43,5354, 55, 57, 114, 136anatomy and brain function, 3, 6, 14, 15,25, 26, 5356, 9394pain, 3537pilot projects, 14schizophrenia, 38visual perception, 2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 3134see also electrophysiologypilot projects, 13, 1415, 19, 92, 9596,107109, 116117, 118, 120, 122,123125, 128, 129anatomy, 15, 115coordination, 13, 1415, 109110,120123evaluation, 13, 1415, 108, 109110,116117, 122, 128policy issues, general, 2, 16, 23positron emission tomography, 6, 9,3940, 52, 53, 73, 9697, 99privacy rights, 16, 104105, 121private sector, 74foundations, 8, 18, 44, 46problem solvingalgorithms, 11, 97, 102artificial intelligence, 54, 59professional organizations, 7, 10, 23, 43,70, 74, 9192consortia, 15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123124, 128symposia, 10, 23, 92, 139141projections, 67, 113116, 125127networks, 8687protein sequencing, 62, 122123databases, 9, 12, 17, 2930, 6869,7982, 95, 105, 128protein synthesis, 57prototypes, see pilot projectspublic domaindatabases, 9798software, 16, 17, 117120, 128public health service, 18, 124publications, 28, 43, 98, 99, 105bibliographic databases, 9, 77, 78, 94,98, 117newsletters, 87standards for related data in databases,12, 92, 110, 119study methodology, 10, 92index150mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.qquality control, 16, 121, 122see also evaluation;standardsrreceptors, neuronal, 5, 67, 34, 35, 38,39, 40, 52, 58, 6063, 94 , 96, 126reference databases, see bibliographicdatabasesrelational databases, 77, 82, 100researchbasic, 2, 19, 21, 23, 52, 94, 103, 116clinical, 2, 6, 19, 21, 23, 37, 52, 94, 116costs, 8, 1819, 105, 125fragmentation of, 3, 13, 4344policy, 2, 3, 23see also technological innovationsresearch triangle institute, 126rna, 57, 63, 68robotics, 4sschizophrenia, 67, 27, 3741, 52, 6769anatomical data, 6, 38, 39, 6769behavioral factors, 3738, 40, 67cerebral cortex, 6, 39, 40chemical processes, 6, 27, 3840, 68databases, 67, 4041, 6769developmental aspects, 6, 37, 40genetics, 67, 38, 4041, 6769sensors, electronic, 4, 118sensory perception, 25, 27, 48, 52pain, 56, 3537see also vision and visualizationsex differences, 64sociological issues, 1213, 104107, 110,117, 118119, 121, 126attitudes, 17, 106, 111pain, 37privacy rights, 16, 104105, 121standard data formats, 12, 118119see also intellectual propertysociety for neuroscience, 7, 10, 23, 43,74, 9192software, 7475, 108, 109database, 81, 101humancomputer interface, 11, 108public domain, 16, 17, 117120, 128telecommunications, 15, 101, 108, 120sulston, john, 87standards, 22data formats, 10, 11, 12, 15, 85, 87, 92,9899, 102104, 108, 109 , 110, 116,119, 120graphics, 11, 9899publication, 12, 92, 110, 119social factors, 12study methodologyconsortia, 15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123124, 128symposia, 10, 23, 92, 139141see also task forcessubstance abuse, 45, 7, 3435, 4142, 50,126alcohol abuse, 7, 8, 18, 34, 4142, 44,45, 124anatomical data, 5, 34, 35animal studies, 34, 55chemical processes, 5, 34, 35cost of, 34, 41databases, 5, 35national institute on drug abuse, 1, 2,22, 23, 126index151mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supercomputer network study act, 86supercomputing centers, 120sutherland, ivan, 70symposia, 10, 23, 92, 139141synapses, 27, 5762, 68, 94axons, 5556, 58, 96ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118ttask forcesstudy methodology, 23, 9192, 97, 100,101, 107, 111, 136138topics and rosters, current study, 133135visualization, 7072technological innovations, general, 2, 6,7, 4244, 5153, 99102, 124125social factors, 104107telecommunications,see communication;networkstextual data, 11, 116, 76, 93, 96, 102, 116uuniversities and colleges, 109databases, 82, 83, 97datasharing controls by, 12, 105, 119graphics developments, 74networks, 85, 120user interface, see humancomputer interfacevvision and visualization, 4, 13, 26, 29,3134, 67, 7073anatomical data, 4, 3132, 33, 34of brain function, 2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 3134,43, 5354cerebral cortex, 4, 32, 34chemical processes, 4, 33color, 31, 64deficits, 4, 31, 32, 33, 53, 64developmental processes, 32, 53electrophysiology, 33, 52neurons, 4, 32, 33pattern recognition, 4, 71physiology, 2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 3134xray crystallography, 89, 7273wwhite, ray, 30wide area network, 84, 85wiesel, torsten, 32women, 126xxray crystallography, 89, 7273xrays, 74index152mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 21 maps of the monkey cerebral cortex, with the visual processingregion shaded. a and b are twodimensional representations of the cerebralcortex from different perspectives. c is a twodimensional map of anﬁunfoldedﬂ cortex, in which topological relationships are preserved and arealdistortions kept to a minimum. this map was generated manually from thecontours through a series of histological sections. figure courtesy of davidvan essen, division of biology, california institute of technology.153mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 22 opiate receptor localization in spinal cord by autoradiography. high densities of opiate receptors (dark orange) are found in the dorsalhorn, an area associated with pain perception. autoradiographic imaging is useful for exploring sites of drug action and for understanding howdrug exert their effects. image courtesy of michael j. kuhar, neuroscience branch, national institute of drug abuse addiction research center.154mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 23 infrared thermograph of a patient with postherpetic neuralgia, acondition involving persistent pain in areas affected by a herpes zosterinfection at least three months after healing of the skin lesions. areas ofpathological pain are associated with increased skin temperature (redrepresents highest skin temperature). figure reprinted from rowbotham andfields, 1989, with permission from elsevier science publishers.155mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 31 computerized pet images showing the changes in local blood flow in the brain, associated with local changes in neuronal activity,that occur during different states of information processing. image courtesy of marcus raichle, department of neurology, washington universityschool of medicine.156mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 32 cell frequency maps illustrating the regional distribution of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in three normal and three parkinsonianbrains. the colored areas represent region that contain different frequencies of cells (e.g., white areas contain 11,800 cells per square millimeter(cells/mm2) and red areas contain 7,2019,000 cells/mm2). the higher frequencies of cells are markedly reduced within the substantia nigra in thethree parkinsonian brains. reprinted from german et al., 1989, with permission from annals of neurology.157mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 33 false color map of intracellular calcium concentration in a guineapig cerebellar purkinje cell at the onset of a wave of complex spike activity. ahigh calcium conentration is observed in the outer portions of the dendritictree. the map was produced from microfluorometric imaging of thefluorescent calcium indicator fura2. image courtesy of d.w. tank and j. a.connor, molecular biophysics department, at&t bell laboratories, murrayhill, nj; m. sugimori and r. r. llinas, department of physiology andbiophysics, new york university school of medicine, new york, ny.reprinted with permission of science.158mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 34 computerenhanced image of vasopressin heteronuclear rna inthe hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (pvn), as revealed by in situhybridization utilizing a probe directed against vasopressin intronic (vp ini)gene sequences. the image is derived from an autoradiograph anddemonstrates expression of the vp gene in functionally distinct divisions of thepvn (posterior magnocellular (pm) and medial parvocellular (mp) region).intronic in situ hybridization allows localization of shortlived heteronuclearrna at the cellular level, and in combination with computerbased imageanalytic procedures can reveal rapid stimulusinduced changes in geneexpression in discrete neuronal populations. image provided by james p.herman and stanley j. watson, mental health research institute, theuniversity of michigan.159mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 35 photomicrographs of dendrites from the brains of a a, a younganimal, and b, an aged animal, and b, an aged animal. the extensions from themain dendritic shaft are dendritic ﬁspines.ﬂ note the thinning of dendriticspines in the aged brain. c. colorenhanced freezefracture of a singledendritic spine. photomicrographs courtesy of fidia pharmaceuticalcorporation.160mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 41 a computer model of an enzyme molecule, the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv1) protease. the structure was solved bymembers of the crystallography laboratory, national cancer institute, frederick cancer research facility, using synthetic protein supplied by thecalifornia institute of technology. molecular graphics by the university of california, san francisco (ucsf) computer graphics laboratoryusing ucsf midasplus. copyright, regents, university of california. reprinted with permission.161mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 42 computerassisted reconstruction of eeg activity. computer software is used to transform an analog eeg signal into quantitativeform, in this case to examine the amplitude of activity of a specific frequency band (the delta band). the eeg distribution is displayed over theentire scalp (nose is up). the delta power distribution of a normal person is seen in a while b shows the result obtained in a patient with ananeurysm of the left posterior communicating artery. figure provided by m. e. sumas and p. g. newlon, department of neurosurgery, easternvirginia medical school, norfolk, virginia.162mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plate 43 threedimensional reconstruction of a monkey brain. the cortexhas been rendered from histology, and the coronal section depicts glucoseutilization derived from autoradiography. image courtesy of arthur w. toga,laboratory of neuro imaging, university of california, los angeles, schoolof medicine.163