detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/18446professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?:criteria for decisionmaking66 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309386913 | doi 10.17226/18446committee on professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce: criteriafor future decisionmaking; computer science and telecommunications board;division on engineering and physical sciences; national research councilprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce:  criteria for future decisionmakingcomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the govern ing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this project was supported by the u.s. department of homeland security under contract no. hshqdc11d00009, task order no. hshqdc12j00157. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.international standard book number13: 9780309291040international standard book number10: 0309291046additional copies of this workshop summary are available for sale from the  national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu. copyright 2013 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. c. d. mote, jr., is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the  council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. c. d. mote, jr., are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce: criteria for future decisionmakingdiana l. burley, george washington university, cochairseymour e. goodman, georgia institute of technology, cochairmatt bishop, university of california, davismischel l. kwon, mischel kwon and associates, llckevin r. murphy, colorado state universityphilip m. neches, foundation ventures, llc.charles ﬁcaseyﬂ o™brien, national cyberwatch center,  prince george™s community collegeronald p. sanders, booz allen hamiltonstaffjon eisenberg, director, computer science and telecommunications board enita a. williams, associate program ofcer (through april 2013)shenae bradley, senior program assistantprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science and telecommunications boardrobert f. sproull, oracle (retired), chair luiz andré barroso, google, inc.robert brammer, brammer technology, llcedward frank, apple, inc.jack l. goldsmith iii, harvard law schoolseymour e. goodman, georgia institute of technology laura m. haas, ibm amalden research laboratoryrobert horowitz, stanford universitymichael kearns, university of pennsylvaniarobert kraut, carnegie mellon university susan landau, radcliffe institute for advanced study peter lee, microsoft corporationdavid e. liddle, u.s. venture partners barbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn stankovic, university of virginiajohn a. swainson, dell, inc.peter szolovits, massachusetts institute of technology ernest j. wilson, university of southern californiakatherine yelick, university of california, berkeleystaffjon eisenberg, director virginia bacon talati, program ofcershenae bradley, senior program assistantrenee hawkins, financial and administrative manager herbert s. lin, chief scientistlynette i. millett, associate director eric whitaker, senior program assistantfor more information on cstb, see its website at  http://www.cstb.org; write to cstb, national research council, 500 fifth street, nw, washington, dc 20001; call (202) 3342605; or email cstb at cstb@nas.edu.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viithe federal national initiative for cybersecurity education (nice) aims to ﬁenhance the overall cybersecurity posture of the united states by accelerating the availability of educational and training resources designed to improve the cyber behavior, skills, and knowledge of every segment of the population.ﬂ1 one of the issues being considered as part of nice is the role of professionalization in enhancing the cybersecurity workforce. the u.s. department of homeland security (dhs), one of the agencies carrying out activities under nice, lists three questions regarding the role of professionalization on the national initiative for cyber security careers and studies webpage on cybersecurity professionalization:2that page goes on to describe the present study, sponsored by dhs, on professionalization. box p.1 provides the full statement of task. to carry out the study, the committee on professionalizing the nation™s cyber1 u.s. department of homeland security, national initiative for cybersecurity careers and studies (niccs), about the national initiative for cybersecurity education, available at http://niccs.uscert.gov/footer/aboutnice.2 u.s. department of homeland security, national initiative for cybersecurity  careers and studies, professionalization, available at http://niccs.uscert.gov/careers/professionalization.prefaceprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii prefacesecurity workforce: criteria for future decisionmaking was convened under the auspices of the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council (appendix a).the statement of task speaks broadly about a range of matters to be considered or examined. with one exception noted below, the committee did explore all of these points. consistent with discussions with dhs before and during the study as well as with the time and resources available for the study, the committee took as its central task to do what is called for in the nal sentence of the statement of taskšto prepare a report that wouldcharacterize the current landscape for cybersecurity workforce development and set forth criteria that the federal agencies participating in the national initiative for cybersecurity educationšas well as organizations that employ cybersecurity workersšcould use to identify which specialty areas may require professionalization and to evaluate different approaches and tools for professionalization. box p.1  statement of taskan ad hoc committee will conduct a study that would consider approaches to increasing the professionalization of the nation™s cybersecurity workforce. it would examine workforce requirements for cybersecurity and the segments and job functions in which professionalization is most needed; the role of assessment tools, certication, licensing, and other means for assessing and enhancing professionalization; and emerging approaches, such as performancebased measures. it would also examine requirements for the federal (military and civilian) workforce, the private sector, and state and local government.three public workshops would be held in the course of the study as the principal datagathering events to obtain input on the foregoing issues from education and training institutions and public and private sector employers of cybersecurity workers. the committee will develop the respective agendas, select and invite speakers and discussants, and moderate the discussions. subsequently, the committee will prepare a report, drawing on the workshops. the report would characterize the current landscape for cybersecurity workforce development and set forth criteria that the federal agencies participating in the national initiative for cybersecurity educationšas well as organizations that employ cybersecurity workersšcould use to identify which specialty areas may require professionalization and to evaluate different approaches and tools for professionalization.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface ixin developing this report, the committee identied three essential elementsš(1) understanding the context for cybersecurity workforce development; (2) considering the relative advantages, disadvantages, and approaches to professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce; and (3) setting forth criteria that can be used to identify which, if any, specialty areas may require professionalizationšand set forth criteria for evaluating different approaches and tools for professionalization. as called for in the statement of task, the committee considered these in the context of the national cybersecurity workforcešand, in particular, not just with respect to the federal government workforce. one issue that is listed in the statement of task but is not addressed in this report is the question of approaches to performance assessment. the reason for this omission is simple: the committee did not hear about this point at the workshops it convened. the committee believes that this issue will merit more attention in the future as professionalization measures are implemented and rened. the principal input to this study came from a series of three workshops convened by the study committee and held in washington, d.c., san francisco, california (coinciding with and partly colocated with the rsa conference), and san antonio, texas. an additional datagathering meeting with approximately 25 attendees was held at the cybercorps scholarship for service principal investigators™ meeting on january 10, 2013, in arlington, virginia. agendas for the three workshops organized by the committee are provided in appendix b. speakers at the workshops came from organizations associated with the education and development of cybersecurity workers (community colleges, colleges, and universities; organizations that provide certicates and certications, and professional associations); organizations that employ cybersecurity workers (federal, state, and local government and a wide array of private sector rms). speakers also included students and a diverse set of people who hold cybersecurity jobs or whose positions signicantly involve cybersecurity. within the federal government, speakers came from civilian, law enforcement, defense, and intelligence agencies. speakers from private rms included individuals from the information technology, cybersecurity, entertainment, banking and nance, and manufacturing sectors. lists of speakers and participants in the three workshops are provided in appendix c. a principal focus of the workshops and other interactions was to understand how organizations think about cybersecurity jobs and the role of professionalization. in the course of these presentations and discussions, the committee heard almost every imaginable point of view, and many points were both corroborated and contradicted by other speakers. during the course of the study, the committee also reviewed reports related to the cybersecurity workforce in general and to its professionprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x prefacealization in particular. these reports provide a variety of perspectives on the need, demand, and supply for cybersecurity workers, the sorts of skills required, and ways of improving the capacity and capability of the workforce. some of these reports focused on the federal government workforce, while others looked at the workforce more broadly. some are independent analysis, and others were prepared by groups with a particular interest in some aspect of workforce issues. chapters 1 and 2 provide context regarding the cybersecurity challenge, the role of the cybersecurity workforce in addressing this challenge, and the role that professionalization might play. chapter 3 provides the committee™s analysis and its conclusions and recommendation. we would like to thank the department of homeland security for sponsoring this study and acknowledge in particular the assistance of robin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, branch chief, cybersecurity education and awareness, u.s. department of homeland security. we would also like to acknowledge the contributions made by the speakers and participants at the three workshops organized by the committee. diana burley and seymour goodman, cochairscommittee on professionalizing the  nation™s cybersecurity workforce:  criteria for future decisionmaking professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xithis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:byron collie, goldman sachs group, inc.,stephen cooper, stanford university,paul e. gray, massachusetts institute of technology,cynthia irvine, naval postgraduate school,john d. johnson, deere & company,anita jones, university of virginia,susan landau, privacyink.org,fred oswald, rice university,michael papay, northrup grumman corporation,franklin s. reeder, reeder group, inc., andeugene spafford, purdue university.acknowledgment of reviewersprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii acknowledgment of reviewersalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by r. stephen berry, university of chicago (emeritus). appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiiexecutive summary 11 cybersecurity, the cybersecurity workforce,  5 and its development and professionalization cybersecurity, 5 need, demand, and supply, 7 roles, responsibilities, and contexts for cybersecurity work, 9 factors affecting future cybersecurity workforce needs, 122 approaches to professionalization 14 profession, 14 professionalization, 15 goals for professionalization, 16 specic mechanisms for professionalization and how they  affect workforce capacity and capability, 17 timescales for professionalization, 20 tradeoffs associated with professionalization, 203 conclusions, recommendation, and criteria  23 for professionalization of cybersecurity capacity and capability of the cybersecurity workforce, 23 cybersecurity work and the cybersecurity workforce, 24 professionalization, 26 criteria, 28contentsprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contentsappendixesa biographies of committee members 33b workshop agendas 39c speakers and participants at workshops organized by the  47 committee professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1the nation™s cybersecurity challenge stems from threats from a wide array of actors who seek to compromise the condentiality, integrity, and availability of elements of cyberspace by exploiting ˚aws in the design, implementation, conguration, and operation of information technology systems. this cybersecurity threat faces individuals, organizations of all sizes, and government at all levels. the effort to establish a safer and more secure cyberspace will require improvements in many areas, including a cybersecurity workforce that has the capacity and capability to do the job; better tools and techniques that enhance the efciency and effectiveness of cybersecurity workers; better tools and approaches for risk identication and assessment; better systems design and development; greater incentives to encourage the deployment of better cybersecurity technologies and practices; improvements in enduser behavior through training; and organizational, national, and international measures to deter bad actors. this report considers the role that professionalization might play in ensuring that the united states has a cybersecurity workforce with enough cybersecurity workers (capacity) with the right knowledge, skills, and abilities (capability). the committee understood its principal tasks to be (1) to consider the role that professionalization could play in enhancing the capacity and capability of the national cybersecurity workforce and (2) to identify criteria that could be used by decisionmakers in government and the private sector when considering measures to professionalize the cybersecurity workforce. executive summaryprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?in brief, the committee found that although the occupations comprising the eld of cybersecurity do require specialized knowledge and some form of intensive advanced training, they have not yet sufciently crystallized into specic professions. cybersecurity is a young eld, and the technologies, threats, and actions taken to counter the threats that characterize the endeavor are changing too rapidly to risk imposing the rigidities that typically attend professional status. some organizations may nd that professionalization provides a useful degree of ﬁquality controlﬂ for those who work in the eld, but professionalization also imposes barriers to those who wish to enter the eld at a time when demand for cybersecurity workers exceeds supply. capacity and capability of the cybersecurity workforceconclusion 1. more attention to both the capacity and capability of the u.s. cybersecurity workforce is needed. conclusion 2. although the need for cybersecurity workers is likely to continue to be high, it is difcult to forecast with certainty the number of workers required or the needed mix of cybersecurity knowledge and skills. cybersecurity work and the cybersecurity workforceconclusion 3. the cybersecurity workforce encompasses a variety of contexts, roles, and occupations and is too broad and diverse to be treated as a single occupation or profession. whether and how to professionalize will vary according to role and context.conclusion 4. because cybersecurity is not solely a technical endeavor, a wide range of backgrounds and skills will be needed in an effective national cybersecurity workforce.professionalizationconclusion 5. professionalization has multiple goals and can occur through multiple mechanisms.conclusion 6. the path toward professionalization of a eld can be slow and difcult, and not all portions of a eld can or should be professionalized at the same time. professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary 3criteria for decisionmaking about professionalizationconclusion 7. professionalization has associated costs and benets that should be weighed when making decisions to undertake professionalization activities.professionalization is not a proxy for ﬁbetter,ﬂ but it may be a useful tool in certain circumstances. the following criteria are suggested to help identify cybersecurity specialties and circumstances where professionalization may be appropriate and to assess the potential effects of different professionalization mechanisms: do the benets of a given professionalization measure outweigh the potential supply restrictions resulting from the additional barriers to entry? does the potential to provide additional information about a candidate outweigh the risks of false certainty about who is actually best suited for a job?do the benets of establishing the standards needed for professionalization outweigh the risks of obsolescence (when the knowledge or skills associated with the standard are outofdate by the time a standard is agreed on) and ossication (when the establishment of a standard inhibits further development by workers of their skills and knowledge)?recommendation. activities by the federal government and other entities to professionalize a cybersecurity occupation should be undertaken only when that occupation has welldened and stable characteristics, when there are observed deciencies in the occupational workforce that professionalization could help remedy, and when the benets outweigh the costs. cybersecurity is a broad eld, and professionalization is something that can be undertaken for specic occupations within the eld and not the eld as a whole. before professionalization activities are undertaken for an occupation, two highlevel criteria should be met:1. the occupation has welldened characteristics. these include stable knowledge and skill requirements, stable roles and responsibilities and occupational boundaries that distinguish the profession from others, welldened career ladders that provide links to professionalization mechanisms, and agreedon ethical standards to which members of the profession will be held.2. there is credible evidence of deciencies in the occupational workforce, such as skill deciencies, questions of legitimacy among the current set of practitioners, or concerns about accountability.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?the criteria in conclusion 7 speak to the tradeoffs that should be considered by those seeking to professionalize those who work in the eld of cybersecurityšincluding the u.s. government, other u.s. public and private employers, educational institutions, certication bodies, and so forth. these tradeoffs illustrate the complex set of costs and benets associated with professionalization. some of the uncertainties may  diminish over time, and longterm benets may ultimately outweigh shortterm costs. it may thus be an effective strategy to encourage, rather than require, the use of certain professionalization mechanisms so as to avoid overly restricting supply in the short term while still establishing a longterm path to enhancing quality. over time, parts of the cybersecurity eld will likely reach the point where professionalization will be warranted. the criteria set forth under the recommendation can be used by decision makers to judge when that time has come.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51cybersecurity, the cybersecurity workforce, and its development and professionalizationcybersecuritycyberspace comprises myriad interconnected computers, cyber physical systems, and telecommunications networksšincluding the  internet and the systems attached to itšthat have become integral to our economy, society, and national security. these include servers,  routers, and other infrastructure; desktops, laptops, and mobile computing devices; and the many other devices that incorporate computing and networking functionality. cybersecurity involves the articulation and enforcement of security  policies for information and communications systems and the implementation of associated technical solutions, mechanisms, and programs. these policies protect various desirable attributes of a systemšfor example, condentiality, possession or control, integrity, authenticity, availability, and  utility.1 privacy is closely associated with security; for example, condentiality is required to protect information from unwanted disclosure. cybersecurity is also required for safety when misuse of information and communications systems has the potential to cause harm.the nation™s cybersecurity challenge stems from actions taken by a wide array of actorsšincluding individuals, insiders, criminal organizations, transnational nonstate actors, and nationstatesšto compromise computing and communications systems and the organizations 1 this particular framework comes from d.b. parker, fighting computer crime, john wiley & sons, new york, n.y., 1998.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?that depend on these systems. indeed, the whole eld of cybersecurity would not exist without these adversaries.2 this cybersecurity threat faces individuals, organizations of all sizes, and government at all levels. the overall sense is that the threat is evolving and growing.3 because attackers target organizations and individuals as well as machines and networks, protecting cyberspace also means ensuring that the components are securely operated, and thus cybersecurity involves human and behavioral factors. although many of the fundamental cybersecurity challenges have endured over time, the underlying information and communications technologies and their applications continue to change rapidly. for example, recent years have seen the rapid adoption of smart phones and tablets by consumers and employers and the associated phenomenon of ﬁbring your own device,ﬂ which has rapidly infused mobile devices into the workplace. both developments have provided organizations with new capabilities that introduce at the same time new cybersecurity risks. cybersecurity threats also continue to evolve as the interests of active human adversaries change, as their capabilities grow, and as the techniques they employ change. the response to the cybersecurity threat has also shifted from one that was entirely, or at least primarily, defensive in nature to one that also includes more active activities, even as defensive activities continue to dominate. in the national security arena, the united states has made public its plans to strengthen its offensive cyber operations capabilities and workforce. although the prevailing sense is that the state of the nation™s cybersecurity is not getting better (and indeed many argue that it is getting worse), it is actually difcult to measure how ﬁcyber secureﬂ a system, organization, or nation may be.4 consider, for example, that the security of a system generally re˚ects not only how well that system was constructed, but also how it is congured, the organizational policies and practices that govern its operation, the degree to which organizational members follow these policies, and the capabilities and interests of potential adversaries.5 moreover, organizations have different denitions of security (i.e., different security policies), so a system that is ﬁsecureﬂ for 2 although dependability and other trustworthiness issues would remain.3 see, e.g., national research council, toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2007. the following provides a similar assessment of the situation facing the federal government: see u.s. government accountability ofce, cybersecurity: national strategy, roles, and responsibilities need to be better dened and more effectively implemented, gao13187, washington, d.c., february 2013.4 see, e.g., national research council, toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, 2007, pp. 2 and 133.5 national research council, toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, 2007, pp. 133135.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity workforce™s development and professionalization 7one use or one organization may not be secure for other uses or organizations. all of this makes it challenging to accurately assess workforce requirements, make workforce investment decisions, or measure the contributions or performance of the cybersecurity workforce. the effort to establish a safer and more secure cyberspace will require improvements in many areas, including a cybersecurity workforce that has the capacity and capability to do the job; better tools and techniques that enhance the efciency and effectiveness of cybersecurity workers; better tools and approaches for risk identication and assessment; better systems design; better systemsdevelopment practices; greater incentives to encourage the deployment of better cybersecurity technologies and practices; better practices and techniques for dealing with the supply chain for components and services; improvements in enduser behavior through training; and organizational, industry, national, and international measures to deter bad actors. this report focuses on one of these areas: building a cybersecurity workforce with enough cybersecurity workers of the right types (capacity) with the right knowledge, skills, and abilities (capability) and the improvements that might come from professionalization. need, demand, and supplythe size of the cybersecurity workforce is difcult to measure because it spans many job roles that often have different and overlapping titles in different organizations. the bureau of labor statistics estimated employment at 72,670* in 2010 for the occupation ﬁinformation security analysts,ﬂ6 a category that does not encompass all cybersecurity workers. an indication of the scale of that workforce segment in the federal government was provided by the size of the target population for a recent workforce survey by the department of homeland security (dhs) and the federal chief information ofcer council that was sent to more than 200,000 federal civilian employees from 82 agencies.7 some sense of the total cybersecurityrelated workforce, construed broadly, can be obtained by considering the number of organizations that must undertake some 6*editor™s note: following initial publication of this report, this number was updated to re˚ect 2010 bls data for the category in question. see the primary reference given in footnote 6.6 bureau of labor statistics, u.s. department of labor, occupational employment and wage, may 2012: 151122 information security analysts, available at http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes151122.htm.7 national initiative for cybersecurity education, department of homeland security and federal cio council, 2012 information technology workforce assessment for cybersecurity summary report, washington, d.c., 2013.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?measures to protect their cybersecurity. there are, for example, roughly 6 million businesses with a payroll (and many more without)8 and nearly 90,000 local governments and public school systems9 in the united states. not all necessarily have fulltime cybersecurity workers, but all must have someone responsible for that organization™s cybersecurity, at least to make decisions about which information technology and cybersecurity products and services to acquire.in considering the role of professionalization in building a cybersecurity workforce with sufcient capacity and capability, it is useful to distinguish need, demand, and supply. need is the number (and skill mix) of cybersecurity workers required to provide satisfactory cyber security (a judgment that will vary according to who makes the assessment). demand is expressed by the desired capabilities stated in job descriptions, the  number of such positions that are created and lled, and the salaries offered to those who have those abilities. demand will fall short of national or societal need to the extent that cybersecurity is a public goodšthat is, organizations will invest to meet their own requirements but not necessarily to achieve society™s desirable overall requirements. demand can also fall short of an organization™s own needs if (1) the organization lacks the required resources or (2) an organization underestimates the threats it faces and thus underinvests in meeting its own needs. supply is the number of available qualied10 workers willing to ll positions and is a function of the visibility and attractiveness of cyber security occupations, the availability of appropriate training and education, and (as in all elds) the overall labor market in which potential workers respond to salary and other signals about demand. as discussed below, professionalization mechanisms can both stimulate supply, by making a eld more attractive, and dampen supply, by creating barriers to entry. they can make it easier for employers to meet their needs, by making it easier to identify suitable candidates, but they can also inhibit the ˚exibility needed as job requirements change or where job responsibilities are necessarily broad and ˚uid. it would be helpful in assessing the role and effects of professionalization to have a handle on the current supply of cybersecurity  workers. unfortunately, it is notoriously difcult to assess labor supply and demand to determine whether or not there is a shortage. for example, employers in a particular sector may complain that they cannot nd enough quali8 u.s. census bureau, statistics about business size, 2007, available at http://www.census.gov/econ/smallbus.html.9 u.s. census bureau, local government and public school systems by type and state, 2007, available at http://www.census.gov/govs/cog/govorgtab03ss.html.10 without ways of assessing quality, the supply will, of course, include available but unqualied individuals, especially if demand greatly exceeds supply.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity workforce™s development and professionalization 9ed individuals, even as workers in that sector complain that there are not enough open positions. this can happen when employers seek talent with very particular skill requirements and balk at training or retraining potential hires. rapid turnover, which is common in fastmoving hightech elds, can also exacerbate perceived shortages, even when there are enough qualied workers in the labor pool. another complication in measuring supply and demand is that the job categories used in the collection of statistics by the department of labor are not always well aligned with the occupation of interest. for example, as noted above, the ﬁinformation security analystsﬂ category does not necessarily include everyone who is a cybersecurity worker, and there may be cybersecurity workers who do not neatly t into a single category. the national origin of cybersecurity workers also affects  supply. firms without global reach must either rely on workers within the u.s. workforce or work within a complex system for hiring foreign  workers. by contrast, rms with global operations are able to seek talent  wherever it exists across the globe and move at least some cybersecurity work to where they nd it. firms of all sizes can outsource some or all of their cybersecurity work, and some of this may also be performed offshore. u.s. citizenship is generally required for federal government cyber security positions, and security clearance requirements for national  securityrelated jobs further restrict the pool of candidates to u.s. citizens. roles, responsibilities, and contexts for cybersecurity workthe cybersecurity workforce is quite diverse, encompassing a wide variety of roles and responsibilities, each involving an array of different skills and abilities. it includes workers in the private and nonprot sector, military, and civilian government. the diverse mix of skills in the cybersecurity workforce re˚ects the complex nature of cybersecurity. some of the cybersecurity problem is technical (i.e., drawing on computer science techniques and skills), but given that cybersecurity is inherently concerned with human adversaries and the behaviors of those in the organizations that they target, behavioral and management aspects are also critical. effective response to an attack involves understanding and anticipating the actions of an attacker. as a result, in some jobs, an adversarial mindset and approach may be as important as the aggregation of particular technical skills in roles that involve detecting, tracking, or responding to an attack. workshop participants noted that some of the most talented individuals in this context today are people who lack formal education, training, or certicationšand that these individuals may be professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?unwilling to pursue any of these to meet a hiring requirement. indeed, it was clear from presentations and discussion at the workshops that such ﬁselftaughtﬂ experts play key roles in some organizations.moreover, security capabilities are hard for end users, administrators, and developers to understand, making it all too easy to use, operate, or construct systems that are inadvertently insecure. insights on how to address usability often come from the disciplines of humancomputer interaction and psychology.11 behavioral expertise is relevant in efforts to detect and deter potential insider threats. because failures to adopt, deploy, or use adequate cybersecurity measures often stem from insufcient incentives, the disciplines of economics, anthropology, and psychology are also relevant for cybersecurity.12given that many aspects of cybersecurity involve highly technical matters, it is often not appreciated that ﬁsoft skillsﬂ are also important, much as they are in other technical elds. these skills include the ability to work in teams and facility with oral and written communication. response to an incident may require coordinating activities across multiple organizational elements or job functions and may involve interactions with vendors, security consultants, law enforcement, or other outside actors. given the dynamic nature of the information technology substrate and threat environment, the ability to continue to learn is also important. all of these traits are at a particular premium in the often  complex response to ﬁadvanced persistent threats,ﬂ where adversaries possess sophisticated levels of expertise and signicant resources that allow them to pursue their objectives through multiple attack vectors. organizations confronting cybersecurity threats increasingly nd themselves conducting what has been dubbed ﬁcyber intelligenceﬂ in addition to more traditional cybersecurity activities.13the organizational context in which the cybersecurity workforce is employed is also diverse. for example, the cybersecurity capabilities of employers vary considerably and include the following:employers with large, specialized cybersecurity operations that have built up a cadre of highly skilled, extensively trained specialists who work together on the most complex cybersecurity problems. such organizations 11 national research council, toward better usability, security, and privacy of information technology: report of a workshop, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2010.12 ross anderson and tyler moore, information security: where computer science, economics and psychology meet, philosophical transactions of the royal society a: mathematical, physical and engineering sciences 367(1898):27172727, 2009; ibid.13 troy townsend et al. emerging technology center report: cyber intelligence tradecraft project summary of key findings, software engineering institute, carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa., 2013.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity workforce™s development and professionalization 11are characterized by willingness and ability to make the necessary investments and by having management with sufcient savvy to identify and recruit highcaliber talent.employers with mixed cybersecurity groups that employ more than one security specialist, typically led by a manager who is knowledgeable but not necessarily expert in the eld.employers with distributed cybersecurity functions, in which cybersecurity is the responsibility of a general information technology (it) worker or manager as part of a broader it job, typically performed in contexts where managers have little specialized knowledge or understanding of cybersecurity. in the rst case, organizations with global reach may send work offshore to wherever expertise can be found within the enterprise. in the second two cases, organizations will rely, at least in part, on outsourced work to obtain the necessary expertise, and some of this work may be offshored by the rm providing the security services.as is true in many elds, there are varying approaches to how work is divided between the cybersecurity workforce and the broader workforce, because the lines between cybersecurity and other roles are blurry, re˚ecting overlaps in both expertise and responsibility. for example, when a change is made to address a cybersecurity problem, someone designated as having cybersecurity responsibilities may recommend a conguration change that is, in turn, implemented by a network engineer who is not designated as a cybersecurity employee. also, highlevel decisions about investment in cybersecurity may be made by individuals who have risk management responsibilities that extend well beyond cybersecurity. another example is privacy, where issues, technical approaches, and job responsibilities often overlap with cybersecurity. because attacks can cross international borders, cybersecurity work sometimes has an international dimension. cybersecurity work may involve coordinating activities in multiple countries and thus require the ability to work with international counterparts from both the private sector and other governments and the knowledge and skills to properly  comply with rules and policies that can differ by jurisdiction. for example, cybersecurity work sometimes involves use of sensitive information about vulnerabilities and responses. in short, cybersecurity work encompasses a wide range of roles and contexts, and there are many different ways to classify cyber security work. some workshop participants commented that agreement on a common framework would be helpful in understanding and developing the cybersecurity workforce, and this view prompted the commissioning of such a framework under the national initiative for cybersecurity educaprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?tion (nice). issued by the national institute for standards and technology, the recently released nice framework divides cybersecurity roles into highlevel areas of specialization, each of which contains multiple subspecialties.14 today, this framework is being referenced as part of workforce development efforts in parts of the federal government and, to a lesser extent, in the private sector. some workshop participants cited the framework as a helpful or much needed development; others observed that it did not seem relevant, given how they currently thought about the structure of their organization™s workforce. factors affecting future cybersecurity workforce needsit is even more difcult to assess future need, demand, and supply for cybersecurity (or information technology more broadly). there are many indications today that demand will continue to be high. for example, the bureau of labor statistics estimates a fasterthanaverage growth rate in employment for the decade 2010 to 2020 of ﬁinformation security analysts,ﬂ a labor category that represents a signicant subset of the cybersecurity workforce.15 in a 2012 survey of information security professionals, more than half reported that their organizations had too few information security workers.16there are a number of factors that could increase or decrease the needed capacity in particular areas or affect the needed workforce capabilities, including the following:how the cybersecurity challenge will evolve as new technologies and threats emerge and old threats evolve, and what the resulting workforce requirements will be. at least historically, new technologies have been deployed without sufcient attention to the security implications, and bad actors have found ways to exploit the resulting vulnerabilities. familiar examples include the introduction of networked personal computers into the workplace and widespread adoption of the internet for missioncritical activities. what the key skills and best practices will be in cybersecurity, and what the content of curricula should be, because the ability to build more secure 14 national institute for standards and technology, u.s. department of commerce,  national cybersecurity workforce framework, washington, d.c., 2013.15 national center for o*net development, bureau of labor statistics, o*net online summary report for 151122.00šinformation security analysts, 2013, available at http://www.onetonline.org/link/summary/151122.00.16 michael suby, the 2013 (isc)2 global information security workforce study, frost and  sullivan, mountain view, calif., 2013.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity workforce™s development and professionalization 13systems lags what is needed, and knowledge about how to protect, defend, and repair computer systems continues to grow. how advances on various fronts might affect the mix of needed capacity and capability. for example, better software design and development from a security perspective would result in fewer vulnerabilities to be exploited (and thus potentially require fewer people to detect, patch, and respond), better tools and techniques for cybersecurity might reduce the number of workers needed in certain roles and change the skills needed for others, more robust law enforcement action might reduce the incidence of certain forms of cybercrime, better training and understanding of security among system administrators would enable them to better ﬁhardenﬂ systems, and better training of the workers that operate systems would help them avoid actions that undermine security. in the case of better tools and techniques that enhance productivity, it is possible that demand for workers might shift to higherend positions, because fewer workers would be needed to carry out functions that are partly or fully automated. emerging technologies like cloud services could enhance security by reducing the burden on individual organizations, but it could also introduce new risks by changing the boundary of an organization™s information systems. how the policy environment for cybersecurity will change. for example, if new cybersecurity or privacy regulations were introduced, organizations would need to increase their workforce to comply with the new requirements and document and report on compliance. how cybersecurity will be provided in the future, especially in smaller organizations. already, many organizations turn to vendors to supply various cybersecurity tools and services, and there are models in which cybersecurity work can be outsourced to service providers. for example, internet service providers increasingly offer a range of security services for their customers. in the increasingly popular softwareasaservice model, vendors generally take responsibility for conguration, monitoring, and response. such shifts of duties may reduce the number or change the mix of cybersecurity workers needed by organizations. on the other hand, every organization that uses it will need people who can take responsibility for the organization™s cybersecurity, at a minimum being able to select vendors that can provide the required levels of assurance. future trends in offshoring security work will also affect the demand for u.s. cybersecurity workers. professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14professionprofession has multiple interpretations, ranging from the common use of the word to more formal denitions that spell out the various elements generally associated with the establishment of a profession. the common meaning of profession is ﬁa paid occupation, especially one that involves prolonged training and a formal qualication.ﬂ1a useful, more comprehensive denition can be derived from suggestions by several speakers at the workshops convened by this committee. that denition identies the following characteristics of a professional: (1) passing a knowledge and/or performance test, (2) superior completion of study of intellectual basis of the profession, (3) a sustained period of mentored experience/apprenticeship, (4) continuing education, (5) licensing by a formal authority, and (6) ethical standards of behavior with enforcement, including removal from profession.2 a eld that possesses 1 new oxford american dictionary, third edition, oxford university press, 2010.2 many similar denitions or subsets of this denition appear in the literature. for example, white papers prepared for the national initiative on cybersecurity education use a denition with three elements (a body of knowledge, ethical guidelines, and professional organization that publishes papers and establishes best practices) (department of homeland security, national initiative for cybersecurity education, ﬁthe path toward cybersecurity professionalization: insights from other occupations: white paper,ﬂ 2012, available at http://niccs.uscert.gov/careers/professionalization). the denition used in this report was presented by franklin reeder in his remarks at the committee™s december 13, 2012, workshop.2approaches to professionalizationprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.approaches to professionalization 15all of these characteristics will almost certainly be recognized as a profession, but not all are required for a eld to be recognized as a profession. this broader denition illustrates the different mechanisms for professionalization that might be applied to cybersecurity work.professionalizationprofessionalization describes (1) education, training, and other activities that transform a worker into a professional and (2) social processes by which an occupation becomes a profession. although cyber security concerns have existed from the earliest days of shared and networked computers, and there have long been workers responsible for various aspects of computer and network security, it has taken some time for the view of cybersecurity as a distinct occupational eld, replete with many subspecialties, to emerge.today, a growing number of workers think of themselves as cybersecurity professionals based on their job roles, experience, and expertise, and an array of government and private sector entities are pursuing activities related to professionalization. professional societies in computer science, computer engineering, and cybersecurity have worked to develop bodies of knowledge and instituted codes of ethics.3 multiple federal agencies, notably the department of defense and the department of homeland security (dhs), the national security agency (nsa), and the ofce of personnel management, have workforce development activities under way. a growing number of educational institutions offer degrees or specializations in cybersecurity, and a national centers of academic excellence program, sponsored by nsa and dhs, certies education, training, and research programs of 2 and 4year academic institutions against standards established jointly by those two federal agencies. a sufciently large number of certicates and certications in various cybersecurity skills and specializations have emerged that dhs has developed a searchable online catalog to guide workers and employers.4 these include general certications like the certied information systems security professional (cissp) as well as many specialized certications. a variety of organizations within and outside the government either require or encourage certication for certain job roles. for example, department 3 these include the association for computing machinery™s ﬁcode of ethics and professional conduct,ﬂ the ieee computer society™s ﬁsoftware engineering code of ethics and professional practice,ﬂ and the international information systems security certication consortium™s ﬁcode of ethics.ﬂ4 u.s. department of homeland security, professional certications, available at http://niccs.uscert.gov/training/professionalcertications.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?of defense directive 85705 requires cissp certication of department personnel who perform information assurance functions.6professionalization can be a bottomup process driven by those in the occupation, a topdown process driven by employers or the government (as an employer or as a policy maker), or some combination of the two. for an employer, professionalization might mean encouraging or requiring a particular course of academic study, degree, certicate, certication, or professional society membership as a condition of initial and/or continuing employment. for a professional association, professionalization might mean establishing a code of conduct or creating (or recognizing) certications, training programs, or educational standards. for the government, professionalization might mean encouraging or requiring a particular educational achievement or certications for its own workforce, supporting the development of curricula, establishing standards for education programs, encouraging the use of certication as a means of regulating the workers whose jobs affect the health and safety or property of others, or requiring (at either the federal or state level) licensure for particular occupations. goals for professionalizationhistorically, professionalization has had one or more of the following goals: (1) to establish standards that enhance the quality of the workforce; (2) to regulate workers whose jobs can affect the health, safety, or property of others; (3) to enhance public trust and condence; (4) to enable compliance with regulatory or legal requirements; (5) to enhance the status of an occupation; (6) to establish a monopoly or otherwise regulate the supply of labor to advance the interests of its members; (7) to guide the behavior of practitioners in the eld, especially when it comes to morally or ethically ambiguous activities; or (8) to establish and standardize roles (and the associated knowledge, skills, and abilities) and pathways so as to better align supply and demand, increase awareness of career paths, and facilitate recruitment and retention by employers.7 an additional, often unstated but important, goal is to establish a shared set of values, culture, ethos, and mindset for a profession. these 5 department of defense, dod 8570.01m: information assurance workforce improvement, washington, d.c., 2012.6 as of this writing, the department of defense is reevaluating certication requirements. zachary fryerbiggs, experts say dod workers undertrained, federal times, february 16, 2013.7 this set of goals draws on observations offered by workshop participants and includes elements commonly found in the literature on professionalization. see, for example, w.j. orlikowski, and j.j. baroudi, the information systems profession: myth or reality?, information technology and people 4(1):1330, 1988.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.approaches to professionalization 17commonalities can contribute to people™s ability to work together effectively, particularly across roles within an organization and across organizations. specific mechanisms for professionalization and how they affect workforce capacity and capability codes of conduct or ethicscodes of conduct or ethics fall into two types: (1) enforceable codes whose breach can lead to revocation of a certication, or even removal from the profession, and (2) nonenforceable codes that are generally associated with membership in a professional society. although workshop participants did not cite examples of where ethical violations had been an issue, more than one participant observed that some cybersecurity  workers are placed in positions that involve signicant responsibility and trust. a possible concern with such codes is how they affect the recruitment of ﬁblack hatsﬂ (i.e., those who have violated computer security laws or rules in the past) into ﬁwhite hatﬂ jobs. this issue is likely to recede over time as the supply of qualied workers grows, reducing the need to hire those with criminal or otherwise less trustworthy backgrounds. another issue is that some specialized cybersecurity jobs that involve offensive operations or active defense might run afoul of codes that do not take such work into account, a tension that other elds have had to consider in developing their ethical standards.education education for cybersecurity is provided at the undergraduate level by both 2 and 4year institutions, which offer a wide range of courses, programs, and degrees focused on cybersecurity and as a component of computer science and engineering, management information system, and other information technology (it)related courses, programs, and degrees. cybersecurity education can also be provided in nonit contexts, such as in business or public policy programs.certicates and certicationscerticates are generally associated with training or education courses and verify through examination that particular content was learned in courses or curricula. they are generally ﬁgood for lifeﬂ and cannot be revoked, although a certicate™s relevance to an employer will diminish over time, especially in a fastmoving eld like cybersecurity. they serve as an indication of knowledge at a particular point in time. professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?certication is a formal procedure by an authorized or accredited body.8 it is based on a study of the factors that predict success in a job and relies on examinations that meet testing standards. certications are time limited and require periodic recertication, and there are procedures in place to remove certication for ethical breaches or knowledge deciencies. certication can also be applied to the content of education and training programs as well as individuals. the centers for academic excellence programs described above certies that the education, training, and research programs meet an external standard. a challenge associated with developing or updating a certication is that it takes time to reach consensus on the knowledge and skills to be assessed. this creates challenges in an area like cybersecurity where the underlying technologies, threats, and context are fast moving. one risk is obsolescencešthe knowledge or skills tested for are outofdate by the time the certication is issued. another risk is ossicationšwhen the establishment of a standard inhibits evolution of skills and knowledge because those certied may not be incentivized to learn beyond what was included in the last certication test. organizations that offer certications can address these challenges by focusing assessments as much as possible on fundamental concepts, by adopting nimble processes for updating content, and by requiring periodic recertication. continuing education is especially important, both in the context of certications and more broadly for the workforce, given the rapid rate of change in cybersecurity knowledge. certicates and certications are especially helpful to employers who may nd it otherwise difcult to evaluate the skills and knowledge of job applicants, especially small organizations that do not have a hiring manager with deep cybersecurity expertise.9 even in these cases, certicates and certications may not be dispositive but may be given greater weight. in addition to providing evidence of competence, certicates and certications may be useful indicators of interest and commitment to work in a eld and provide a useful complement or supplement to academic degrees in establishing knowledge and commitment. a number of workshop participants observed that some certications play a useful role in helping employers determine that an applicant has been exposed to a minimum level of knowledge. cissp certication is 8 the distinction between certicates and certications is re˚ected in american national standards institute, ﬁassessment based certicate programs,ﬂ ansi/noca standard 1100, 2009. the denitions used here are drawn from a presentation at the march 28, 2013, workshop, by roy swift, american national standards institute.9 as observed above, another possibility for such organizations is to outsource cybersecurity work (e.g., consultants) or outsource some of the responsibility (e.g., via software as a service).professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.approaches to professionalization 19a canonical example. others observed that many qualied and, indeed, very highly qualied applicants can be found who do not have a cissp or other certication, and so requiring such certication would undesirably restrict the candidate pool.views expressed by workshop participants with respect to the value of certicates and certications in the context of their own careers or workplaces varied. some indicated that certicates and certications had helped advance their careers and/or were perceived as valuable credentials within their organizations. other participants observed that certicates and certications were not viewed so positively in some  contextsšthat other factors, such as experience, demonstrated ability, or educational achievement, were seen as better measures. a few said that they sometimes omitted listing them on their resumes for this reason. certicates and certications also play a role in establishing the qualications and credibility of those who testify in court, and thus it is no surprise that several certications in digital forensics are now offered. interestingly, at the committee™s december 2012 workshop, participants from two federal government organizations described entirely different approaches to certication of forensic experts. one sought to have all of the organization™s experts certied to enhance the experts™ credibility in court, while the other discouraged certication out of concern that a capable expert might for some reason not pass a particular certication exam and that this fact could be used to question the expert™s court testimony irrespective of the expert™s actual knowledge and skills.licensurelicensure involves a government restriction on practice without a license, generally involving public safety or trust. it may establish standards for legal liability in the case of negligent practice. in engineering elds, a small fraction of workers with degrees in engineering elds are licensed as professional engineers. for example, a licensed civil engineer responsible for approving a bridge design is assumed to be able to state with some certainty that the bridge will stand under stated conditions. by contrast, for software and security no equivalent knowledge exists, which is one reason that licensure has not taken hold in the related area of software engineering. also, cybersecurity is carried out in an adversarial environment where human behavior plays a central role. as a result, it likely is too early for licensure in cybersecurity, at least broadly, but the approach may have some utility in the future as the underlying science and engineering practice improves.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?timescales for professionalizationthe path toward professionalization of an occupation is generally a long one, and debates about the best approach can continue for decades. there has, for example, been a multidecade discussion about professionalization of software engineering, with no consensus as yet reached among workers, professional organizations, and employers. in that regard, for example, the association for computing machinery has taken a public position that is unfavorable to licensing of software engineers, while the institute of electrical and electronics engineers has been more receptive. today, only one state, texas, recognizes professional software engineers, and the software industry remains largely ﬁpolicedﬂ by the marketplace. even in a eld as old as medicine, professionalization has continued to evolve. more than 100 years ago, the flexner report10 spurred education reforms and greater professionalization of medical practice. professionalization mechanisms in medicine have also seen signicant evolution during this time. for example, medicine has increasingly been subdivided into distinct specialty roles (e.g., the emergence of boardcertied specialties and subspecialties) that have made it easier to identify specic certication criteria in the face of expanding and evolving knowledge and skill requirements. even today, debate about how the necessary skills and knowledge for medical students are best acquired through classroom education and handson practice continues, re˚ecting the growing body of scientic knowledge, the increasing complexity of clinical care, and the evolving socioeconomic context in which medicine is practiced.11 an important and open question is whether cybersecurity will endure in anything like its present form over the timescales in which professionalization emerged and matured in professions like medicine, law, and aviation.tradeoffs associated with professionalizationchapter 1 described some of the uncertainties associated with the current and future supply and demand for cybersecurity workers and the diversity of contexts in which cybersecurity work is done. this chapter has outlined the range of potential professionalization measures and some of the associated advantages and disadvantages. taking these together, 10 a. flexner, medical education in the united states and canada: a report to the carnegie foundation for the advancement of teaching, merrymount press, boston, mass., 1910.11 there is a rich literature on the future of medical education and the recommendations of the flexner report. see, for example, m. cooke, d.m. irby, w. sullivan, and k.m. ludmerer, ﬁamerican medical education 100 years after the flexner report,ﬂ new england journal of medicine 355(13):13391344, 2006.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.approaches to professionalization 21the committee identied a set of tradeoffs associated with actions to professionalize the cybersecurity workforce. these include the following:quality versus quantity. improvements in quality that can be shown to result from professionalization mechanisms should be weighed against supply restrictions that the resulting additional barriers to entry would create. professionalization can be both a funnel (restricting people from entering the eld) and a magnet (attracting people to the eld). it can also act as a sieve if people who moved from general it or other positions into cybersecurity roles nd themselves subject to new professionalization requirements and then move out of cybersecurity. this  tension comes into play when employers expect job candidates to already have experience and credentials, rather than investing in onthejob training. the time and cost associated with obtaining the required education, training, experience, and credentials will discourage some from entering the eld.standardization versus dynamism. the value of standardization associated with development of common curricula or certications should be weighed against the time it takes to reach consensus on standards, given the rate of change in underlying technologies, the introduction of new technologies, and the rapid pace at which the context and threat evolve. in other words, the benets of standardization should be weighed against the risks of obsolescence (the knowledge or skills associated with the standard are outofdate) and ossication (the establishment of a standard inhibits evolution of skills and knowledge).broad versus niche needs. given the great diversity of roles, responsibilities, and contexts, the fact that professionalization measures (e.g., certication) may be warranted in a particular subeld and context (e.g., digital forensics) should not be confused with a broad need for professionalization. better information for employers versus false certainty. certicates and certications provide some ability to vet job candidates, but overreliance on them may screen out some of the most talented and suitable individuals. this is particularly true in cybersecurity, in which some of the most procient cyber experts have developed their skill sets through informal methods (e.g., selftaught hackers). organizations that do not already have a sophisticated cybersecurity workforce may place a greater value on professionalization measures, which make it easier for them to identify qualied workers. however, at a time when few think the cybersecurity situation is improving, outofthebox thinking may be at a premium but may be lost with overly rigid screening.certainty about worker capabilities versus uncertainty about actual job requirements. increased certainty about the capabilities of a professional that may result from professionalization should be weighed against the professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?uncertainty about what skills, knowledge, or abilities are actually needed in a particular role and uncertainty about how roles may change as the technological, organizational, and threat context evolves. specicity versus ˚exibility. employers and their hiring managers and human resource staff will seek sufcient specicity to assure that a candidate has the right set of skills and abilities for a position. they may also seek specicity simply to make it easier to identify candidates (although at the risk of overlooking candidates who may be suitable but lack the specied qualications). at the same time, job boundaries are never rm, and in the evolving world of cybersecurity, roles and needs can be especially ˚uid, which means that enough ˚exibility to select candidates who are more broadly suited for that range of possible roles is also important.stimulation of supply and better matching of supply to demand versus restriction of supply. professionalization may increase supply over time as it helps increase awareness and desirability of a profession and thus increases the number of individuals who consider cybersecurity as a career. by helping dene roles and career paths, professionalization can help workers identify suitable jobs and employers identify suitable workers. on the other hand, dening the eld in terms of a specic set of exams, certicates, degrees, or the like will narrow the pipeline of future candidates for the eld and thus may constrain supply.the committee believes that careful consideration of these tradeoffs will help inform decisionmaking by employers, professional organizations, and governments about whether and how to undertake activities to professionalize the cybersecurity workforce. they do not represent ﬁeither/orﬂ choices, but tradeoffs to be weighed. conclusion 7 of this report presents these tradeoffs as questions to pose about any given professionalization effort.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.233conclusions, recommendation, and criteria for professionalization of cybersecuritythis report considers the role that professionalization might play in ensuring that the united states has enough cybersecurity workers ( capacity) and that it has a workforce with the right knowledge, skills, and abilities (capability). these issues arise at a critical juncture, when there is growing recognition that the cybersecurity threat is serious and pervasive. where and how professionalization would contribute to, or possibly diminish, the capacity and capability of the national workforce to provide cybersecurity are questions that do not have a simple or single answer.capacity and capability of the cybersecurity workforceconclusion 1. more attention to both the capacity and capability of the u.s. cybersecurity workforce is needed. even large organizations with top talent and signicant resources devoted to cybersecurity have suffered major cybersecurity compromises, and organizations that do not have such levels of talent or resources face even greater challenges. more highly skilled workers in cybersecurity roles would help the nation respond more robustly to the cybersecurity problems it faces. all organizations need to understand their threat environment and the risks they face, address their cybersecurity problems, and hire the most appropriate people to do that work.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?conclusion 2. although the need for cybersecurity workers is likely to continue to be high, it is difcult to forecast with certainty the number of workers required or the needed mix of cybersecurity knowledge and skills. there are many indications today that demand for cybersecurity workers will continue to be high, but it is notoriously difcult to measure or forecast labor supply and demand for any eld, especially one that is as dynamic and fast moving as cybersecurity. moreover, there are several factors that may affect future need. these include the following:threats evolve, and how this may alter workforce capability and capacity requirements. productive cybersecurity tools; better training of the workers that operate and manage it systems; or more robust law enforcementšmight change the number of workers needed in certain roles and change the skills needed for others.organizations at large to more specialist information technology (it) or cybersecurity rms, which may reduce the number or change the mix of cybersecurity workers needed by organizations. cybersecurity work and the cybersecurity workforceconclusion 3. the cybersecurity workforce encompasses a variety of contexts, roles, and occupations and is too broad and diverse to be treated as a single occupation or profession. whether and how to professionalize will vary according to role and context.cybersecurity is a eld that encompasses more than one kind of work and more than one occupation or profession. some kinds of workers may come to be considered as professionals, but the committee believes that the eld may also include a range of personnel and functions that are best not considered as professionals, much as many other elds contain both professionals and other workers who are not formally professionalized, including some who are designated as paraprofessionals. for example, there are today large numbers of people within organizations who have responsibility for cybersecurity functions, such as frontline it support staff, for whom there may not be any formal education or accreditation requirements. the organizational context for cybersecurity work is professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions, recommendation, and criteria  25diverse, ranging from rms that have highly procient cybersecurity groups to ones where cybersecurity is one of the responsibilities of general it groups. there are also varying approaches to how work is divided between the cybersecurity workforce and the broader it workforcešsome cybersecurity positions are clearly hybrid in nature, blending cybersecurity roles with other roles in it, management, or law enforcement. the committee heard a wide range of opinions regarding the contexts in which professionalization would or would not be appropriate. the committee noted only one case where there is a compelling and widely agreedon case for professionalization today. in digital forensics, where the results are to be used in a legal proceeding, the work is comparatively narrowly dened by procedures and law, the relevant domain of expertise appears to be sufciently narrow, and the appropriate professionalization mechanism is clear (certication with periodic recertication re˚ecting advances in acceptable forensic techniques and practices). even in this case, however, the committee learned that not all agencies that employ digital forensics examiners currently favor external certication. given the great diversity of roles, responsibilities, and contexts, the fact that professionalization measures may be warranted in a particular subeld and context should not be confused with a broad need for professionalization. those organizations that nd professionalization helpful can certainly insist on some form of certication or other professionalization measure for the workers they hire, and a number of organizations inside and outside government do so today. other organizations, having given this serious thought, may nd other ways to optimize and customize their hiring and cybersecurity workforce composition to best meet their specic needs. professionalizing by roles, which are the building blocks of professional categories, would be at too low a level. at the same time, it would be a mistake to attempt to professionalize at too high a levelšfor example, by identifying a single set of professional requirements for multiple, distinct occupations (with different knowledge requirements) within a broad eld. conclusion 4. because cybersecurity is not solely a technical endeavor, a wide range of backgrounds and skills will be needed in an effective national cybersecurity workforce. for example:and networks, so cybersecurity is inherently concerned with human adversaries and behaviors of those in the organizations they target. proprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?tecting cyberspace thus involves human, behavioral, psychological, and economic factors and management expertise as well as technical skills and knowledge. as well as technologies. as a result, people are needed who understand the organizational contextšmission requirements, business processes, and organizational culture. across organizational boundaries. soft skills, which include the ability to work in teams and facility with oral and written communication, are essential in many roles. as a result, education, training, and workforce development activities that focus too much on narrow technical knowledge and skills may discourage participation by people with muchneeded nontechnical knowledge and skills, may overly concentrate attention and resources on building technical capability and capacity, and may discourage technically procient people from developing nontechnical skills. the result would fall short of delivering the workforce the nation requires. professionalizationconclusion 5. professionalization has multiple goals and can occur through multiple mechanisms.ﬁprofessionalizationﬂ describes the social process by which an occupation becomes a profession. its goals include establishing quality standards, enhancing public trust and condence, and establishing and standardizing job roles and pathways. the movement toward the professionalization of an occupation has multiple goals and can occur through multiple mechanisms. members of a nascent profession may seek to establish a monopoly or otherwise regulate the supply of labor to advance their interests. an additional and often unstated but important goal is to establish a shared set of values, ethos, standards of conduct, culture, and mindset for a profession. another frequently unstated goal is to facilitate compliance with contractual or other requirements.professional status for an individual is generally associated with the following mechanisms: (1) passing a knowledge and/or performance test, (2) completion of a course of study on the intellectual basis of the profession, (3) a sustained period of mentored experience/apprenticeship, (4) continuing education, (5) licensing by a formal authority, and (6) ethical standards of behavior with enforcement. a eld in which all of these professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions, recommendation, and criteria  27mechanisms are used will almost certainly be recognized as a profession, but not all are required for a eld to be recognized as a profession. the committee made several observations regarding the role and application of several of these mechanisms:codes of conduct or ethics dene the norms of behavior for a profession. although the adoption of such codes is generally a positive step with few drawbacks, it does raise two possible concerns in the context of cybersecurity. one issue is how the codes relate to actions taken in roles that involve offensive operations or active defensive measures (where legitimate activities might run afoul of overly narrowly drawn standards). the other is how the codes might (in the short run) affect the hiring of ﬁblack hatsﬂ (those who have violated computer security laws or rules in the past but may be a valuable source of talent in protecting computer security) for ﬁwhite hatﬂ jobs.1certicates and certication are ways to demonstrate not only an individual™s competence in a welldened area of cybersecurity, but also an individual™s interest and commitment. they may provide a useful complement or supplement to academic degrees in establishing knowledge and commitment. views of certicates and certications vary with respect to individual careers or workplaces: some see them as valuable, while  others omit them from resumes because they believe they may diminish, not enhance, some employers™ perception of their technical credentials. the content of education and training programs can also be certied to have met an external standard. licensure involves a government restriction on practice without a license, generally for reasons involving public safety or trust. the sense of the committee is that it is too early for licensure in cybersecurity, at least broadly, because today™s engineering practices for cybersecurity fall short of highly reliable methodologies found in some other areas of engineering where licensing has been applied. licensure may have some utility in the future as the underlying science and engineering practice improves.conclusion 6. the path toward professionalization of a eld can be slow and difcult, and not all portions of a eld can or should be professionalized at the same time. there has, for example, been a multidecade discussion about the professionalization of software developers, with no consensus as yet reached 1 there are other contexts, such as law enforcement and the military, where a careful distinction must be made between actions that may be duty in one context but prohibited, or even criminal, in another.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?among workers, professional organizations, and employers about whether or how to professionalize. even 100 years after the flexner report,2 which spurred education reforms and greater professionalization of medical practice, the medical profession continues to debate how best to instill new doctors with the requisite knowledge and skills. the professionalization of other elds, such as law and aviation, has also evolved over the course of many decades. where professionalization does occur, it will take time, as consensus is developed, professional associations emerge or evolve, and professionalization mechanisms achieve recognition by employers and government. criteriaconclusion 7. professionalization has associated costs and benets that should be weighed when making decisions to undertake professionalization activities. professionalization is not a proxy for ﬁbetter,ﬂ but it may be a useful tool in certain circumstances. the following criteria are suggested to help identify cybersecurity specialties and circumstances where professionalization may be appropriate and to assess the potential effects of different professionalization mechanisms: do the benets of a given professionalization measure outweigh the potential supply restrictions resulting from the additional barriers to entry? professionalization can be both a magnet (attracting people to the eld) and a funnel (restricting people from entering the eld). it can also act as a sieve if people who have moved from general it occupations or other positions into cybersecurity roles are subjected to new professionalization requirements and then move out of cybersecurity. the cost and time required for certication or a degree may also narrow the pipeline of people entering the eld. a corollary is that overly narrow professionalization measures may lter out workers whose skills are needed (e.g., certications focused on technical skills that lter out needed nontechnical skills). on the other hand, professionalization may increase supply over time, as it helps increase awareness and desirability of that profession and thus increases the number of individuals who consider cybersecurity as a career. by helping dene roles and career paths, it can also help workers identify suitable jobs and help employers identify suitable workers. specialization and stratication may also help address supply issues, much as the 2 a. flexner, medical education in the united states and canada: a report to the carnegie foundation for the advancement of teaching, merrymount press, boston, mass., 1910.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions, recommendation, and criteria  29introduction of nurse practitioners and physician assistants expanded the workforce providing primary medical care. does the potential to provide additional information about a candidate outweigh the risks of false certainty about who is actually best suited for a job? certicates and certications may provide useful tools for vetting job candidates, but overreliance on them may screen out some of the most talented and suitable individuals. this is particularly true in cybersecurity today, where some of the most effective workers develop their skillsets through informal methods (e.g., selftaught hackers). organizations that do not already have a sophisticated cybersecurity workforce may place a greater value on professionalization measures because they make it easier for them to identify qualied workers. however, at a time when few think the cybersecurity situation is improving, and where ﬁsidewaysﬂ thinking may be at a premium, creativity and innovation may be lost with overly rigid screening. moreover, given the ˚uid and changing nature of cybersecurity work, the knowledge, skills, and abilities actually needed in a particular job can change, and workers™ roles and responsibilities can also shift rapidly. do the benets of establishing the standards needed for professionalization outweigh the risks of obsolescence (when the knowledge or skills associated with the standard are outofdate by the time a standard is agreed on) and ossication (when the establishment of a standard inhibits further development by workers of their skills and knowledge)? it takes time to reach consensus on the standards needed to establish a curriculum or certication, and it can be difcult to reach convergence, given the rate of change in underlying technologies and the rapid pace at which the context and threat evolve. following receipt of a degree or certication, workers may stop developing their skills and knowledge. strategies for addressing these challenges include focusing assessments as much as possible on fundamental concepts, segmenting a eld (where possible) into sufciently narrow specialty roles, adopting more nimble processes for updating content, and requiring continuing education and periodic recertication to refresh requirements. recommendation. activities by the federal government and other entities to professionalize a cybersecurity occupation should be undertaken only when that occupation has welldened and stable characteristics, when there are observed deciencies in the occupational workforce that professionalization could help remedy, and when the benets outweigh the costs. cybersecurity is a broad eld, and professionalization is something that can be undertaken for specic occupations within the eld and not professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?the eld as a whole. before professionalization activities are undertaken for an occupation, two highlevel criteria should be met:1. the occupation has welldened characteristics. these include the following:have a stable (but not necessarily static) common body of knowledge on which members of the profession can be judged to a generally agreedupon standard. this does not imply, however, that the occupation is static; even within a rapidly evolving profession, core knowledge elements that remain stable can be identied. that distinguish the profession from others. ization mechanisms.sion will be held.not all of these characteristics or standards must be met, but the level of readiness for professionalization is higher when more of them are met.2. there is credible evidence of deciencies in the occupational workforce. these might include skill deciencies, questions of legitimacy among the current set of practitioners, or concerns about accountability. each deciency should be separately identied. there should be a compelling argument that professionalization (and the specic proposed mechanisms) will remedy each observed deciency. finally, the benets of  professionalization to remedy the targeted deciencies should outweigh the potential costs. professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.33appendix abiographies of committee membersdiana l. burley, cochair, is associate professor in the graduate school of education and human development at george washington university (gw). dr. burley joined gw in 2007 and has served as the inaugural chair of the human and organizational learning department and as director of the executive leadership doctoral program. prior to joining the gw faculty, she served as a program ofcer in the directorate for education and human resources at the national science foundation (nsf), where she managed multimilliondollar grant programs designed to increase the capacity of the u.s. higher education enterprise to produce scientists. at nsf she served as the lead program ofcer of the federal cyber service scholarship (cyber corps) program, and based on her work, dr. burley was honored by the federal chief information ofcers council and the colloquium on information systems security education for outstanding efforts toward the development of the federal cybersecurity workforce. she is a frequent contributor to the national cybersecurity forums, such as the national initiative on cyber security education (nice) workshop, the federal information systems security educators™ association conference, and the department of homeland security™s (dhs™s) software assurance forum. most recently, dr. burley was appointed to the 2012 commonwealth of virginia joint commission on technology and science cyber security committee. in addition, she serves as the coprincipal investigator (copi) for curriculum and research of national cyberwatch, an nsffunded cybersecurity research and education center. she is one of two gw representatives to the institute for information infrastructure protection professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?(i3p)ša consortium of leading institutions dedicated to strengthening the cyber infrastructure of the united states; a research scholar in the gw institute for public policy; and a senior research scientist in the gw cyber security research and policy institute. she holds an m.s. in public management and policy, an m.s. in organization science, and a ph.d. in organization science and information technology from carnegie mellon university, where she studied as a woodrow wilson foundation fellow in public policy.seymour (sy) e. goodman, cochair, is professor of international affairs and computing, jointly at the sam nunn school of international affairs and the college of computing at the georgia institute of technology ( georgia tech). he serves as codirector of both the georgia tech information security center and the center for international strategy, technology and policy. dr. goodman™s research interests include international developments in the information technologies (it), technology diffusion, it and national security, and related public policy issues. areas of geographic interest include the former soviet union and eastern europe, latin america, the middle east, south and southeast asia, and parts of africa. earlier research had been in areas of statistical and continuum physics, combinatorial algorithms, and software engineering. current work includes research on the global diffusion of the internet and the protection of large itbased infrastructures. immediately before coming to georgia tech, he was director of the consortium for research on information security and policy at the  center for international security and cooperation, with an appointment in the department of engineering economic systems and operations research, both at stanford university; and professor of management information systems and a member of the center for middle eastern studies at the university of arizona. earlier tenured and visiting appointments have been at the university of virginia (applied mathematics, computer science, and soviet and east european studies), princeton university (mathe matics and the woodrow wilson school of public and international affairs), and the university of chicago (economics). dr. goodman is contributing editor for international perspectives for the communications of the acm and has served with many government, academic, professional society, and industry advisory and study groups. his research pursuits have taken him to all seven continents and about 100 countries and have included testimony before legislative bodies and ministeriallevel briengs. he is currently pi on two large grants from nsf and the macarthur foundation. dr.  goodman was an undergraduate at columbia university, where he started as an aspiring english major, and obtained his ph.d. from the california institute of technology (caltech), where he worked on problems of applied mathematics and mathematical physics.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 35matt bishop is a professor of computer science at the university of california, davis. he was a research scientist at the research institute of advanced computer science and was on the faculty at dartmouth college before joining the department of computer science at the university of california, davis. his main research area is the analysis of vulnerabilities in computer systems, including modeling vulnerabilities, building tools to detect them, and ameliorating or eliminating them. this work includes detecting and handling all types of malicious logic. dr. bishop is active in the areas of network security, the study of denial of service attacks and defenses, policy modeling, software assurance testing, and formal modeling of access control. he has also become interested in electronic voting and was one of the two pis of the california toptobottom review, which performed a technical review of all electronic voting systems certied in the state of california. he is active in information assurance education. his textbook, computer security: art and science, was published in 2002. he also teaches software engineering, machine architecture, operating systems, programming, and computer security. he received his ph.d. in computer science in 1984 from purdue university, where he specialized in computer security.mischel l. kwon is the president of mischel kwon and associates, llc, a security consulting rm specializing in technical defensive security, security operations and information assurance. she is an it executive with more than 29 years of experience ranging from application design and development, network architecture and deployment, information assurance policy, audit and management, technical defensive security, and large wireless system security, to building organizational and nationallevel computer emergency/incident response/readiness teams. most recently, as vice president of public sector security for rsa security, ms. kwon was responsible for leading rsa in assisting public sector security solutions, strategies, technologies and policy. in june 2008, she was named the director for the u.s. computer emergency readiness team (uscert), where she spearheaded the organization responsible for analyzing and reducing cyber threats and vulnerabilities in federal networks, disseminating cyber threat warning information, and coordinating national incident response activities. ms. kwon brings a unique blend of handson experience, academic research and training, and a seasoned understanding of how to build operational organizations from inception. among her successes at the u.s. department of justice (doj), where she was deputy director for it security staff, she built and deployed the justice security operations center to monitor and defend the doj network against cyber threats. in addition, she serves as an adjunct professor at george  washington university, where she also runs the george  washington uniprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?versity cyber defense lab. ms. kwon holds an m.s. in computer science from  marymount university and a graduate certicate in computer security and information assurance.kevin r. murphy is a consulting expert at lamorinda consulting, llc and an afliate faculty member in the department of psychology at  colorado state university. he was a fulbright scholar at the university of stockholm and is a fellow of the american psychological association, the society for industrial and organizational psychology, and the american psychological society. he is the recipient of the society for industrial and organizational psychology™s 2004 distinguished scientic contribution award. he served as president of the society for industrial and organizational psychology (19971998) and as associate editor and then editor of the journal of applied psychology (19912002), as well as editor of industrial and organizational psychology: perspectives on science and practice (2012present). he is a member of the editorial boards of human performance, personnel psychology, human resource management review, international journal of management reviews, journal of industrial psychology, and international journal of selection and assessment. he served as a member and chair of the department of defense advisory committee on military personnel testing and has also served on four national academy of sciences committees, most recently the committee to review the scientic evidence on the polygraph. he has served as an expert witness in more than 20 cases involving age, race, and sex discrimination. he is the author of more than 150 articles and book chapters and author or editor of 11 books, in areas ranging from psychometrics and statistical analysis to individual differences, performance assessment, gender, and honesty in the workplace. dr. murphy™s main areas of research include personnel selection and placement, performance appraisal, and psychological measurement. his current work focuses on understanding the validation process. he earned his ph.d. from pennsylvania state university in 1979; served on the faculties of rice university, new york university, and  colorado state university; and has had visiting appointments at the university of california, berkeley, and the university of limerick.philip m. neches is the chairman of foundation ventures, llc. he is also an independent consultant working with earlystage companies in the information technology and communications service industries on their technical, market, and business strategies as an advisor, board member, and investor. a worldrenowned authority on databases, he was the founder and chief scientist of teradata corporation, a leading database technology vendor. he began his career as the manager for the systems evaluation group at transaction technology, inc. (a citicorp subsidiary), professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 37where he led analysis of consumer banking networks, including the rst largescale deployment of automated teller machines (atms) in the united states. later at teradata, he pioneered the application of parallel processing to commercial applications. as senior vice president and chief scientist for ncr corporation, he led both the repositioning of ncr™s computer product family and the product plan for a merger with at&t. dr. neches served as vice president and chief technical ofcer of multimedia products and services group at at&t corporation. he has served on the board of directors of expandbeyond, inc., and on the advisory boards of earthlink, tacoda systems, luxtera, and the technology group of merrill lynch. other prior directorships include mcc, semitech, dayton public radio, demografx, mediamap, peoplelink, and vendquest. he serves on the caltech board of trustees and sits on its technology transfer committee and chairs the student experience committee. dr. neches holds b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees in computer science from caltech.charles ﬁcaseyﬂ o™brien is director of the national cyberwatch  center, an nsf advanced technological educationfunded cyber security consortium headquartered at prince george™s community college in largo,  maryland. his major teaching and research interests include cyber exercise design and delivery, scalable and costeffective information security laboratories, and information security curriculum development. mr. o™brien also teaches internationally and is a frequently invited speaker at  various conferences. he has coordinated the midatlantic collegiate cyber defense competition since 2005 and is a cofounder of the national cyber league, which was founded in 2011 with the sole purpose of providing a training ground for students to develop cybersecurity skills through combined individual and team exercises via virtual ﬁcyber  stadiums.ﬂ mr. o™brien earned a b.a. in psychology from the university of st. thomas and an m.a. in psychology from duquesne university, and he holds various industryrecognized certications.ronald p. sanders is a senior executive advisor for booz allen  hamilton and the rm™s rst booz allen hamilton fellow. dr. sanders supports federal and other clients in the areas of human capital, learning, and organizational transformation. he joined the rm after completing 37 years of federal service; 20 of those years were in senior executive positions. before coming to booz allen, dr. sanders served as the u.s. intelligence community™s (ic™s) associate director of national intelligence and rst chief human capital ofcer, where he played a key role in the establishment of the ofce of the director of national intelligence (odni) and the integration of the ic. he also served as the ofce of personnel management™s (opm™s) rst associate director for human resource policy, with professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?responsibility for all civil service policies and programs for millions of federal employees and retirees. among his achievements at opm, he led the creation of the senior executive service™s revolutionary payforperformance system. prior to his opm appointment, dr. sanders served as the rst chief human resources ofcer for the internal revenue service, where he was honored for his leadership role in the service™s landmark restructuring. other executive positions include director of civilian personnel for the department of defense (where he received the rst of his three presidential rank awards), founding director of the defense civilian personnel service, and deputy director of civilian personnel for the department of the air force. in that latter capacity, he earned the air force™s prestigious general robert j. dixon leadership awardšthe rst and only civilian to be so honored. a nalist for the service to america career achievement medal, dr. sanders is also the recipient of the national intelligence distinguished service medal, three presidential rank awards from three different agencies, two opm theodore  roosevelt awards for distinguished public service, and the american society for public administration award for outstanding career service. he and his odni team also earned a coveted harvard university innovations in american government award. in addition, dr. sanders taught and directed research centers at george washington university and  syracuse university™s maxwell school of citizenship and public affairs. he is an adjunct faculty member with the brookings institution center for public policy education, chairs its executive education advisory board, and sits on the board of the american society for training and development. he attended mit™s sloan school of management senior executive program and completed a congressional fellowship with the u.s. senate governmental affairs committee. a fellow of the national academy of public administration, dr. sanders earned his doctorate in public administration from george washington university. he also holds an m.s. degree in human resource management from the university of utah and a b.a. degree in business management from the university of south florida.professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39appendix bworkshop agendasworkshop 1: december 1213, 2012 national academy of sciences washington, d.c.december 12. 20128:15 a.m. welcome angela curry, director, national cybersecurity workforce structure strategy, department of homeland security (dhs)8:30 overviewdiana burley, george washington university, committee cochairseymour goodman, georgia institute of technology, committee cochair8:45 panel 1šfederal civilian workforce steven moxley, senior security engineer, ofce of the chief administrator, u.s. house of representativessharon james, director, cybersecurity architecture and implementation, internal revenue service professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?patrick kelly, senior ofcial for privacy, department of health and human services moderator: mischel kwon, committee member10:30 panel 2šfederal national security and intelligence workforceleonard t. reinsfelder, deputy associate director of education and training, nsa/css chris kelsall, branch head, cyberspace/information technology (it) workforce, ofce of the department of the navy chief information ofcer, u.s. navy brian andrzejewski, outreach team lead, futures exploration, defense cyber crime center, department of defensemoderator: ron sanders, committee member12:30 p.m. national cybersecurity workforce frameworkrobin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity  education and awareness ofce, dhs 1:15  panel 3šfederal law enforcement workforceed cabrera, assistant special agent in charge (atsaic) criminal investigative division, u.s. secret service (usss)trent teyema, atsaiccyber, washington field ofce, federal bureau of investigation matthew swenson, section chief, computer forensics, cyber crimes center, u.s. immigration and customs enforcement moderator: diana burley, committee cochair2:45  panel 4šstate and local governmentcameron kilberg, assistant secretary of technology, commonwealth of virginiamaribeth luftglass, chief information ofcer (cio), fairfax county public schools michael aliperti, senior director of programs, msisac (by phone)professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 41moderator: charles ﬁcaseyﬂ o™brien, committee member4:00  public comments and questions moderator: diana burley, committee cochairdecember 13, 20128:30 a.m. welcome and housekeepingdiana burley, committee cochairseymour goodman, committee cochair8:35 panel 5šindustry and critical infrastructurelee holcomb, vice president strategic initiatives, lockheed martin information systems and global solutions stephanie derdouri, senior advisor for federal system authorization and compliance, a.i. solutionsbyron collie, director, financial services information sharing and analysis centervanessa pollock, network security business manager, motorola peter rothschild, security analyst and project manager, sra internationalchristopher day, chief security architect, terremark joe albaugh, associate cio and chief information security ofcer (ciso), u.s. department of transportationmichelle monsees, independent consultant  moderator: philip neches, committee member 11:30 panel 6šassessment and certication: existing and emerging tools marc noble, vice chair, cybersecurity certication collaborative (c3) and international information systems, security certication consortium, inc., (isc)²franklin reeder, chairman, nbise rosey greer, rosey greer consulting alan paller, director of research, sans institutemoderator: seymour goodman, committee cochairprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?workshop 2: february 2526, 2013 san francisco, californiafebruary 25, 2013 8:45 a.m. welcome robin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity  education and awareness ofce, dhsron sanders, committee member9:00  panel 1šeducation, training, and pipelinejames jones, executive director, midpacic information and  communication technologiestelle whitney, chief executive ofcer (ceo) and president, anita borg institute dan manson, professor of computer information systems at  california state polytechnic university, pomona, national cyber league, and cyberwatch westjaishri mehta, cyberwatch west, mt. san  antonio college moderator: charles ﬁcaseyﬂ o™brien, committee member10:15  panel 2šindustry (part 1)steve lipner, partner director of program management,  trust worthy computing security, microsoft corporationjohn munoz, technical program manager, google, inc. sean mason, director for cirt, general electric mike mcconnell, booz allen hamiltonmoderator: ron sanders, committee member11:40  panel 3šstate government doug robinson, executive director, national association of state chief information ofcers theresa a. masse, state ciso, oregonmichele robinson, state ciso, california robert ono, ciso, university of california, davismoderator: kevin murphy, committee member professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 432:00  panel 4šindustry (part 2)john stewart, senior vice president and chief security ofcer, cisco john d. johnson, global security strategist, deere and companydickie george, senior advisor for cyber security, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universitymoderator: mischel kwon, committee member3:00  panel 5šfederal government matthew scholl, deputy division chief, computer security  division, national institute of standards and technology matthew a. parrella, assistant united states attorney, chief, computer hacking/intellectual property unit, united states attorney™s ofce, northern district of california brian busony, atsaicectf/asset forfeiture/admin, u.s. secret service, san francisco field ofcemoderator: philip neches, committee member4:00  nice initiative update peggy maxson, director, national cybersecurity education  strategy, dhs4:30  open discussion/ question and answer session moderator: seymour goodman, committee cochairfebruary 26, 20138:00 a.m. welcome seymour goodman, committee cochair8:15  (isc)2 2013 global information security workforce studyjulie peeler, director, (isc)² foundation professionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?8:45  panel 6šinformation technology and cybersecurity  professional organizationsjeff frisk, director, certication program, giachord tipton, executive director, (isc)² eric hibbard, cto security and privacy for hitachi data systemstaylor pellegrini, marketing executive, eccouncil eugene h. spafford, professor of computer science, purdue  university, and chair, u.s. public policy council of acmterry erdle, executive vp for skills certication, comptia christopher buse, ciso, state of minnesota, and member, board of directors, minnesota chapter of the information systems audit and control associationmoderator: seymour goodman, committee cochairworkshop 3: march 27, 2013 texas a&m at san antonio8:30 a.m. welcome diana burley, committee cochairjohn dickson, principal, denim group, ltd.carolyn wilson green, director, center of information technology and cyber security, texas a&m university, san antoniorobin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity  education and awareness ofce, dhs9:00  nice initiative update robin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity workforce, dhs9:30  panel 1šstate and local governmentbert jarreau, chief innovation ofcer, national association of countiesbrian engle, ciso, department of information resources, state of texas greg white, associate professor, university of texas, san antonio, and director, center for infrastructure assurance and securitymoderator: kevin murphy, committee memberprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 4510:40  panel 2šcybersecurity education, training, and pipelinecarolyn wilson green, director of the center for information technology and cyber security, texas a&m university, san antonio art conklin, associate professor and director of the center for information security research and education, university of houston troy touchette, chair, computer information systems department, san antonio college adrian collett, career and technical education specialist, state of texas education service center, region 20scott ﬁskipﬂ runyan, technical advisor to the commander,  39th information operations squadron, u.s. air force  (via teleconference)moderator: diana burley, committee cochair1:00 p.m.  panel 3šcertication and licensing roy swift, senior director, personnel credentialing accreditation, ansi (by teleconference)lance kinney, executive director, texas board of professional engineersjeff pike, senior technical director, giacmoderator: seymour goodman, committee cochair2:00  panel 4šhuman resources, recruiting, and talent developmentchris prosise, engineer, pandestaharvinder singh, ceo, bestica 3:10 panel 5šnational security and critical infrastructurearthur ﬁwallyﬂ wachdorf, senior advisor for intelligence and cyber operations, 24th air force guy walsh, technical advisor to the deputy commander, u.s. cyber command (via teleconference)frank grace, lead specialist, tesoro moderator: philip neches, committee memberprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?4:15  panel 6šindustryrocky destefano, founder and ceo, visibleriskjanie gonzalez, ceo, webheadsergio c. muniz, president, cyfor technologies, llcmoderator: philip neches, committee memberprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.47appendix cspeakers and participants at workshops organized by the committeedecember 1213, 2012, workshop speakersjoe albaugh, associate chief information ofcer and chief information security ofcer, u.s. department of transportationmichael aliperti, senior director of programs, multistate information sharing and analysis center (by telephone)brian andrzejewski, outreach team lead, futures exploration, defense cyber crime center, department of defenseed cabrera, assistant special agent in charge (atsaic)criminal investigative division, u.s. secret service (usss)byron collie, director, financial services information sharing and analysis centerangela curry, director, national cybersecurity workforce structure strategy, department of homeland securitychristopher day, chief security architect, terremarkstephanie derdouri, senior advisor for federal system authorization and compliance, a.i. solutionsrosey greer, rosey greer consultinglee holcomb, vice president strategic initiatives, lockheed martin information systems and global solutionssharon james, director, cybersecurity architecture and implementation, internal revenue servicepatrick kelly, senior ofcial for privacy, department of health and human servicesprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?chris kelsall, branch head, cyberspace/information technology (it) workforce, ofce of the department of the navy chief information ofcer, u.s. navycameron kilberg, assistant secretary of technology, commonwealth of virginiamaribeth luftglass, chief information ofcer, fairfax county public schoolsmichelle monsees, independent consultantsteven moxley, senior security engineer, ofce of the chief administrator, u.s. house of representativesmarc noble, vice chair, cybersecurity certication collaborative and international information systems, security certication consortium, inc.alan paller, director of research, sans institutevanessa pollock, network security business manager, motorolafranklin reeder, chairman, national board of information security examinersleonard t. reinsfelder, deputy associate director of education and training, nsa/csspeter rothschild, security analyst and project manager, sra internationalmatthew swenson, section chief, computer forensics, cyber crimes center, u.s. immigration and customs enforcementtrent teyema, assistant special agent in chargecyber, washington field ofce, federal bureau of investigationrobin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity education and awareness ofce, department of homeland security (dhs)february 2526, 2013, workshop speakers and participantsmike avina, healthnetsarah bohne, senior manager of communications, (isc)²christopher buse, chief information security ofcer, state of minnesota, and member, board of directors, minnesota chapter of the information systems audit and control associationbrian busony, usss, san francisco field ofcescott cassity, global information assurance certicationterry erdle, executive vice president for skills certication, comptiajeff frisk, director, certication program, giacrichard m. (dickie) george, senior advisor for cyber security, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universityeric hibbard, chief technology ofcer, security and privacy, hitachi data systemsprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 49hillary homan, booz allen hamiltonjayson jenkins, booz allen hamiltonjohn d. johnson, global security strategist, deere & companyjames jones, executive director, midpacic information and communication technologiessteven lafountain, distinguished academic chair for information assurance and cyber, national security agencybrian lamacchia, microsoft researchsteve lipner, partner director of program management, trustworthy computing security, microsoft corporationdaniel lohrmann, chief security ofcer, state of michigandan manson, professor of computer information systems at california state polytechnic university, pomona, national cyber league, and cyberwatch westsean mason, director, critical incident response team, general electrictheresa a. masse, state chief information security ofcer, state of oregonpeggy maxson, director, national cybersecurity education strategy, dhsjaishri mehta, cyberwatch west, mt. san antonio collegevadm john m. (mike) mcconnell (usn, ret.), booz allen hamiltonjohn munoz, technical program manager, google, inc.robert ono, chief information security ofcer, university of california, davisrandi parker, director, public advocacy, comptiamatthew a. parrella, assistant united states attorney, u.s. attorney™s ofce for the northern district of californiasebron partridge, chief information security ofcer, riverside county, californiajulie peeler, director, (isc)² foundationtaylor pellegrini, marketing executive, eccounciljames richards, director of it security, west virginia ofce of technologydoug robinson, executive director, national association of state chief information ofcersmichele robinson, state chief information security ofcer, state of californiamatthew scholl, deputy division chief, computer security division, national institute of standards and technologyjohn sjobergeugene h. spafford, professor of computer science, purdue university, and chair, u.s. public policy council of acmjohn stewart, senior vice president and chief security ofcer, ciscohord tipton, executive director, (isc)²jodi traversaro, department of human resources, state of californiaprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity workforce?telle whitney, ceo and president, anita borg instituterobin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity education and awareness ofce, dhsnoel wray, booz allen hamiltonmarch 2728, 2013, workshop  speakers and participantsdaniel aguallo, innity advisory grouproger burrjohn carrera, holmes high school, san antonio, texasbrian carron, carron and associates, llcarthur celestin, southwest high school, san antonio, texasadrian collett, career and technical education specialist, state of texas education service center, region 20ron comeau, general dynamicsart conklin, associate professor and director, center for information security research and education, university of houstonchris cook, bexar metro 911 network districtrocky cortez, u.s. air forceramanamurthy dantu, university of north texasrocky destefano, founder and chief executive ofcer, visibleriskjohn dickson, principal, denim group, ltd.glenn dietrick, university of texas, san antoniobrian engle, chief information security ofcer, department of information resources, state of texasgus gonzales iii, tekfriendsal gonzalez, u.s. air forcejanie gonzalez, chief executive ofcer, webheadmatthew d. gonzalez, university of the incarnate wordmark gottsberger, hallmark college, san antonio, texasfrank grace, lead specialist, tesorocarolyn wilson green, director, center for information technology and cyber security, texas a&m university, san antonioryan gurr, booz allen hamiltonbarbara hewitt, texas a&m university, san antonionolen hick, express news, san antonio, texasmark huson, texas a&m university, san antoniobert jarreau, chief innovation ofcer, national association of countiesrobert kaufman, u.s. air forcelance kinney, executive director, texas board of professional engineerstaryn mandrell, security researcher, alert logicjason matthews, department of the air forceprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 51chris mock, workforce solutions, alamo, texasdarryl mosley, macaulaybrown, inc.sergio c. muniz, president, cyfor technologies, llclis o™briantjeff pike, senior technical director, global information assurance certicationchris prosise, engineer, pandestaalonzo pugh, department of the air forcerudy ramirez, zachary holdings, inc.scott ﬁskipﬂ runyan, technical advisor to the commander,  39th information operations squadron, u.s. air force  (via teleconference)joe sanchez, u.s. air forceterrye schaetzel, georgia tech research instituteharvinder singh, chief executive ofcer, besticamika spence, visibleriskroy swift, senior director, personnel credentialing accreditation, ansi (via teleconference)troy touchette, chair, computer information systems department, san antonio collegearthur ﬁwallyﬂ wachdorf, senior advisor for intelligence and cyber operations, 24th air forceguy walsh, technical advisor to the deputy commander, u.s. cyber command (via teleconference)joules webb, sastemicgreg white, associate professor, university of texas, san antonio, and director, center for infrastructure assurance and securityrobin ﬁmontanaﬂ williams, director, national cybersecurity education and awareness ofce, dhsvern williams, the patria groupnoel wray, booz allen hamiltonnicholas xenos, juniper networksprofessionalizing the nation's cybersecurity workforce?: criteria for decisionmakingcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.