detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/18501artificial intelligence: current status and future potential25 pages | 7 x 10 | paperbackisbn 9780309292719 | doi 10.17226/18501herbert alexander simon, editor; naval studies board; national research councilartificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.artificial intelligence: current status and future potentialcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.