detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/18749at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basicconcepts and issues150 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309303187 | doi 10.17226/18749david clark, thomas berson, and herbert s. lin, editors; committee on developinga cybersecurity primer: leveraging two decades of national academies work;computer science and telecommunications board; division on engineering andphysical sciences; national research councilat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david clark, thomas berson, and herbert s. lin, editorscommittee on developing a cybersecurity primer:  leveraging two decades of national academies workcomputer science and telecommunications boardat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policysome basic concepts and issuesat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation under award number cns0940372. additional support was provided by microsoft corporation, google, inc., and the president™s committee of the national academies.cies that provided support for the project.international standard book number 13: 9780309303187international standard book number 10: 0309303184library of congress control number: 2014940211this report is available fromcomputer science and telecommunications boardnational research council500 fifth street, nwwashington, dc 20001additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2014 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciencesdedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal governnational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charing engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research councilsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in procommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee on developing a cybersecurity primer:  leveraging two decades of national academies workdavid clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairthomas berson, anagram laboratories1 georgetown universitystaffherbert s. lin, study director and chief scientist, computer science and telecommunications board eric whitaker, senior program assistant, computer science and telecommunications board 1 ms. blumenthal resigned from the committee on may 1, 2013, and accepted a position at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications boardrobert f. sproull, university of massachusetts, amherst, chairluiz andré barroso, google, inc.steven m. bellovin, columbia universityrobert f. brammer, brammer technology, llcedward frank, apple, inc.laura m. haas, ibm alamaden research laboratorymark a. horowitz, stanford universitymichael kearns, university of pennsylvaniarobert kraut, carnegie mellon universitysusan landau, google, inc.peter lee, microsoft corporationdavid e. liddle, us venture partnersbarbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologypeter szolovits, massachusetts institute of technologyrenee hawkins, financial and administrative managerherbert s. lin, chief scientisteric whitaker, senior program assistantfor more information on cstb, see its web site at http://www.cstb.org, write to cstb, national research council, 500 fifth street, nw, washington, dc 20001, call (202) 3342605, or email the cstb at cstb@nas.edu.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacetoday, cybersecurity is widely viewed as a matter of pressing national importance. many elements of cyberspace are notoriously vulnerable to sector companies both large and small suffer from cyber thefts of sensitive information, cyber vandalism (e.g., defacing of web sites), and denialofservice attacks. the nation™s critical infrastructure, including the electric operation.concerns about the vulnerability of the information technology on which the nation relies have deepened in the securityconscious environment after the september 11, 2001, attacks and in light of increased cyber espionage directed at private companies and government agencies in the united states. national policy makers have become increasingly concerned that adversaries backed by considerable resources will attempt have been advanced, and a number of bills have been introduced in congress to tackle parts of the cybersecurity challenge.although the larger public discourse sometimes treats the topic of cybersecurity as a new one, the computer science and telecommunicaat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii prefacecybersecurity as a major challenge for public policy.1 cstb work in cybertion on practical measures, technical and nontechnical challenges, and potential policy responses. produced by the committee on developing a cybersecurity primer: leveraging two decades of national academies oped in this body of work to provide a concise primer on the fundamenthe report also addresses issues not covered in earlier cstb work, and the committee acknowledges with gratitude input from william press savage (university of california, san diego), and william sanders (university of illinois at urbanachampaign) on a variety of cybersecurityrelated topics in the course of its work.as a primer, this report presents fundamental concepts and principles change rapidly, but the fundamental concepts and principles endure, or at least they change much more slowly. these concepts and principles are incidents, although they manifest themselves in a wide variety of different technologies and incidents.the report™s emphasis on fundamental concepts and principles also means that in the interest of brevity, coverage in this primer cannot be tial resource.1 the web page at http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cstb/cstb059144 lists all cstb reports related to cybersecurity.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface ixbox p.1 selected computer science and telecommunications board work on cybersecurityša brief summary of highlightsthe 1991 cstb report computers at risk warned that ﬁas computer systems become more prevalent, sophisticated, embedded in physical processes, and interconnected, society becomes more vulnerable to poor system design . . . and attacks on computer systemsﬂ and that ﬁthe nature and magnitude of computer system problems are changing dramaticallyﬂ (p. 1). it also lamented that ﬁknown techniques are not being usedﬂ to increase security. in 1999, cstb released trust in cyberspace, which proposed a research agenda to increase the trustworthiness of information technology (it), with a special focus on networked information systems. this report went beyond security matters alone, addressing as well other dimensions of trustworthiness such as correctness, reliability, safety, and survivability. importantly, it also noted that ﬁeconomic and political context is critical to the successful development and deployment of new technologiesﬂ (p. viii).in 2002, cstb issued cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later, which reprised recommendations from a decade of cstb cybersecurity studies. its preface noted that ﬁit is a sad commentary on the state of the world that what cstb wrote more than 10 years ago is still timely and relevant. for those who work in computer security, there is a deep frustration that research and recommendations do not seem to translate easily into deployment and utilizationﬂ (p. v).cstb™s 2007 report toward a safer and more secure cyberspace observed that ﬁthere is an inadequate understanding of what makes it systems vulnerable to attack, how best to reduce these vulnerabilities, and how to transfer cybersecurity knowledge to actual practiceﬂ (p. vii). it set forth an updated research agenda, sought to inspire the nation to strive for a safer and more secure cyberspace, and focused ﬁsubstantial attention on the very real challenges of incentives, usability, and embedding advances in cybersecurity into realworld products, practices, and servicesﬂ (p. xii).in 2009, cstb turned its attention to the technical and policy dimensions of cyberattackšthe offensive side of cybersecurity. technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities concluded that although cyberattack capabilities are an important asset for the united states, the current policy and legal framework for their use is illformed, undeveloped, and highly uncertain and that u.s. policy should be informed by an open and public national debate on technological, policy, legal, and ethical issues posed by cyberattack capabilities.in 2010, the cstb report toward better usability, security, and privacy of information technology: report of a workshop identied research opportunities and ways to embed usability considerations in design and development related to security and privacy. in that year, cstb also produced a second workshop report, proceedings of a workshop on deterring cyberattacks: informing strategies and developing options, a collection of papers that examined governmental, economic, technical, legal, and psychological challenges involved in deterring cyberattacks. note: all of these reports were published by the national academies press, washington, d.c.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x prefacebox p.2 the project statement of taska primer on the technical and policy issues of cybersecurity, building on more than two decades of prior academies work, will be developed under the auspices of a small study committee. the report will examine what is known about effective technical and nontechnical approaches, the state of the art and open challenges, why relatively little progress has been made in cybersecurity despite the recommendations of many reports from the academies and elsewhere, and potential policy responses. much of the material will be drawn directly from previous reports. the committee will also review emerging issues and new technical and nontechnical approaches that may not have been covered in previous national research council reports. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:steven bellovin, columbia university,ruthanne bevier, california institute of technology,butler lampson, microsoft corporation, andsteven wallach, convey computer corporation.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conthe review of this report was overseen by sam fuller (analog devices). appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for makat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii acknowledgment of reviewersout in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comthis report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontents 1 1.1 on the meaning and importance of cyberspace and cybersecurity, 7 1.2 cybersecurity and public policy concerns, 102 some basics of computing and communications  18  2.1 computing technology, 18 2.2 communications technology and the internet, 21 2.3 information technology systems, 27 3.1 on the terminology for discussions of cybersecurity and public policy, 29 3.2 what it means to be an adversary in cyberspace, 31 3.2.2 cyberattack, 32 attack, 35 3.3 inherent vulnerabilities of information technology, 35at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contents 3.4 the anatomy of adversarial activities in cyberspace, 40 3.4.1 cyber penetration, 41 3.4.2 cyber payloads (malware), 46 3.4.3 operational considerations, 48 3.6 threat assessment, 52 4.1 approaches to improving security, 53 4.1.1 reducing reliance on information technology, 53 4.1.2 knowing that security has been penetrated, 54 4.1.3 defending a system or network, 57 4.1.4 ensuring accountability, 62 4.1.5 building a capacity for containment, recovery, and resilience, 69 4.1.6 employing active defense, 71 4.2 nontechnological dimensions of cybersecurity, 75 4.2.1 economics, 76 4.2.2 psychology, 77 4.2.3 law, 81 4.2.5 deterrence, 86 4.3 assessing cybersecurity, 88 4.4 on the need for research, 90  5.1 economics, 93 5.1.1 economic approaches to enhancing  cybersecurity, 93 5.1.2 economic impact of compromises in  cybersecurity, 96 5.2 innovation, 98 5.3 civil liberties, 100 5.3.1 privacy, 100 5.3.3 due process, 102 5.4 international relations and national security, 103 5.4.1 internet governance, 103 5.4.2 reconciling tensions between cybersecurity and surveillance, 104 5.4.3 norms of behavior in cyberspace, 106at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents xv 5.4.4 managing the global supply chain for information technology, 111 5.4.5 role of offensive operations in cyberspace, 1136 findings and conclusion 116 6.1 findings, 116 6.2 conclusion, 124appendixesa committee members and staff 129b bibliography 132at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summarynations are increasingly dependent on information and information technology. companies rely on computers for diverse business processes ranging from payroll and accounting to the tracking of inventory and sales, to support for research and development. distribution of food, water, and energy is dependent on computers and networks at every modern military forces use weapons that are computer controlled. even more important, the movements and actions of military forces are increasingly coordinated through computerbased networks that allow informain light of this dependence on information technology, cybersecurity is increasingly important to the nation, and cyberspace is vulnerable to a broad spectrum of hackers, criminals, terrorists, and state actors. working in cyberspace, these malevolent actors can steal money, intellecimpersonate lawabiding parties for their own purposes; harass or bully innocent people anonymously; damage important data; destroy or disrupt the operation of physical machinery controlled by computers; or deny the availability of normally accessible services.a number of factors, such as the september 11, 2001, attacks and higher levels of cyber espionage directed at private companies and government agencies in the united states, have deepened concerns about the vulnerability of the information technology (it) on which the nation at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policysubstantial harm on the nation. numerous policy proposals have been advanced, and a number of bills have been introduced in congress to tackle parts of the cybersecurity challenge.it is to help decision makers and the interested public make informed choices that this report was assembled. the report is fundamentally a leverages insights developed in work by the national research council™s computer science and telecommunications board over more than two decades on practical measures for cybersecurity, technical and nontechnical challenges, and potential policy responses.dependent on computing and communications technology; the information that these artifacts use, store, handle, or process; and how these various elements are connected. security in cyberspace (i.e., cybersecurity) is about technologies, processes, and policies that help to prevent and/or reduce the negative impact of events in cyberspace that can happen as the result of deliberate actions against information technology by a hostile or malevolent actor.cybersecurity issues arise because of three factors taken togetheršthe presence of malevolent actors in cyberspace, societal reliance on it for many important functions, and the inevitable presence of vulnerabilities in it systems that malevolent actors can take advantage of. despite these they are supposed to do and only when they are supposed to do it, and is the purpose of cybersecurity.against this backdrop, it appears that cybersecurity is a neverending battle, and a permanently decisive solution to the problem will not be found in the foreseeable future.1 cybersecurity problems result ing judgments about what actions and information are safe or unsafe from a cybersecurity perspective. furthermore, threats to cybersecurity evolve, and adversariesšespecially at the highend part of the threat spectrumšconstantly adopt new tools and techniques to compromise security when defenses are erected to frustrate them. as information technology becomes more ubiquitously integrated into society, the incentives to compromise the security of deployed it systems grow. thus, enhancing 1 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 3in which it is embeddedšmust be understood as an ongoing process rather than something that can be done once and then forgotten.ultimately, the relevant policy question is not how the cybersecurity problem can be solved, but rather how it can be made manageable. socidrug abuse, and so on are rarely ﬁsolvedﬂ or taken off the policy agenda so decisively that they will never reappearšand the same is true for cybersecurity.at the same time, improvements to the cybersecurity posture of able value in reducing the loss and damage that may be associated with cybersecurity breaches. a welldefended target is less attractive to many malevolent actors than are poorly defended targets. in addition, defensive thus making intrusion attempts slower and more costly and possibly helping to deter future intrusions.improvements to cybersecurity call for two distinct kinds of activity: efforts to more effectively and more widely use what is known about improving cybersecurity, and efforts to develop new knowledge about cybersecurity. the gap in security between the u.s. national cybergap is the difference between what our cybersecurity posture is and what it could be if known best cybersecurity practices and technologies were widely deployed and used. the second part (part 2) is the gap between the strongest posture possible with known practices and technologies technical in nature (requiring, e.g., research relating to economic or psychological factors regarding the use of known practices and techniques, enhanced educational efforts to promote securityresponsible user behavsecurity awareness). closing the part 1 gap does not require new technical technical knowledge. research will be needed to understand how better to promote deployment and use of such knowledge. closing the part 2 gap is where new technologies and approaches are needed, and is the fundamental rationale for technical research in cybersecurity.publicly available information and policy actions to date have been for a number of years, the cybersecurity issue has received increasing public attention, and a greater amount of authoritative information regarding at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policycybersecurity threats is available publicly. but all too many decision maktional cybersecurity postures, and little has been done to harness market forces to address matters related to the cybersecurity posture of the nation as a whole. if the nation™s cybersecurity posture is to be improved to a level that is higher than the level to which today™s market will drive it, the curity must be altered in some fashion.cybersecurity is important to the nation, but the united states tives of cybersecurity. tradeoffs are inevitable and will have to be accepted through the nation™s political and policymaking processes. senior policy makers have many issues on their agenda, and they must set priorities for the issues that warrant their attention. in an environment of many competing priorities, reactive policy making is often the outcome. support for efforts to prevent a disaster that has not yet occurred is typically less than support for efforts to respond to a disaster that has already or few attempts have yet been made to compromise the cybersecurity of application xtifying why immediate attention and action to improve the cybersecurity posture of application x can be deferred or studied further.progress in cybersecurity policy has also stalled at least in part yes, but we also want a private sector that innovates rapidly, and the convenience of not having to worry about cybersecurity, and the ability for applications to interoperate easily and quickly with one another, and the right to no diminution in our civil liberties, and so on. although research and deeper thought may reveal that, in some cases, tradeoffs between security and these other equities are not as stark as they might appear at when they are irreconcilable, and honest acknowledgment and discussion of the tradeoffs (e.g., a better cybersecurity posture may reduce the nation™s innovative capability, may increase the inconvenience of using information technology, may reduce the ability to collect intelligence) will go a long way toward building public support for a given policy position.the use of offensive operations in cyberspace as an instrument to advance u.s. interests raises many important technical, legal, and ernment. some of these questions involve topics such as u.s. offensive capabilities in cyberspace, rules of engagement, doctrine for the use of ment of defense and the intelligence community, and a host of other at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 5topics related to offensive operations. it is likely that behind the veil of opacity has many undesirable consequences, but one of the most important consequences is that the role offensive capabilities could play in defending important information technology assets of the united states cannot be discussed fully.what is sensitive about offensive u.s. capabilities in cyberspace is (rather than the nature of that technology itself); fragile and sensitive ticular vulnerability, a particular operational program); or u.s. knowledge vides a generally reasonable basis for understanding what can be done and for policy discussions that focus primarily on what should be done.but not limited to computer science and information technology, psycholsociology, decision sciences, international relations, and law. although technical measures are an important element, cybersecurity is not primarily a technical matter, although it is easy for policy analysts and others to get lost in the technical details. furthermore, what is known about cybersecurity is often compartmented along disciplinary lines, reducing will never be solved once and for all. solutions to the problem, limited in scope and longevity though they may be, are at least as much nontechnical as technical in nature. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.711.1 on the meaning and importance of cyberspace and cybersecuritymost people in modern society encounter computing and communiputers are not openly visible. people type at the keyboard of computers or tablets and use their smart phones daily. people™s personal lives involve computing through social networking, home management, communication with family and friends, and management of personal affairs. the operation of medical devices implanted in human bodies is controlled by embedded (builtin) microprocessors. a much larger collection of information technology (it) is instrugovernment. companies large and small rely on computers for diverse business processes ranging from payroll and accounting to the tracking of inventory and sales, to support for research and development (r&d). the distribution of food and energy from producer to retail consumer depends on computers and networks at every stage. nearly everyone (in everyday society, business, government, and the military services) relies on wireless and wired digital communications systems. it is used care, utilities, transportation, and retail and management services. indeed, the architecture of today™s enterprise it systems is the very embodiment at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyﬁtraditionalﬂ industries such as manufacturing without it.today and increasingly in the future, computing and communications technologies (collectively, information technologies) are found and will be more likely to be found in places where they are essentially invisible to everyday view: in cars, wallets, clothing, refrigerators, keys, cabinets, watches, doorbells, medicine bottles, walls, paint, structural beams, roads, ing some embedded in human beings). these devices will be connectedšthe socalled internet of things. computing will be embedded in myriad places and objects; even today, computing devices are easily transported in pockets or on wrists. computing devices will be coupled to multiple sensors and actuators. computing and communications will be seamless, enabling the tight integration of personal, family, and business systems. sensors, effectors, and computing will be networked together so that they pass relevant information to one another automatically.in this emerging era of truly pervasive computing, the ubiquitous integration of computing and communications technologies into common everyday objects enhances their usefulness and makes life easier ances will make appropriate information available on demand, enabling users to be more productive in both their personal and their professional lives. and, as has been true with previous generations of it, interconnections among all of these nowsmart objects and appliances will multiply their usefulness many times over.ﬁcyberspaceﬂ often arises. although ﬁcyberspaceﬂ does not have a single 1 some things can be said about how the term is used in this report. first, cyberspace is not a physical place, although many elements of cyberspace are indeed physical, do have volume and three spatial dimensions. second, cyberspace includes but is not limited to the internetšcyberspace also includes computers (some of which are attached to the internet and some not) and networks (some of which may be part of the internet and some not). third, cyberspace includes many intangibles, such as information and software and how different elements of cyberspace are connected to each other.1 https://blogs.cisco.com/security/cyberspacewhatisit/.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why care about cybersecurity? 9based on or dependent on computing and communications technology; the information that these artifacts use, store, handle, or process; and the interconnections among these various elements. but the reader should precise one.given our dependence on cyberspace, we want and need our information technologies to do what they are supposed to do and only when they are supposed to do it. we also want these technologies to not do things they are not supposed to do. and we want these things to be true in the face of deliberately hostile or antisocial actions.cybersecurity issues arise because of three factors taken together. first, we live in a world in which there are parties that will act in deliberately hostile or antisocial waysšparties that would do us harm or separate us from our money or violate our privacy or steal our ideas. second, we rely on it for a large and growing number of societal functions. third, it systems, no matter how well constructed (and many are not as well constructed as the state of the art would allow), inevitably have vulnerabilities that the bad guys can take advantage of.security in cyberspace (i.e., cybersecurity) is about technologies, processes, and policies that help to prevent and/or reduce the negative impact of events in cyberspace that can happen as the result of deliberate actions against information technology by a hostile or malevolent actor. essary to elaborate on the meaning of ﬁimpact,ﬂ on what makes impact ﬁnegative,ﬂ and on what makes an actor ﬁhostileﬂ or ﬁmalevolent.ﬂinformation artifact (software or hardware) has impactšchapter 3 discusses different kinds of impact that are related to cybersecurity. but any given impact can be positive or negative and any actor can be virtuous or malevolent, depending on the perspective of the parties involvedšthat is, who is a perpetrator and who is a target.in many cases with which readers of this report are likely to be concerned, the meanings of these terms are both reasonably clear and an impact negative is that their information technology no longer works are relying on such technologies and it is the u.s. government that takes actions to render their technologies inoperative, the impact would usually be seen as positive.similarly, many repressive regimes put into place various mechanisms in cyberspace to monitor communications of dissidents. these at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyregimes may regard as ﬁmalevolent actorsﬂ those who help dissidents breach the security of these mechanisms and circumvent government monitoring, but others may well regard such parties as virtuous rather than malevolent actors. compromising the cybersecurity of an internetbased mechanism for conducting surveillance against such parties has a negative impact from the standpoint of these regimes, but a positive impact for those seeking to open up these regimes.there are also cases of concern to readers of this report in which the meanings of ﬁnegativeﬂ and ﬁmalevolentﬂ may not be shared. consider the debate over internet surveillance by the national security agency 2013. according to news stories on these documents in the washington post and the guardian, the nsa has engaged in a broad program of electronic surveillance for counterterrorism purposes.2 some of the reactions defended the actions of the nsa as a vital element in u.s. counterterrorism efforts.indeed, one of the most important lessons to emerge from cybersecurity factors can have an impact on cybersecurity that is at least as great as technology™s impact. a full consideration of cybersecurity necessarily 1.2 cybersecurity and public policy concernswrote in computers at risk: we are at risk. increasingly, america depends on computers. they control are used to store vital information, from medical records to business plans to criminal records. although we trust them, they are vulnerablešand perhaps most alarmingly, to deliberate attack. the modern thief can 2 learned from edward snowden in 2013,ﬂ national journal, december 31, 2013, available at http://www.nationaljournal.com/defense/everythingwelearnedfromedwardsnowdenin201320131231.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why care about cybersecurity? 11steal more with a computer than with a gun. tomorrow™s terrorist may be able to do more damage with a keyboard than with a bomb. (p. 7)what is worrisome from a public policy perspective is that the words cance has grown as our reliance on it has increased. table 1.1 illustrates some of the security consequences of the changes in the information technology environment in the past 20 years.the it on which we rely is for the most part created, owned, and operated by the private sector, which means that improving the cybersecurity posture of the nation will require action by relevant elements of the private sector. nonetheless, many parties believe that the government has an important role in helping to address cybersecurity problems, in much the same way that the government has many responsibilities for national security, law enforcement, and other problems of societal scale.table 1.1 potential security consequences of more than two decades™ worth of change in information technology (it)change since 1990potential security consequence  (illustrative, not comprehensive)microprocessors, storage devices, communications links, and so onšthe raw hardware underlying itšdemonstrate performance that is several orders of magnitude more capable than their counterparts of 20 years ago.more integration of it into the functions of daily life means more opportunities for malevolent actors to compromise those functions. devices for computing have shifted mobile computing: tablets, pads, smart phones, smart watches, and so on. desktop and laptop computers are still important to many end users, especially in business environments, but mobile devices are ubiquitous today. accompanying this change are new business models for providing software to end usersšvendorcontrolled or vendoroperated app stores are now common. many corporate employees use their personally owned computing devices for business purposes. new security approaches are needed to secure batteryoperated devices with relatively little computational power. app stores can provide greater assurance about the security of installed software. control over computing resources used on their behalf. continuedat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policychange since 1990potential security consequence  (illustrative, not comprehensive)cyberphysical systems are physical systems that are controlled at least in part by it. physical devices with embedded computing accept data from the physical world (through sensors such as cameras or thermometers) and/or cause changes in the physical world (through actuators such as a motor that causes something to move or a heater that heats a fluid). such systems are everywherešin manufacturing assembly lines, chemical production plants, power generation and transmission facilities, automobiles, airplanes, buildings, heating and cooling facilities, and so onšoperation of these systems. itbased control of cyberphysical systems means that cybersecurity compromises can affect physical systems and may cause death, destruction, or physical damage. cloud computing has become increasingly popular as a way for businesses (and individuals) to increase the efficiency management and it infrastructure, cloud computing promises to reduce the cost of computing and increase its accessibility to a geographically dispersed user base. concentration of computing resources for many parties potentially offers a ﬁbig fat targetﬂ for malevolent actors. cloud computing infrastructure may also provide malevolent actors a platform from which to launch their ever, enables providers of computing able administrators.the number of internet users has grown by at least two orders of magnitude in the past two decades, and hundreds of millions of new users (perhaps as many as a billion) will begin to use the internet as large parts of africa, south america, and asia come devices will become increasingly connected to the internet of things, on the theory that network connections between these devices will enable them to operate more efficiently and effectively.untutored in the need for security and are thus more vulnerable. a larger user base means a larger number of potentially malevolent actors. the rise of social networking and such as facebook and twitter, is based on the ability of it to bring large numbers of people into contact with one another. connectivity among friends and contacts offers opportunities for malevolent actors to improperly take advantage of trust relationships.table 1.1 continuedat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why care about cybersecurity? 13public policy concerns about the effects of inadequate cybersecurity are often lumped into a number of categories:cybercrimethe internet and it to steal valuable assets (e.g., money) from their rightful owners or otherwise to take actions that would be regarded as criminal if these actions were taken in person, and a breach of security is usually an important element of the crime. criminal activity using cyber means includes cyber fraud and theft of services (e.g., stealing credit card numbers); cyber harassment and bullying (e.g., taking advantage of online anonymity to threaten a victim); cyber vandalism (e.g., defacing a web site); penetration or circumvention of cybersecurity mechanisms intended to protect the privacy of communications or stored information (e.g., identity theft (e.g., stealing login names and passwords to forge email or to improperly manipulate bank accounts). loss of privacy and theft of intellectual property are also crimes (at least sometimes) but generally occupy their own categories of concern. note also that in addition to the curity consume resources (e.g., money, talent) that could be better used to build improved products or services or to create new knowledge. and, in some cases, concerns about cybersecurity have been known to inhibit the use of it for some particular application, thus leading to selfdenial of the loss of privacy. losses of privacy can result from the actions of others or of the individual concerned. largescale data breaches occur from time to time, for reasons including loss of laptops containing sensitive data and system penetrations by sophisticated intruders. intruders have used the sound and video capabilities of home computers for blackmail based social networks without understanding the privacy implications of doing so, and are later surprised when such information is accessible to als are concerned about the privacy of their data and communications, and a variety of u.s. laws guard against improper disclosure of such information.activismto promote, block, or protest social or political change. compromises in cybersecurity have been used in some activist efforts in cyberspace, wherein activists may compromise the cybersecurity of an installation in an effort to make a political statement or to call attention to a cause, for release or by defacing a publicfacing web site. activism may also be an at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policysites belonging to adversaries of nation a.misappropriation of intellectual property such as proprietary software, r&d work, blueprints, trade secrets, and other product information. concern over theft of intellectual property is especially pronounced when goods and services vital to national security. although misappropriation of trade secrets is prohibited under international trade law, many countries in the world conduct activities aimed at collecting information that might be economically useful to their domestic companies.3 private companies also have incentives to undertake these latter activities, although in many cases some of such activity is forbidden by domestic laws.espionage. espionage refers to one nation™s attempts to gather intelligence on other nations, where intelligence information includes information related to national security and foreign affairs. cyber espionage refers to nationallevel entities conducting espionage activities using cyber means to obtain important intelligence information relevant to national lection of intelligence information about another nation is not prohibited under international law.denials (or disruption) of service. when services are not available when needed, the elements of society that rely on those services are inconvenienced and may be harmed. denials of service per se do not necessarily entail actual damage to the facilities providing service. for ing it impossible to place one, but as soon as the attacker stops, it again becomes possible to make a call. denial of services is described further in chapter 3.destruction of or damage to physical property. such concerns fall into three general categories: š individual cyberphysical systems, such as automobiles, airliners, and medical devices. increasingly, computers control the operation of such systems, and communications links, either wired or wireless, connect them to other computational devices. thus, a malevolent actor might be able to improperly assume control of individual cyberphysical systems or to obtain information (e.g., medical information) that should be private. š critical infrastructure, which includes multiple facilities for electric power generation and transmission, telecommunications, storage, and water supply. although failures in individual facilities 3 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why care about cybersecurity? 15sive loss of life, longlasting disruption of the services that these loss. policy makers have become increasingly concerned about cyber threats to critical infrastructure emanating from both nations and terrorist groups.  š . modern economies depend in large measure everyday activities. under some circumstances, it is possible that even symbols of the nation, such as important monuments) could considered to have some catastrophic potential as well.as far as is known publicly, actual destruction of or damage to physical property to date has been a relatively rare occurrence, although there have been many incidents in the other categories outlined above. threats to national security and cyber war. u.s. armed forces depend heavily on it for virtually every aspect of their capabilitiesšweapons systems; systems for command, control, communications, and intelligence; systems for managing logistics; and systems for administration. given that dependence, potential adversaries are developing ways to threaten the it underlying u.s. military power.4 in addition, other nations are also using it in the same ways that the united states is using it, for both military and civilian purposes, suggesting that the united states could itself seek opportunities to advance its national interests by going on the offensive in cyberspace.concerns about the areas described above have made cybersecurity a hot topic that has garnered substantial public and government attention. in international circles too, such as the united nations and nato, as well as in bilateral relationships with parties such as china and the european union, cybersecurity is moving higher on the agenda.but as important as cybersecurity is to the nation, progress in public policy to improve the nation™s cybersecurity posture has not been as rapid policy issuesšand measures taken to improve cybersecurity potentially 4 department of defense strategy for operating in cyberspaceat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyhave negative effects in these other areas. some of the most important economics. the costs of action to improve cybersecurity beyond an necessary, and the costs of inaction are not borne by the relevant decision makers. decision makers discount future possibilities so much that they do not see the need for presentday action. also, cybersecurity is increasingly regarded as a part of risk managementšan important part in many debates as wellšwith all of the competing demands for a share of government budgets and attention from senior policy makers, policy progress in cybersecurity has been slower than many have desired.innovation. the private sector is constantly trying to bring forward new applications and technologies that improve on old ways of performing certain functions and offer useful new functions. but attention to security can slow bringing new products and services to market, with the result that new technologies and applications are often offered for general question is how to manage the tradeoff between the pace of innovation and a more robust security posture.civil liberties. some measures proposed to improve cybersecurity for the nation potentially infringe on civil liberties, such as privacy, anonymity, due process, freedom of association, free speech, and due process. advocates of such measures either argue that their favored measures do not infringe on civil liberties, or assert that the infringements are small because changes in information technology have gone beyond the techsmith vs. maryland) held that metadata on phone calls (i.e., the phone numbers involved and the duration and time of the call) was less worthy of privacy protection than was ﬁcontentﬂ information, that is, what the parties to a phone call actually say to each other. but the concept of metadata has come to mean ﬁdata associated with a communication that is not communications content,ﬂ and given the way modern electronic communications operate, the relevance of the 1979 precedent has been challenged as many analysts assert that metadata is more revealing than content information.55 ieee security and privacyfebruary):6264, 2014, available at http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why care about cybersecurity? 17international relations and national security. because of the worldwide internet and a global supply chain in which important elements of information technology are created, manufactured, and sold around the world, cyberspace does not have physical national borders. but the world physical artifact of information technology is located somewhere. consewith other nationsšthat is, in their international relations.1.3 organization of this reportchapter 2 presents some fundamental concepts in information technology that are necessary for understanding cybersecurity. chapter 3 what it means to compromise cybersecurity. chapter 4 describes a variety of methods for strengthening and enhancing cybersecurity. chapter 5 is devoted to a further discussion of key public policy issues relating to of course. largescale analysis of phone metadata reveals patterns of communicationšthe identities of communicating parties, and when and with what frequency such communications occur. for some people in some situations, a map of their communications patterns is more privacysensitive than what they are saying in their conversations or even in any one conversation; in other situations for other people, their patterns of communication are less sensitive.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182some basics of computing and communications technology and 2.1 computing technologythe computers at the heart of information technology are generally storedprogram computers. a program is the way an algorithm is represented in a form understandable by a computer. an algorithm is a particular method devised to solve a particular problem (or class of problems). computers do what the program tells them to do given particular that is, how to program it.a program is implemented as a sequence of instructions to the computer; each instruction directs the computer to take some action, such as adding two numbers or activating a device connected to it. instructions are stored in the memory of the computer, as are the data on which these instructions operate.a particularly important instruction is conditional. let™s call x a statement about some particular data that is either true or false. then if x is true, the computer does something (call it a); if x is not true, the computer does something else (call it b). in this way, the sequence of instructions the data provided to the computer. furthermore, the number of possible of decisions: a program with only 10 ﬁyesﬂ or ﬁnoﬂ decisions can have more than 1000 possible paths, and one with 20 such decisions can have more than 1 million.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some basics of computing and communications technology 19a second key point about computing is that information processed by computers and communication systems is represented as sequences of bits (i.e., binary digits). such a representation is a uniform way for computers and communication systems to store and transmit all inforsource per se simply by creating the bits and then can be used to produce everything from photorealistic images to an animation to forged email. digital encoding can represent many kinds of information with which as bit sequences, information can be found in two formsšinformation card; and information in transit through a cable or over a wireless link from one location to another. why do these aspects of computing technology matter for securitydepending on the data means that the programmer must anticipate what the program should do for all possible data inputs. this mental task is of to properly anticipate some particular set of data (e.g., the program processes only numeric input, and fails to account for the possibility that a user might input a letter).a further consequence is that for programs of any meaningful utility, testing for all possible outcomes is essentially impossible when treating inputs. this means that although it may be possible to show that the program does what it is supposed to do when presented with certain inputs, it is impossible to show that it will never do what it is not supposed to do upon receiving that particular sequence, the program can (deliberately) the digital representation of information has a number of important as sequences of bits means that there is no inherent association between originatoršthat is, information is inherently anonymous. a programmer additional data can, in principle, be separated from the information of interest. this point matters in situations in which knowing the association between information and its originator is relevant to security, as might be the case if a law enforcement agency were trying to track down a cyber criminal. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policythe fact that a given sequence of bits could just as easily be a program as data means that a computer that receives information assuming it to be data could in fact be receiving a program, and that program could be hostile. mechanisms in a computer are supposed to keep data and program separate, but these mechanisms are not foolproof and can sometimes be tricked into allowing the computer to interpret data as instructions. it is can be programs that can penetrate the computer™s security, and opening last, the representation of information as sequences of bits has facilitated the use of various mathematical techniquesšcryptographic techniquesšto protect such information. cryptography has many purposes: to ensure the integrity of data (i.e., to ensure that data retrieved or received are identical to data originally stored or sent), to authenticate tiality of information that may have come improperly into the possession to understand how cryptographic methods span a range of communication and storage needs, consider the general problem of securing accomplished by alice writing a letter containing her signature (authentication). the letter was sealed inside a container to prevent accidental an unbroken seal, it meant that the letter had not been disclosed or altered (data integrity), and bob would verify alice™s signature and read the message. if he received the container with a broken seal, bob would then take appropriate actions.with modern cryptographic techniques, each of the steps remains work. mathematical operations can scramble (encrypt) the bit sequences of them cannot interpret their meaning. other mathematical operations descramble (decrypt) the scrambled bits so that they can be interpreted properly and the information they represent can be recovered. still other operations can be used to ﬁsignﬂ a piece of information in a way that associates a particular party with that information. (note, however, that signed information can always be separated from its signature, and a different signature (and party) can then be associated with that information.)at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some basics of computing and communications technology 212.2 communications technology and the internetcomputers are frequently connected through networks to communicate with each other, thus magnifying their usefulness. furthermore, since computers can be embedded in almost any device, arrays of devices can be created that work together for coherent and common purposes.which is a diverse set of independent networks, interlinked to provide its users with the appearance of a single, uniform network. that is, the internet is a network of networks. the networks that compose the internet share a common architecture (how the components of the networks interrelate) and protocols (standards governing the interchange of data) that enable communication within and among the constituent networks. these networks themselves range in scale from pointtopoint links between individual devices (such as bluetooth) to the relatively small networks internally, the internet has two types of elements: communication links, channels over which data travel from point to point; and routers, computers at the network™s nodes that direct data arriving along incoming links to outgoing links that will take the data toward their destinations. data travel along the internet™s communication links in packets format and header information. header information includes information such as the origin and destination ip addresses of a packet, which routers use to determine which link to direct the packet along. a message from a sender to a receiver might be broken into multiple packets, each of which might follow a different path through the internet. information in the packets™ headers enables the message to be restored to its proper order at its destination. however, as a general rule, it is not possible to specify in advance the particular sequence of routers that will handle a given packetšthe routers themselves make decisions about where to send a packet in real time, based on a variety of information available to those routers about the cost of transmission to different routers, outages in adjacent routers, and so on.the origins and destinations of data transiting the internet are computers (or other digital devices), which are typically connected to the internet through an internet service provider (isp) that handles the necessary technical and administrative arrangements. the links and routers of the internet provide the critical connectivity among source and destination computers, but nothing else. (distinguishing between source/at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policydestination computers transmitting and receiving data and links and routers moving data through the internet captures the essence of its original architectural design, but in truth it presents a somewhat oversimplifigure 2.1 provides a schematic that illustrates the architecture of the internet. applications that are directly useful to users are provided by the source and destination computers. applications are connected to each other using packetswitching technology, which runs on the physibox 2.1 a more refined view of internet architecturethe separation of the internet into nodes for transmitting and receiving data and links and routers for moving data through the internet captures the essence of its original architectural design, but in truth it presents a somewhat oversimplied picture. some of the more important adjustments to this picture include the following: content delivery networks. certain popular sites on the web serve a large number of end users. to increase the speed of delivering content from these sites to end users, these web sites replicate the most popular content on content delivery networks located across the internet. when a user requests content from these popular sites, the content is in fact delivered to the user by one of these content delivery networks. other networks. as noted in the main text, the internet is a network of networks. each network within the internet is controlled by some entity, such as an internet service provider, a business enterprise, a government agency, and so on. the controlling entity has relationships with the users to whom it provides service and with the entity controlling the larger network within which this network is embedded. each relationship is governed by negotiated terms of service. these entities do have capabilities for monitoring trafc and modulating connectivity on their networks, so that, for example, they can cut off certain nodes that are pumping hostile or adverse trafc onto the larger internet.  cloud computing and storage. cloud computing and storage, as well as services such as internet search, are internet applications. various vendors also sell to end users cloudbased services that provide software and even infrastructure on demand. however, from the standpoint of individual users, cloud computing may appear to be located among the links and routers, because the information technology on which such applications run is not colocated with end users.misbehavior in any of these components reroutes, delays, or drops trafc inappropriately, or otherwise provides unreliable information, thus posing security risks.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some basics of computing and communications technology 23figure 2.1 a schematic of the internet. three ﬁlayersﬂ of the internet are depicted. the top and bottom layers (the applications layer and the physical infrastructure layer) are shown as much wider than the middle layer (the packetswitching layer), because within each of the wide layers is found a large number of largely independent actors. but within the packetswitching layer, the number of relevant actors is much smaller, and those that do have some control over the packetswitching layer act in tight coordination.networks, local area networks). users navigate the internet using the the various applications, the packetswitching technology, and the physical infrastructure are often called layers of the internet™s architecdifferent parties control different layers. applications (and the infrastructure on which they run) are developed, deployed, and controlled by millions of different entitiesšcompanies, individuals, government agencies, and so on. each of these entities decides what it wants to do, and ﬁputs it on the internet.ﬂ the physical infrastructure responsible for carrying packets is also controlled by a diverse group of telecommunications and interestsšmonetary or otherwisešin being able to carry data packets. (in the united states, these service providers are mostly entities in the private sector.)at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policya set of standards for the internet protocol discussed above)šis managed not under the control of any government, although governments (and many others as well) have input into the processes that evolve the internet protocol.it is the separation of the internet into different layers that are managed separately that is responsible more than any other factor for the box 2.2 internet navigationhow can a user navigate from one computer to another on the internet? to navigatešto follow a course to a goalšacross any space requires a method for designating locations in that space. on a topographic map, each location is designated by a combination of a latitude and a longitude. in the telephone system, a telephone number corresponding to a landline designates each location. on a street map, locations are designated by street addresses. just like a physical neighborhood, the internet has addressesš32 or 128bit numbers, called ip addresses (ip for internet protocol)šthat dene the specic location of every device on the internet.also like the physical world, the internet has namesšcalled domain names, which are generally more easily remembered and informative than the addresses that are attached to most devicesšthat serve as unchanging identiers of those devices even when their specic addresses are changed. the use of domain names on the internet relies on a system of serversšcalled name serversšthat translate the userfriendly domain names into the corresponding ip addresses. this system of addresses and names linked by name servers is called the domain name system (dns) and is the basic infrastructure supporting navigation across the internet.conceptually, the dns is in essence a directory assistance service. george uses directory assistance to look up sam™s number, so that george can call sam. similarly, a user who wants to visit the home page of the national academy of sciences must either know that the ip address for this page is 144.171.1.30, or use the dns to perform the lookup for www.nas.edu. the user gives the name www.nas.edu to a dns name server and receives in return the ip address 144.171.1.30. however, in practice, the user almost never calls on the dns explicitlyšrather, the entire process of dns lookup is hidden from the user in the process of viewing a web page, sending email, and so on.disruptions to the dns affect the user experience. disruptions may prevent users from accessing the web sites of their choosing. a disruption can lead a user to a ﬁlookalikeﬂ web site pretending to be its legitimate counterpart. if the lookalike site is operated by a malevolent actors, the tricked user may lose control of vital information (such as login credentials). at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some basics of computing and communications technology 25data from a to b without regard for the content of that data), any given applications provider can architect a service without having to obtain agreement from any other party. as long as the data packets are properly formed and adhere to the standard internet protocol, the application provider can be assured that the transport mechanisms will accept the data for forwarding to users of the application. interpretation of those packets is the responsibility of programs on the receiver™s end.box 2.3 the internet engineering task forcethe internet engineering task force (ietf) is a large, open international community of network designers, operators, vendors, and researchers concerned with the evolution of the internet architecture and the smooth operation of the internet. it is open to any interested individual. the actual technical work of the ietf is done in its working groups, which are organized by topic into several areas (e.g., routing, transport, security, and so on). much of the work is handled via mailing lists. the ietf holds meetings three times per year.the ietf describes its mission as ﬁmak[ing] the internet work better by producing high quality, relevant technical documents that in˚uence the way people design, use, and manage the internet.ﬂ the ietf adheres to a number of principles: open process. any interested person can participate in the work, know what is being decided, and make his or her voice heard on an issue. all ietf documents, mailing lists, attendance lists, and meeting minutes are publicly available on the internet. technical competence. the issues addressed in ietfproduced documents are issues that the ietf has the competence to speak to, and the ietf is willing to listen to technically competent input from any source. the ietf™s technical competence also means that ietf output is designed to sound network engineering principles, an element often referred to as ﬁengineering quality.ﬂ volunteer core. ietf participants and leaders are people who come to the ietf because they want to do work that furthers ietf™s mission of ﬁmaking the internet work better.ﬂ rough consensus and running code. the ietf makes standards based on the combined engineering judgment of its participants and their realworld experience in implementing and deploying its specications. protocol ownership. when the ietf takes ownership of a protocol or function, it accepts the responsibility for all aspects of the protocol, even though some aspects may rarely or never be seen on the internet. conversely, when the ietf is not responsible for a protocol or function, it does not attempt to exert control over it, even though such a protocol or function may at times touch or affect the internet.source: adapted from material found at the ietf web site at http://www.ietf.org.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyput differently, most of the service innovationšthat is, the applications directly useful to usersštakes place at the source and destination computers, independently of the network itself, apart from the technical need for sending and receiving packets that conform to the internet protocol. the internet™s architecture is an embodiment of the endtoend argument in systems design that says that ﬁthe network should provide a very basic level of servicešdata transportšand that the intelligencešthe information processing needed to provide applicationsšshould be located in or close to the devices attached to . . . the network.ﬂ1 as a result, innovation requires no coordination with network architects or operators, as long as the basic protocols are adhered to. all of the services commonly available on the internet todayšemail, the world wide web, facebook, google search services, voiceoverip communications services, and so why do these aspects of communications technology and the internet matter for security?the fundamental architecture of the internet also has many implications for security. in particular, the endtoend design philosophy of the internet is that the internet should only provide capability for transporting information from one point to another. as such, the internet™s design philosophy makes no special provision for security services. instead, the internet operates under the assumption that any properly formed packet found on the network is legitimate; routers forward such packets to the appropriate addressšand don™t do anything else.discussions of cybersecurity for ﬁthe internetﬂ often carry a builtin ambiguity. from the standpoint of most users, ﬁthe internetﬂ refers to all of the layers depicted in figure 2.1šthat is, users™ conception of ﬁinternet securityﬂ includes the security of the source and destination computers connected to the internet. from the standpoint of most technologists, however, ﬁthe internetﬂ refers only to the packetswitching technology. this distinction is important because the locus of many cybersecurity problems is found in the applications that use the internet.in principle, security mechanisms can be situated at every layer. depending on the layer, these mechanisms will have different properties and capabilities, and will be implemented by different parties.contrary to the internet™s endtoend design philosophy, some parties argue that the internet needs security services that are more embedded into the internet™s architecture and protocols and active in the packetfor a wide range of security threats, and perhaps take action to curb or 1 system design,ﬂ acm transactions on computer systems 2(4):277288, 1984.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some basics of computing and communications technology 27cation users. further, this argument implies that the endtoend design philosophy has impeded or even prevented the growth of such security services.those favoring the preservation of the endtoend design philosophy argue that because of the higher potential for inadvertent disruption as a side effect of a change in architecture or protocols, every proposed change must be tested and validated. because such changes potentially and timeconsumingšand thus raise concerns about negative impacts on the pace of innovation in new internetbased products and services. moreover, actions driven by the requirements of protocols necessarily slow down the speed at which packets can be forwarded to their destinations. and any mechanisms to enforce security mechanisms embedded in internet protocols may themselves be vulnerable to compromise that may have wideranging effects.others argue that security services should be the responsibility of the developers of individual applications. in this view, the security functionality provided can be tailored to the needs of the application, and providthe performance of the internet as a whole. in addition, the scope and nature of security services provided need not be negotiated with stakeholders responsible for other applications. countering this viewpoint is the perspective that applicationsbased security is a burden on end users.some security services can be provided at a distance from the applicathem when they detect that a user™s security has been compromised. such offerings are not uncommon, and they have a modest impact on users™ whether and how to violate the endtoend principle in the name of security is an important policy issue today. how this issue is resolved will have profound implications for security. 2.3 information technology systemsinformation technology (it) systems integrate computing technology, communication technology, people (such as developers, operators, and users), procedures, and more. interfaces to other systems and control at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policywhy do these properties of it systems matter for security?at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.293on the nature of cybersecuritychapter 1 points out that bad things that can happen in cyberspace fall into a number of different categories: cybercrime; losses of privacy; misappropriation of intellectual property such as proprietary software, r&d work, blueprints, trade secrets, and other product information; espionage; disruption of services; destruction of or damage to physical property; and threats to national security. after a brief note about terminology, this chapter addresses how adversarial cyber operations can result in any or all of these outcomes.3.1 on the terminology for discussions of cybersecurity and public policyin developing this report, the committee was faced with an unfortumind the conceptual basis) for discussions about cybersecurity and pubwhere it is well known that translations among english, chinese, german, russian, arabic, french, and hebrew can be problematic. but it is also the case that even within the united states, different communitiesšand even different individuals within those communitiesšuse terminology whose cerns about cybersecurity have spread rapidly in the past 10 years to many at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policybe established under such circumstances. further, different vocabularies and orientation that might differentiate various communities.as an illustration, consider the term ﬁcyberattack.ﬂ the term has been used variously to include: ˚any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system or network regardless of purpose or outcome.˚any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system or network if (and only if) that action is intended to cause a denial of service (discussed below) or damage to or destruction of information stored tration (the essential characteristic of cyber espionage) and other kinds of law and domestic legal authorities for conducting such actions; these points are discussed further in section 4.2.3 on domestic and international law.)˚any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system or network if (and only if) that action is intended to cause damage to or destruction of information stored in or transiting through that system or network and is effected primarily through the direct use of information actions can seriously disrupt services provided by the attacked computer or cables.)another frequent confusion in the literature or in discussions involves making a copy of it and conveying that copy into an adversary™s hands.   is a mechanism used x) means ﬁto take advantage ofﬂ (as in ﬁan adversary can take advantage of vulnerability xﬂ). the reader is cautioned that there are many terms in cybersecurity on some particular vocabulary, but until that day comes, participants in special care to ensure that they understand a speaker™s or writer™s intent when certain terms are used.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 313.2 what it means to be an adversary in cyberspacein this report, an adversarial (or hostile) cyber operation is one or more unfriendly actions that are taken by an adversary (or equivalently, an intruder) against a computer system or network for the ultimate puroperationsﬂ or ﬁoffensive operations in cyberspaceﬂ are roughly equivalent from an action standpoint but are terms for operations conducted by can be used more or less interchangeably with ﬁhostile cyber operation,ﬂ but in this report will usually refer to an adversarial cyber operation conducted sometime in the past.attack.3.2.1 cyber exploitationshould not have access to it. to date, the vast majorityšnearly allšof stored information such as social security numbers, medical records, and bid information, and software source code have all been obtained by ered, the credit card owner can notify the bank and prevent the card™s further use.the winter holiday season of 2013, when the target retail store chain suffered a data breach in which personal information belonging to 70 million to 110 million people was stolen.1 such information included names, mailing and email addresses, phone numbers, and credit card numbers. shortly after the breach occurred, observers noted an orderofmagnitude increase in the number of highvalue stolen cards on black market web sites, from nearly every bank and credit union. the target 1 new york timeshttp://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/11/business/targetbreachaffected70millioncustomers.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyending february 1, 2014, relative to the comparable period a year earlier, covered 72 percent).2 financial institutions spent $200 million to replace credit cards after the breach.3stored on a computer or network, they can also seek information in the physical vicinity of a computer when the computer has audio and/or video capabilities. in such cases, an intruder can penetrate the computer and activate the onboard camera or microphone without the knowledge of the user, and thus surreptitiously see what is in front of the camera and of the new miss teen usa and took pictures that he subsequently used to blackmail the victim.4the warning light on the camera from turning on.3.2.2 cyberattacka cyberattack is an action intended to cause a denial of service or damage to or destruction of information stored in or transiting through an information technology system or network.a denialofservice (dos) attack is intended to render a properly functioning system or network unavailable for normal use. a dos attack may mean that the email does not go through, or the computer simply trolled by the system). as a rule, the effects of a dos attack vanish when the attack ceases. dos attacks are not uncommon, and have occurred against individual corporations, government agencies (both civilian and military), and nations.requests for service (e.g., requests to display a web page, to receive and 2 paul ziobro, ﬁtarget earnings suffer after breach,ﬂ wall street journal, february 27, 2014, available at http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/sb20001424052702304255604579406694182132568.3 saabira chaudhuri, ﬁcost of replacing credit cards after target breach estimated at $200 million,ﬂ wall street journal, february 19, 2014, available at http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/sb10001424052702304675504579391080333769014.4 nate anderson, ﬁwebcam spying goes mainstream as miss teen usa describes hack,ﬂ ars technica, april 16, 2013, available at http://arstechnica.com/techpolicy/2013/08/webcamspyinggoesmainstreamasmissteenusadescribeshack/.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 33to handle legitimate requests for service and thus blocking others from using those resources. such an attack is relatively easy to block if these bogus requests for service come from a single source, because the target can simply drop all service requests from that source. a distributed many different machines. since each of these different machines might, in principle, be a legitimate requester of service, dropping all of them runs a higher risk of denying service to legitimate parties. botnetsša collection when a series of distributed denialofservice (ddos) attacks began on a range of estonian government web sites, media sites, and online banking services.5 attacks were largely conducted using botnets to create network around the world. the duration and intensity of attacks varied across the web sites attacked; most attacks lasted 1 minute to 1 hour, and a few lasted up to 10 hours.6 attacks were stopped when the attackers ceased their efforts rather than being stopped by estonian defensive measures.7 the estonian government was quick to claim links between those conducting the attacks and the russian government,8cials denied any involvement.9a damaging or destructive attack can alter a computer™s programming in such a way that the computer does not later behave as it should. if a physical device (such as a generator) is controlled by the computer, the operation of that device may be compromised. the attack may also being sent from one point to another). such an attack may delete data although the preparation for an attack may be surreptitious (so that 5 economistestonia, presentation to centre for strategic and international studies, november 28, 2007.6 asert.arbornetworks.com/2007/05/estonianddosattacksasummarytodate/. 7 mcafee corporation, cybercrime: the next wave, mcafee virtual criminology report, 8 maria danilova, ﬁantiestonia protests escalate in moscow,ﬂ washington post, may 2, 2007, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2007/05/02/ar20070502006712.html. the article quotes both the estonian president and the estonian ambassador to russia as claiming kremlin involvement. 9 mcafee corporation, cybercrime: the next wave, 2007, p. 7.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policybox 3.1 botnetsan attack technology of particular power and signicance is the botnet. botnets are collections of victimized computers that are remotely controlled by the attacker. a victimized computeršan individual botšis connected to the internet, usually with an ﬁalwaysonﬂ broadband connection, and is running software clandestinely introduced by the attacker. the attack value of a botnet arises from the sheer number of computers that an attacker can controlšoften tens or hundreds of thousands and perhaps as many as a million. (an individual unprotected computer may be part of multiple botnets.)since all of these computers are under one party™s control, the botnet can act as a powerful amplier of an adversary™s actions. in addition, by acting through a botnet, a malevolent actor can be more anonymous (because his actions can be routed through many computers belonging to third parties). the use of botnets can also help to defeat defensive techniques that identify certain computers as sources of hostile trafcšas one bot in the net is identied as a source of hostile trafc, the adversary simply shifts to a second, and a third, and a fourth bot.an attacker usually builds a botnet by nding a few individual computers to compromise, perhaps using one of the tools described above. the rst hostile action that these initial zombies take is to nd other machines to compromiseša task that can be undertaken in an automatic manner, and so the size of the botnet can grow quite rapidly.a botnet controller can communicate with its botnet and still stay in the background, unidentied and far away from any action, while the individual botsšwhich may belong mostly to innocent parties that may be located anywhere in the worldšare the ones that are visible to the party under attack. the botnet controller has great ˚exibility in the actions it may takešit may direct all of the bots to take the same action, or each of them to take different actions.individual bots can probe their immediate environment and take action based on the results of that probe. a bot can pass information it nds back to its controller, or it can take destructive action, which may be triggered at a certain time, or perhaps when the resident bot receives a subsequent communication from the controller. bots can also obtain new programming from their controllers, giving them great ˚exibility with respect to the range of harmful tasks they can conduct at any time.perhaps the most important point about botnets is the great ˚exibility they offer to a malevolent actor. adversaries can obtain botnet services on the open (black) market for hacking services (e.g., the botnets used to attack estonia in 2007 were apparently rented).1 although botnets are known to be well suited to distributed denialofservice attacks, it is safe to say that their full range of utility for adversarial operations in cyberspace has not yet been examined.1 mark landler and john markoff, ﬁdigital fears emerge after data siege in estonia,ﬂ new york times, may 29, 2007, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/29/technology/29estonia.html?pagewanted=all&r=0.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 35the victim does not have a chance to prepare for it), the effects of an attack may or may not be concealed. if the intent of an attack is to destroy a be traceable to a cyberattack on the controlling computer). but if the intent of an attack is to corrupt vital data, small amounts of corruption may not be visible (and small amounts of corruption continued over time could result in undetectable largescale corruption).hostile cyber operation that targeted the computercontrolled centrifuges 10 after taking control ways that would cause them to selfdestruct, unbeknownst to the iranian centrifuge operators. 3.2.3 an important commonality for exploitation and attackthey generally use the same basic technical approaches to penetrate the security of a system or network, even though they have different outthe latter results in damage to information or information technologyšand whatever else that technology controls.) the reason for this similarity is addressed below in section 3.4. also, a single offensive operation can, in 3.3 inherent vulnerabilities of information technologydesigning a completely secure, totally unhackable computer is easyšsystem is entirely secure (see the left side of figure 3.1). of course, this useful (right side of figure 3.1).a computer can produce useful results only when it is provided with ﬁcorrectﬂ or ﬁgoodﬂ information. but what counts as ﬁgoodﬂ and ﬁbadﬂ information depends on decisions made by fallible human beingsšand in particular humans who may be tricked into believing that certain 10 ieee spectrum, february 26, 2013, at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyinformation or programs are good when they are in fact bad. this fact underscores a basic point about most adversarial cyber operationsšthe two other factors compound the inherent vulnerabilities of information technology. first, the costs of an adversarial cyber operation are usually small compared with the costs of defending against it. this asymmetry arises because the victim (the defender) must succeed every time the intruder acts (and may even have to take defensive action long after the intruder™s initial penetration if the intruder has left behind an implant for a future attack). by contrast, the intruder needs to succeed in his efforts only once, and if he pays no penalty for a failed operation, he can continue his efforts until he succeeds or chooses to stop.11whose proper (secure) operation requires many actors to have behaved correctly and appropriately and to continue to do so in the future. each 11 this asymmetry applies primarily when the intruder can choose when to act, that is, when the precise timing of the intrusion™s success does not matter. if the intruder must of tries to succeed, and the asymmetry between intruder and defender may be reduced figure 3.1 a secure but useless computer (left), and an insecure but useful computer (right).at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 37something that many people do every day with ease. the user can type the name of a web page (called a url, uniform resource locator) as depicted in the top of figure 3.2, and the proper web page appears in a second or two as depicted at the bottom of figure 3.2. in addition, the user also wants the display of the web page to be the only thing that happens things that the user does not want to happen.behind this apparent simplicity is a multitude of steps, as depicted by any of these actors may mean that the requested page does not appear as required.inspection of figure 3.3 with a powerful magnifying lens (not suppreparation of the computer used to display the page, preparation of the web page that is to be displayed, and the actual retrieval of the web page from where it is hosted to where it is displayed. each of these parts is itself composed of actions involving a number of actors. some of the actors shown in figure 3.3 include:˚the provider of the hardware and the operating system;˚the delivery service that handles the computer in transit (e.g., box 3.2 a simple example of deceptionhtml (an acronym for hypertext markup language) is a computer language that is used to display web pages. one feature of this language is that it enables the conversion of text into links to other web pages. the user sees on the page a certain text string, but the text string conceals a linkšclicking on the ﬁclick hereﬂ text brings the user to the web site corresponding to the link. (although the link can be revealed if the user™s pointing device hovers over the text string, many users do not perform such a check.)but there are no limits on the text string to be displayed to the user, and so it is possible for the user to see on the screen ﬁwww.example.com,ﬂ but underneath the text is really the link for another web page, such as www.hackyourcomputer.com. clicking on the text displayed on the screen takes the user to the bad site rather than the intended site. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyfigure 3.2a and bfigure 3.2 viewing a web page, from the user™s perspective. when a user types a web page™s name (top), the corresponding page appears and can be read (bottom). at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 39userstartproviderofo/sselectispdesignwebsl/hbootcomputerrundhcpspecifydnso/sproviderofhardwareaccessispvpnprovidercreatewebpagedevelopmentdevelopmenttoolsdnsregistrar;dnsprovideractivatednsnameselect/purchasecomputerproviderstartdesignappusevpnobtainmerchantcertificaterunningsystemavailableselectbrowserinstallbrowserpyproviderofbrowserdownloadmechanismdnsproviderinstallonserverelecttousecdnserversoftware;systemoperatorcdnproviderelecttousesslsetupsecurepagecertificateauthorityconfiguredsystemavailablemechanismserversoftware;systemoperatorobtainurlbrowserwebpageavailableextractdnsnameretrievecertificateconvertdnstoipretrievepagerenderpagednsserver/systemallispsalongpathbrowserallispsalongpathverifycertificatebrowsercertificatebrowsercertificateauthorityrenderpageviewretrievedpageretrieveembeddedelementsbrowserallofthesestepsacceptverificationusercognition/perceptionfigure 3.3 viewing a web page, behind the scenes. source: david clark, ﬁcontrol point analysis,ﬂ ecir working paper, 2012, controlpointanalysis. reprinted by permission.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policythe factory to the proper destination without allowing an adversary to tamper with it;˚the internet service provider that provides internet service to the location where the user accesses the web page;˚the party responsible for the internet browser that the user runs to access the web page;˚the party or parties responsible for various addons that the ˚the developer of the tools for creating web pages; ˚the operator of the server that hosts the web page to be accessed;˚the provider of software for the host server;˚providers of the advertisement(s) that might be served up along with the web page;˚the domain name system registrar that registers the name of the web site where the web page can be found;˚the dns provider that translates the name of the web site to a numerical internet protocol address such as 144.171.1.4;˚the web site is in fact the properly registered operator; and˚all of the internet service providers along the connection path between the host and the user.each of these actors must carry out correctly the role it plays in ing protocols if packets are to reach their destination. moreover, each of these actors could take (or be tricked into taking) one or more actions that thwart the user™s intent in retrieving a given web page, which is to receive the requested web page promptly and to have only that task be accomplished, and not have any other unrequested task be accomplished.3.4 the anatomy of adversarial activities in cyberspaceadversarial operations in cyberspace against a system or network usually require penetration of the system or network™s security to deliver a payload that takes action in accordance with the intruder™s wishes against the target of interest (e.g., against any of the entities shown in ovals in figure 3.3). the payload is usually computer code, and is also known as malware. (in some cases, the payload could be instructions or commands issued to the computer by a malevolent actor.)at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 41a problem very different from that posed by the same cabinet located net, the intruder might take advantage of an easily pickable lock on the cabinetšthat is, an easily pickable lock is a vulnerability. the payload in tion on those papers, perhaps by replacing certain pages with pages of the intruder™s creation (i.e., he alters the data recorded on the pages), he can pour ink over the papers (i.e., he renders the data unavailable to any legitimate user), or he can copy the papers and take the copies away, 3.4.1 cyber penetration accessone that the intruder need spend only a little effort preparing and the target that is known to be connected to the internet. public web sites are the internet to be useful.hard targets are those that require a great deal of preparation on the part of the intruder and where access to the target can be gained only at great effort or may even be impossible for all practical purposes. for nected to the internet for the foreseeable future, which means that launching a cyberattack against such a plane will require some kind of hardertoachieve access to introduce a vulnerability that can be used later. as a general rule, sensitive and important computer systems or networks are likely to fall into the category of hard targets.access paths to a target include those in the following categories:˚remote access, in which the intruder is at some distance from the remote access is that of an adversary computer attacked through the accessing an adversary computer through a dialup modem attached to it or through penetration of the wireless network to which it is connected. malevolent actors are constantly searching for new computers computer, and in some cases, such penetration takes only a matter of at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyminutes or hours from the moment of initial connection to the internet, even without its owner taking any other action at all.12 computer language used for managing data input and data manipulation to insert (ﬁinjectﬂ) database commands of his own into the input. in a making 32 million user names and passwords available to intruders.13 in federal trade commission.14˚close access, in which the penetration of a system or network takes place through the local installation of hardware or software functionality imity to the computer or network of interest. close access is a possibility conduct than remote access.to the telegraph, criminal gangs in china gained access to the supply chain for a certain line of chipandpin credit card readers.15 the gangs nal enterprises. the readers were repackaged with virtually no physical traces of tampering and shipped directly to several european countries. details collected from the cards were used to make duplicate credit cards, 12 survival time, available at http://isc.sans.org/survivaltime.html. was rendered unusable through online attacks. the computer was probed within 30 seconds 13sc magazine, compromises32millionpasswords/article/159676/.14 sc magazine, rockyoutopayftc250kafterbreachof32mpasswords/article/233992/.15 henry samuel, ﬁchip and pin scam ‚has netted millions from british shoppers,™ﬂ the telegraph, october 10, 2008, available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/lawandorder/3173346/chipandpinscamhasnettedmillionsfrombritishshoppers.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 43international estimated that thousands of customer accounts were compromised, netting millions of dollars in illgotten gains before the breach was discovered.˚social access. an intruder can gain access by taking advantage of trust the intentions of a known and/or friendly party than an unknown box 3.3 close access through the information technology supply chainsystems (and their components) can be penetrated in design, development, testing, production, distribution, installation, conguration, maintenance, and operation. in most cases, the supply chain is only loosely managed, which means that the party supplying the system to the end user may well not have full control over the entire chain. examples of possible supplychain penetrations include the following: ˚a vendor with an employee loyal to an adversary introduces malicious hardware or code at the factory as part of a system component for which the vendor is a subcontractor in a critical system.˚an adversary intercepts a set of usb ˚ash drives ordered by the victim for distribution at a conference and substitutes a different doctored set for actual delivery to the victims. in addition to the conference proceedings, the adversary places hostile software on the ˚ash drives that the victims install when they plug in the drives.˚an adversary writes an application for a smart device that performs some useful function (e.g., an app that displays a clock on the device™s face) but also includes malware that sends the contact list on the device to the adversary.˚an adversary bribes a shipping clerk to look the other way when the computer is on the loading dock for transport to the victim, opens the box, replaces the video card installed by the vendor with one modied by the intruder, and reseals the box.a supply chain penetration may be effected late in the chain, for example, against a deployed computer in operation or one that is awaiting delivery on a loading dock. in these cases, such a penetration is by its nature narrowly and specically targeted, and it is also not scalable, because the number of computers that can be penetrated is proportional to the number of human assets available. in other cases, a supply chain penetration may be effected early in the supply chain (e.g., introducing a vulnerability during development), and high leverage against many different targets might result from such an attack. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyit systems of interest can often be compromised through recruitment, can be of enormous value to the intruder. in some cases, a trusted insider ﬁgoes badﬂ for his or her own reasons and by virtue of the trust placed in him is able to take advantage of his own credentials for improper purposesšthis is the classical ﬁinsider threat.ﬂ social engineering is the use of deception and trickery for gaining access. social engineering results in the intruder gaining access to the credentials and therefore the access privileges of those the intruder has tricked.penetrate the security of computer systems, consider the case of edward ments from the national security agency and other government agencies in the united states and abroad that described electronic surveillance nature of these documents, many have asked how their security could have been compromised. according to a reuters news report,16 snowden him with their credentials, telling them that he needed that information in his role as systems administrator.sometimes, social engineering is combined with either remote access or close access methods. an intruder may make contact through the internet with someone likely to have privileges on the system or network of interest. through that contact, the intruder can trick the person into taking intruder sends the victim an email with a link to a web page and when the victim clicks on that link, the web page may take advantage of a technical vulnerability in the browser to run a hostile program of its own choosing on the user™s computer, often or usually without the permission or even the knowledge of the user.social engineering can be combined with close access techniques in computer. because some systems support an ﬁautorunﬂ feature for insertable media (i.e., when the medium is inserted, the system automatically ports can be glued shut, but such a countermeasure also makes it impos16 mark hosenball and warren strobel, ﬁsnowden persuaded other nsa workers to give up passwordsœsources,ﬂ reuters, november 7, 2013, available at http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/11/08/netususasecuritysnowdenidusbre9a703020131108.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 45sible to use the usb ports for anythe red team scattered usb drives in parking lots, smoking areas, and drive was inserted, and the result was that 75 percent of the usb drives distributed were inserted into a computer.17 vulnerabilityaccess is only one aspect of a penetration, which also requires the intruder to take advantage of a vulnerability in the target system or the target such as a default setting that leaves system protections turned off. vulnerabilities arise from the characteristics of information technology and information technology systems described above.door for opportunistic use of the vulnerability by an adversary who learns discovered and can then be used by anyone with moderate technical skills until a patch can be developed, disseminated, and installed. intruders with the time and resources may also discover unintentional defects that they protect as valuable secrets that can be used when necessary. as long as those defects go unaddressed, the vulnerabilities they create can be used by the intruder.built into programs by their creators; the purpose of a ﬁback doorﬂ is to enable another party to bypass security features that would otherwise keep that other party out of the system or network. an illustration would would have an assigned login name and password that would enable them to do certain things (and only those things) on the web site. but if the program™s creator had installed a back door, a knowledgeable intruder (perhaps in cahoots with the program™s creator) could enter a special 17 see steve stasiukonis, ﬁsocial engineering, the usb way,ﬂ dark readingat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy40character password and use any login name and then be able to do anything he wanted on the system.vulnerability.ﬂ the term refers to a vulnerability for which the responsible party (e.g., the vendor that provides the software) has not provided a impact are those in a remotely accessible service that runs by default on all versions of a widely used piece of softwarešunder such circumstances, an intruder could take advantage of the vulnerability in many places nearly simultaneously, with all of the consequences that penetrations of such scale might imply.those who discover such vulnerabilities in systems face the question of what to do with them. a private party may choose to report a vulnerability privately to those responsible for maintaining the system so that actions can be taken; keep a discovered/known vulnerability for its own purposes; or sell it to the highest bidder. national governments face a similar choiceškeep it for future use in some adversarial or offensive the susceptibility to penetration of the systems in which that vulnerability is found. national governments as well as nongovernment entities such as for future use.penetration approaches and techniques, and thus may look quite similar to the victim, at least until the nature of the malware involved is ascertained.3.4.2 cyber payloads (malware)if an intruder is successful at penetrating a system or network, the a payload is most often a ﬁmalwareﬂ program that is designed to take hostile action against the system to which it has been delivered. in general, these hostile actions can be anything that could be done by an has entered a system, it can be programmed to reproduce and retransmit at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 47ability for future use, and so on. the payload is what determines if an malware can have multiple capabilities when inserted into an adversary system or networkšthat is, malware can be programmed to do more than one thing. the timing of these actions can also be varied. and if a communications channel to the intruder is available, malware can be remotely updated. indeed, in some cases, the initially delivered malware consists of nothing more than a mechanism for scanning the penetrated system to determine its technical characteristics and an update mechanism to retrieve the best packages to further the malware™s operation.malware may be programmed to activate either immediately or when some condition is met. in the second case, the malware sits quietly and does nothing harmful most of the time. however, at the right moment, ﬁright momentﬂ can be triggered because:˚a certain date and time are reached;˚˚˚malware may also install itself in ways that keep it from being detected. it may delete itself, leaving behind little or no trace that it was ever present. in some cases, malware can remain even after a computer is scanned with antimalware software or even when the operating system is reinstalled from scratch.puters in everyday usešrun through a particular poweron sequence when their power is turned on. the computer™s poweron sequence loads a small program from a chip inside the computer known as the bios (basic inputoutput system), and then runs the bios program. the bios program then loads the operating system from another part of the computer, usually its hard drive. most antimalware software scans only the operating system on the hard drive, assuming the bios chip to be intact. but some malware is designed to modify the program on the bios chip, and reinstalling the operating system simply does not touch the (moditargets the bios,18 and in 1998 it rendered several hundred thousand 18 the chernobyl virus is further documented in cert coordination center, ﬁcih/chernobyl virus,ﬂ cert® incident note in9903, updated april 26, 1999, available at  in9903.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policycomputers entirely inoperative without physical replacement of the bios chip. last, the payload might not take the form of hostile software at all. advantage of a certain vulnerability to give himself remote access to the target computer such that the intruder has all of the privileges and capabilities that he might have if he were sitting at the keyboard of that computer. he is then in a position to issue to the computer commands of his own choosing, and such commands may well have a harmful effect on the target computer.3.4.3 operational considerationssections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 describe the basic structure of hostile activities in cyberspace. but an intruder must take into account a number of operational considerations if such activities are to be successful:˚effects prediction and assessment. when planning a hostile operation, operation has concluded, the responsible party wants to know if it was successful. but accurate predictions about the outcome of hostile operaeye.˚target selectionof sources, including open source collection, automated target selection, in targeting may require large amounts of intelligence information.˚fragilitythe vulnerability that was taken advantage of by an intruder. thus, an intruder must consider the possibility that a particular penetration tool will be usable only once or a few times.˚rules of engagement. these rules specify what tools may be used to conduct a hostile cyber operation, what their targets may be, what effects may be sought, and who may conduct such operations under what specifying these rules for a variety of different purposes (e.g., military purposes, intelligence purposes, law enforcement purposes).˚the availability of intelligence. as a general rule, a scarcity of intelligence information regarding possible targets means that any cyber operation launched against them can only be ﬁbroadspectrumﬂ and relatively at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 49indiscriminate or blunt. substantial amounts of intelligence information about targets (and paths to those targets) are required if an operation is intended as a very precise one directed at a particular system. often, 3.5 characterizing threats to cybersecuritymalevolent actors in cyberspace span a very broad spectrum, rangto the lone intruder.in addition to those who are motivated by pure curiosity, malevolent actors have a range of motivations. some are motivated by the desire to nationalistic considerations.the skills of malevolent actors also span a very broad range. some have only a rudimentary understanding of the underlying technology and are capable only of using tools that others develop to conduct their own operations but in general are not capable of developing new tools. those with an intermediate level of skill are capable of developing hacking tools on their own.those with the most advanced levels of skillsšthat is, the highend threatšcan identify weaknesses in target systems and networks and develop tools to take advantage of such knowledge. moreover, they are support. when governments are involved, the resources of national intelligence, military, and law enforcement services can be brought to bear. of end intruder, efforts oriented toward countering the casual adversary or even the common cyber criminal amount to little more than speed bumps.the availability of such resources widens the possible target set of seeks the credit card numbers of a group of individuals. the operation at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policymay not be entirely successful because some of these individuals have defenses in place that thwart the operation on their individual machines. but the operation taken as a whole will obtain some credit card numbers, and an adversary that simply wants credit card numbers without regard for who actually owns those numbers will regard this operation as a success.however, because of the resources available to them, highend adverenormous value (ﬁthe crown jewelsﬂ). in the former case, an adversary confronted with an adequately defended system simply moves on to another system that is not so well defended. in the latter case, the adverhas become known as the advanced persistent threat.highend adversariesšand especially major nationstate adversariesšare also likely to have the resources that allow them to obtain detailed information about the target system, such as knowledge gained by having access to the source code of the software running on the target or the schematics of the target device, or through reverseengineering. success in obtaining such information is not guaranteed, of box 3.4 the advanced persistent threatdiscussions of highend cybersecurity threats often make reference to the ﬁadvanced persistent threat (apt).ﬂ one document suggests that the term was originally coined by the u.s. air force in 2006 to refer to ﬁa sophisticated adversary engaged in [cyber] warfare in support of longterm strategic goals.ﬂ1 that is, the apt is a party (an actor) that is technologically advanced and persistent (i.e., able and willing to persist in its efforts).a second usage of the term refers to the character of a cyber intrusionšone that is technologically sophisticated (i.e., advanced) and hard to nd and eliminate (i.e., persistent). in this usage, the apt is highly focused on a particularly valuable target. this tight and narrow focus stands in contrast to other cyber threats (e.g., spamming for credit card numbers) that seek targets of opportunity. an apt typically makes use of tools and techniques that are customized to the specic security conguration and posture of its target. furthermore, it operates in ways that its perpetrators hope minimize the likelihood of detection.1 see fortinet, inc., ﬁthreats on the horizon: the rise of the advanced persistent threat,ﬂ solution brief, 2013, http://www.fortinet.com/sites/default/les/solutionbrief/threatsonthehorizonriseofadvancedpersistentthreats.pdf.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the nature of cybersecurity 51course, but the likelihood of success is clearly an increasing function of the availability of resources. for instance, a country may obtain source code and schematics of a certain vendor™s product because it can require that the vendor make those available to its intelligence agencies as a condition of permitting the vendor to sell products within its borders.the highend adversary is generally indifferent to the form that its path to success takes, as long as that path meets various constraints such as affordability and secrecy. in particular, the highend adversary will the former is easier to do than the latter.to support this broad range of malevolent actors, there is a thriving and robust underground marketplace for hacking tools and services. those wishing to conduct an adversarial operation in cyberspace can often purchase the service with nothing more than a credit card (probably a stolen one) or an alternative and untraceable currency such as bitcoin.19 out of which a malevolent actor can assemble his own adversarial cyber operation. in an environment in which such services can be bought and a number of general observations can be made about the various malevolent actors: ˚bad guys who want to have an effect on their targets have some motivation to keep trying, even if their initial efforts are not successful in intruding on a victim™s computer systems or networks. ˚bad guys nearly always make use of deception in some formšthey trick the victim into doing something that is contrary to the victim™s interests. ˚a wouldbe bad guy who is induced or persuaded in some way to refrain from intruding on a victim™s computer systems or networks results in no harm to those systems or networks, and such an outcome is just as good as thwarting his hostile operation (and may be better if the user is persuaded to avoid conducting such operations in the future). ˚cyber bad guys will be with us forever for the same reason that crime will be with us foreveršas long as the information stored in, processed by, or carried through a computer system or network has value to 19 r. velde, ﬁbitcoin: a primer,ﬂ chicago fed letter, number 517, december 2013, available at http://www.chicagofed.org/digitalassets/publications/chicagofedletter/2013/at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policythird parties, cyber bad guys will have some reason to conduct adversarial operations against a potential victim™s computer systems and networks.3.6 threat assessmentthe process through which information is assembled and interpreted to assess the threats faced by a potential target is known as threat assessment. threat assessments help those who are defending systems and networks to allocate resources (money, time, effort, personnel) prior to hostile action and to plan what they should do when they are the target resources should be deployed to combat one particular threat over all others or that a particular strategy would be more effective than others in responding to a given threat.in general, threat assessments are based on information from multiple sources. as is discussed in section 4.1.4, successful forensics of actual cyber incidents provide one kind of information, yielding details about the methodology and identity of the intruders, the damage that resulted, and so on. other sources of useful information may include intercepts of communications and other signals, interviews with those knowledgeable about intruder doctrine or operations, analysis of intruders™ documents, photo reconnaissance, reports from intelligence agents, public writing and speeches by relevant parties, and so on.a threat assessment sheds light on adversary capabilities and intenhostile party.) what an adversary is capable of doing depends on the tools available, the skill with which the adversary can use those tools, and the numbers of skilled personnel available to the adversary. what an adversary intends to do depends on the adversary™s motivation, as target set (i.e., what targets the adversary seeks to penetrate) and in what the adversary wishes to do or be able to do once penetration is achieved at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.534enhancing cybersecurity4.1 approaches to improving securitycance of adversarial cyber operations. the approaches described below that some combination of them be used. 4.1.1 reducing reliance on information technologythe most basic way to improve cybersecurity is to reduce the use of using it must be weighed against the security risks that the use of it cient degree, and the use of it should be rejected. in other cases, security costs should be factored into the decision. but what should not happen is that security risks be ignored entirelyšas may sometimes be the case.connecting a computer system to the internet, even if not connecting might increase costs or decrease the system™s utility. the theory underlying such a decision is that the absence of an internet connection to such a computer will prevent intruders from gaining access to it and thus that the computer system will be safe. in fact, this theory is not rightšthe lack of such a connection reduces but does not prevent access, and thus the at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policysafety of the computer system cannot be taken for granted forever after. but disconnection does help under many circumstances.the broader point can be illustrated by supervisory control and data acquisition (scada) systems, some of which are connected to the internet.1 scada systems are used to control many elements of physical infrastructure: electric power, gas and oil pipelines, chemical plants, factories, water and sewage, and so on. infrastructure operators connect their scada systems to the internet to facilitate communications with them, at least in part because connections and communications hardware that are provide such communications. but internet connections also potentially provide access paths to these scada systems that intruders can use.note that disconnection from the internet may not be easy to accomplish. although scada systems may be taken off the internet, connecting these systems to administrative computers that are themselves connected means that these scada systems are in fact connectedšindirectlyšto the internet. 4.1.2 knowing that security has been penetrateddetectionfrom the standpoint of an individual system or network operator, the only thing worse than being penetrated is being penetrated and not knowing about it. detecting that one has been the target of a hostile cyber action.action) is harmful (or potentially harmful) or not harmful. making such decisions is problematic because what counts as harmful or not harmful is for the most part a human decisionšand such judgments may not be made correctly. in addition, the number of nonharmful things happening inside a computer or a network is generally quite large compared with the number of harmful things going on. so the detection problem is nearly one oftenused technique for detecting malware is to check to see such checks depend on ﬁsignaturesﬂ that might be associated with the 1 see http://cyberarms.wordpress.com/2013/03/19/worldwidemapofinternetconnected scadasystems/.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 55when it was created, a hash of the program,2 and so on. signatures might also be associated with the path through which a program has arrived at the einstein program of the department of homeland security (dhs) 3 by law and policy, dhs is the primary agency responsible for protecting u.s. government agencies other than the department of defense and the header information in each packet but not the content of a packet itself) and compares that data to known patterns of such data that have previdropped).this signaturebased technique for detection has two primary weaknesses. first, it is easy to morph the code without affecting what the program can do so that there are an unlimited number of functionally equivalent versions with different signatures. second, the technique cannot identify a program as malware if the program has never been seen before.another technique for detection monitors the behavior of a program; are behavioral signatures that help with anomaly detection, this techbut it is not a general solution because there is usually no reliable way to a legitimate and benign purpose and an intruder who wishes to do that very same thing for some nefarious purpose. in practice, this technique something nefarious is going on when in fact it is not. a high level of false positives annoys legitimate users, and often results in these users being unable to get their work done.2constructed algorithm, hashes of two different bit sequences are very unlikely to have the same hash value.3 department of homeland security, national cyber security division, computer emergency readiness team (uscert), privacy impact assessment [of the] einstein program: collecting, analyzing, and sharing computer security information across the federal civilian governmentprivacypiaeisntein.pdf.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyassessmenta hostile action taken against an individual system or network may or may not be part of a larger adversary operation that affects many systems simultaneously, and the scale and the nature of the systems and networks affected in an operation are critical information for decision makers.detecting a coordinated adversary effort against the background noise of ongoing hostile operations also remains an enormous challenge, given that useful information from multiple sites must be made available on a timely basis. (and as detection capabilities improve, adversaries will take steps to mask such signs of coordinated efforts.)an assessment addresses many factors, including the scale of the hostile cyber operation (how many entities are being targeted), the nature of the targets (which entities are being targeted), the success of the operation and nature of any foreign involvement derived from technical analysis of cally derived from the operation itself, and attribution of the operation of ﬁsomething bad going on in cyberspace.ﬂ assessments are further complicated by the possibility that an initial penetration is simply paving the way for hostile payloads that will be delivered later, or by the possibility that the damage done by an adversarial operation will not be visible for a long time after it has taken place.the government agencies responsible for threat assessment and warning can, in principle, draw on a wide range of information sources, both inside and outside the government. in addition to hearing from privatecommunicate with security it vendors, such as symantec and mcafee, that monitor the internet for signs of hostile activity. other public interest groups, such as the opennet initiative and the information warfare monitor, seek to monitor hostile operations launched on the internet.44 see the opennet initiative (http://opennet.net/) and the information warfare monitor (http://www.infowarmonitor.net/) web sites for more information on these groups. a useful press report on the activities of these groups can be found at kim hart, ﬁa new breed of hackers tracks online acts of war,ﬂ washington post, august 27, 2008, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2008/08/26/ar2008082603128pf.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 574.1.3 defending a system or networkdefending a system or network means taking actions so that a hostile actor is less successful than he or she would otherwise be in the absence of defensive actions. a desirable side effect of taking such measures is that by reducing the likelihood that a hostile actor will succeed, that actor may also be deterred from taking hostile action because of its possible futility.some of the most important approaches to defense include:˚reducing the number of vulnerabilities contained in any deployed it system or network. there are two methods for doing so.known as ﬁpatchingﬂ). much software has the capability to update itself, and many updates received automatically by a system contain patches that repair vulnerabilities that have become known since the software was released for general use. š design and implement software so that it has fewer vulnerabilities from the start. software designers know many principles about how to design and build it systems and networks more securely security features are feasiblešimplementing such features in hardware is often more secure than implementing them in software, parable software implementations.˚eliminating or blocking known but unnecessary access paths. many it systems or networks have a variety of ways to access them that are unnecessary for their effective use. securityconscious system administrators often disconnect unneeded wireless connections and wired jacks; disable usb ports; change system access controls to quickly remove departing employees or to restrict the access privileges available to individual users the internet is a particular instance of eliminating an access path.˚ﬁwhitelistingﬂ software. vendors of major operating systems provide the option of (and sometimes require) restricting the programs that can be approach is the ﬁapp storeﬂ approach to software development by third parties for mobile devices. in principle, whitelisting requires that the code of an application be cryptographically signed by its author using a public at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policybox 4.1 on attributionattribution is the process through which an adversarial cyber operation is associated with its perpetrator. in this context, the denition of ﬁperpetratorﬂ can have many meanings: ˚the computer from which the adversarial cyber operation reached the target. note that this computeršthe one most proximate to the targetšmay well belong to an innocent third party that has no knowledge of the operation being conducted. ˚the computer that launched or initiated the operation.˚the geographic location of the machine that launched or initiated the operation.˚the individual sitting at the keyboard of the initiating machine. ˚the nation under whose jurisdiction the named individual falls (e.g., by virtue of his physical location when he typed the initiating commands).˚the entity under whose auspices the individual acted, if any.one can thus imagine a hostile operation that is launched under the auspices of elbonia, by a ruritanian citizen sitting in a darkistanian computer laboratory, that penetrates computers in agraria as intermediate nodes in an attack on computers in latkovia.in general, ﬁattributionﬂ of a hostile cyber operation could refer to an identication of any of three entities:˚a computer or computers (called c) that may be involved in the operation. the identity of c may be specied as a machine serial number, a mac address, or an internet protocol (ip) address.1 ˚the human being(s) (h) involved in the operation, especially the human being who initiates the hostile operation (e.g., at the keyboard). the identity of h may be specied as his or her name, pseudonym, or identication card number, for example.˚the party (p) ultimately responsible for the actions of the involved humans. the identity of p may be the name of another individual, the name of an organization, or the name of a country, for example. if h is a ﬁlone wolf,ﬂ p and h are probably the same.note that knowing the identity of c does not necessarily identify h, and knowing the identity of h does not necessarily identify p. the distinctions between c, h, and p are important because the appropriate meaning of attribution depends on the reason that attribution is necessary.˚if the goal is to mitigate the negative effects of a hostile cyber operation as soon as possible, it is necessary to shut down the computers involved in the operation, a task that depends on affecting the computers more than on affecting their operators or their masters. the identity of c is important.˚if the goal is to prosecute or take the responsible humans into custody, the names of these human beings are important. the identity of h is important.˚if the goal is to deter future hostile acts, and recognizing that deterrence involves imposing a cost on the party that would otherwise choose to launch a future hostile act, the identity of p is important.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 59when the identities of h or p are desired, judgments of attribution are based on all available sources of information, which could include technical signatures and forensics collected regarding the act in question, communications information (e.g., intercepted phone calls monitoring conversations of individuals or their leaders), prior history (e.g., similarity to previous hostile operations), and knowledge of those with incentives to conduct such operations.the fact that such a diversity of sources is necessary for identifying humans underscores a fundamental pointšassignment of responsibility for an adversarial cyber operation is an act that is in˚uenced although not uniquely determined by the technical information associated with the operation itself. nontechnical evidence can often play an important role in determining responsibility, and ultimately, human judgment is an essential element of any attempt at attribution.it is commonly said that attribution of an adversarial cyber operation is impossible. the statement does have an essential kernel of truth: if the perpetrator makes no mistakes, uses techniques that have never been seen before, leaves behind no clues that point to himself, does not discuss the operation in any public or monitored forum, and does not conduct his actions during a period in which his incentives to conduct such operations are known publicly, then identication of the perpetrator may well be impossible.indeed, sometimes all of these conditions are met, and policy makers rightly despair of their ability to act appropriately under such circumstances. but in other cases, the problem of attribution is not so dire, because one or more of these conditions are not met, and it may be possible to make some useful (if incomplete) judgments about attribution. for example, a cyber intruder may leave his ip address exposed (perhaps because he forgot to use an anonymizing service to hide it). that ip address may be the key piece of information that is necessary to track the intruder™s location and eventually to arrest the individual involved.2perhaps the more important point is that prompt attribution of any given adversarial cyber operation is much more difcult than eventual or delayed attribution. it takes timešdays, weeks, perhaps monthsšto assemble forensic evidence and to compare it to evidence of previous operations, to query nontechnical intelligence sources, and so on. in a national security context, policy makers faced with responding to a hostile cyber operation naturally feel pressure to respond quickly, but sometimes such pressures have more political than operational signicance.last, because attribution to any actor beyond a machine involves human judgments, actors that are accused of being responsible for bad actions in cyberspace can always assert their innocence and point to the sinister motives of the parties making human judgments, regardless of whether those judgments are well founded. such denials have some plausibility, especially in an environment in which there are no accepted standards for making judgments related to attribution.1 a mac address (mac is an acronym for media access control) is a unique number associated with a physical network adapter, specied by the manufacturer and hardcoded into the adapter hardware. an ip address (internet protocol address) is a number assigned by the operator of a network using the internet protocol to a device (e.g., a computer) attached to that network; the operator may, or may not, use a conguration protocol that assigns a new number every time the device appears on the network.2 see gerry smith, ﬁfbi agent: we™ve dismantled the leaders of anonymous,ﬂ the hufngton post, august 21, 2013, available at http://www.hufngtonpost.com/2013/08/21/anonymousarrestsfbin3780980.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy5 if the app store does whitelisting consistently and rigorously (and app stores do vary sigcannot run programs that have not been properly signed. another issue for whitelisting is who establishes any given whitelistšthe user (who 5box 4.2 the saltzerschroeder principles of secure system design and developmentsaltzer and schroeder articulate eight design principles that can guide system design and contribute to an implementation without security ˚aws:˚economy of mechanism: the design should be kept as simple and small as possible. design and implementation errors that result in unwanted access paths will not be noticed during normal use (since normal use usually does not include attempts to exercise improper access paths). as a result, techniques such as linebyline inspection of software and physical examination of hardware that implements protection mechanisms are necessary. for such techniques to be successful, a small and simple design is essential. ˚failsafe defaults: access decisions should be based on permission rather than exclusion. the default situation is lack of access, and the protection scheme identies conditions under which access is permitted. the alternative, in which mechanisms attempt to identify conditions under which access should be refused, presents the wrong psychological base for secure system design. this principle applies both to the outward appearance of the protection mechanism and to its underlying implementation. ˚complete mediation: every access to every object must be checked for authority. this principle, when systematically applied, is the primary underpinning of the protection system. it forces a systemwide view of access control, which, in addition to normal operation, includes initialization, recovery, shutdown, and maintenance. it implies that a foolproof method of identifying the source of every request must be devised. it also requires that proposals to gain performance by remembering the result of an authority check be examined skeptically. if a change in authority occurs, such remembered results must be systematically updated. ˚open design: the design should not be secret. the protection mechanisms should not depend on the ignorance of potential attackers, but rather on the possession of specic, more easily protected keys or passwords. this decoupling of protection mechanisms from protection keys permits the mechanisms to be examined by many reviewers without concern that the review may itself compromise the safeguards. in addition, any skeptical users may be allowed to convince at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 61themselves that the system they are about to use is adequate for their individual purposes. finally, it is simply not realistic to attempt to maintain secrecy for any system that receives wide distribution. ˚separation of privilege: where feasible, a protection mechanism that requires two keys to unlock it is more robust and ˚exible than one that allows access to the presenter of only a single key. the reason for this greater robustness and ˚exibility is that, once the mechanism is locked, the two keys can be physically separated, and distinct programs, organizations, or individuals can be made responsible for them. from then on, no single accident, deception, or breach of trust is sufcient to compromise the protected information. ˚least privilege: every program and every user of the system should operate using the least set of privileges necessary to complete the job. this principle reduces the number of potential interactions among privileged programs to the minimum for correct operation, so that unintentional, unwanted, or improper uses of privilege are less likely to occur. thus, if a question arises related to the possible misuse of a privilege, the number of programs that must be audited is minimized. ˚least common mechanism: the amount of mechanism common to more than one user and depended on by all users should be minimized. every shared mechanism (especially one involving shared variables) represents a potential information path between users and must be designed with great care to ensure that it does not unintentionally compromise security. further, any mechanism serving all users must be certied to the satisfaction of every user, a job presumably harder than satisfying only one or a few users. ˚psychological acceptability: it is essential that the human interface be designed for ease of use, so that users routinely and automatically apply the protection mechanisms correctly. more generally, the use of protection mechanisms should not impose burdens on users that might lead users to avoid or circumvent themšwhen possible, the use of such mechanisms should confer a benet that makes users want to use them. thus, if the protection mechanisms make the system slower or cause the user to do more workševen if that extra work is ﬁeasyﬂšthey are arguably ˚awed.source: adapted from j.h. saltzer and m.d. schroeder, ﬁthe protection of information in computer systems,ﬂ proceedings of the ieee 63(9):12781308, september 1975.(who may not be willing or able to provide the full range of applications desired by the user or may accept software too uncritically for inclusion on the whitelist). these approaches to defense are well known, and are often implemented to a certain degree in many situations. but in general, these approaches have not been adopted as fully as they could be, leaving systems more vulnerable than they would otherwise be. if the approaches at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyseveral factors account for this phenomenon:˚. in many cases, closing down access paths and introducing cybersecurity to a system™s design slows it down or makes it harder to use. restricting access privileges to users often has serious usability implications and makes it harder needs higher access privileges temporarily but on a timeurgent basis. implementing the checking, monitoring, and recovery needed for secure operation requires a lot of computation and does not come for free. user demands for backward compatibility at the applications level often call for building into new systems some of the same security vulnerabilities present in the old systems. program features that enable adversary access can be turned off, but doing so may disable functionality needed or desired by users.˚the mismatch between these approaches to defense and realworld software development environmentssuch an environment, it makes very little sense to invest up front in the approaches to defense outlined above unless such adherence is relatively ˚. with large systems in place, upgrade all parts of the system at once. this means that for practical technology environment in which the parts that have not been replaced are likely still vulnerable, and their interconnection to the parts that have been replaced may make even the new components vulnerable. 4.1.4 ensuring accountability accountability is the ability to unambiguously associate a consecation refers to a process that ensures that an asserted identity is indeed properly associated with the asserting party. access control is the technical mechanism by which certain system privileges but not others are nical means by which the activity of an intruder can be reconstructed; in many cases, the intruder leaves behind evidence that provides clues to his or her identity. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 63individual authentication and access controlfor purposes of this report, authentication usually refers to the proment agency. as applied to individuals, authentication serves two purposes:˚ensuring that only authorized parties can perform certain actions. in privileges and no others. because certain users have privileges that others ˚facilitating accountability, which is the ability to associate a consequence with a past improper action of an individual. thus, the authentication process must unambiguously identify one and only one individual who will be held accountable for improper actions. (this is the reason that credentials should not be shared among individuals.) to avoid accountability, an individual may seek to defeat an authentication process.in general, the authentication process depends on one or more of three factors: something you know, something you have, or something you are. ˚something you know, such as a password. passwords have many hardware or training. passwords can be distributed, maintained, and guessing and to theft.6 passwords are easily shared, either intentionally lost (forgotten) passwords. because people often reuse the same name and password combinations across different systems to ease the burden 6(in order of frequency) ﬁ123456,ﬂ ﬁpassword,ﬂ and ﬁ12345678.ﬂ see impact lab, ﬁthe top 50 gawker media passwords,ﬂ december 14, 2010, available at http://www.impactlab.net/2010/12/14/thetop50gawkermediapasswords/.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyon their memories, a successful password attack on a user on one site increases the likelihood that accounts of the same user on other sites can be hacked.˚something you have, such as a cell phone. if a user is locked out of his account because of a forgotten password, a password recovery system code that can be used to reset the password. although anyone can request on which the activation code is received. of course, this approach presumes that i havešin advanceštold the system my cell phone number at the time of account setup; that is the primary way that the system can ˚something you are(often called biometrics) is the automatic recognition of human individuals on the basis of behavioral and physiological characteristics. biometrics have the obvious advantage of authenticating the human, not just the presented token or password. common biometrics in use today verify ous disadvantage of biometric credentials is that they can be forged or stolen,7credential cannot be changed). other downsides to biometrics include the fact that not all people can use all systems, making a backup authentication method necessary (and consequently increasing vulnerability), and the fact that remote enrollment of a biometric measure (sending one™s purpose and is easily compromised. these factors can be combined to provide greater authentication securead by a computer. this approach would provide twofactor authenticaone to enable access.all authentication mechanisms are susceptible to compromise to varying degrees in two ways. one is technicalšuse of a gummy bear to 7metrics firms,ﬂ the register, may 16, 2002, http://www.theregister.co.uk/ 2002/05/16/at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 65ing action on behalf of someone without those privileges. organizational authenticationon the internet today, i would likely rely on the assurances of a trusted box 4.3 certificate authoritiescryptography refers to a set of techniques that can be used to scramble information so that only certain partiesšparties with the decryption keyšcan recover the original information. to scramble the original information, the sender of the information uses an encryption key.in symmetric cryptography (or equivalently, secretkey cryptography), the encryption key is the same as the decryption key; thus, message privacy depends on the key being kept secret. in asymmetric (or, equivalently, publickey) cryptographic systems, the encryption key is different from the decryption key. message privacy depends only on the decryption key being kept secret. the encryption key can even be published and disseminated widely, so that anyone can encrypt messages.certicate authorities are used to facilitate publickey cryptography systems that enable secure communications among a large number of parties who do not know each other and who have not made prior arrangements for communicating. for alice to send a secure message to bob, alice needs to know bob™s encryption key. alice looks up in a published directory bob™s encryption key (which happens to be 2375959), and then sends an encrypted message to bob. only bob can decrypt it, because only bob knows the correct decryption key. but how is alice to know that the number 2375959 does in fact belong to bobšin other words, how does alice know that the published directory is trustworthy?the answer is that a trusted certicate authority stands behind the association between a given encryption key and the party to which it belongs. certicate authorities play the role of trusted third partiesštrusted by both sender and receiver to associate and publish public keys and names of potential message recipients.certicate authorities can exist within a single organization, across multiple related organizations, or across society in general. any number of certicate authorities can coexist, and they may or may not have agreements for crosscertication, whereby if one authority certies a given person, then another authority will accept that certication within its own structure. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policygiven the role of the ca, its compromise is a dangerous event that can and some have even gone rogue on their own. the security of the internet is under stress today in part because the number of trusted but not trustworthy cas is growing. thus, cas must do what they can to ensure is compromised.check its status to see if it has been revoked. few users are so diligentšthey rely on software to perform such checks. sometimes the software fails to perform a check, leaving the user with a false sense of security. revoked and asks the user if he or she wants to proceed. faced with this question, the user often proceeds.furthermore, there is an inherent tension between authentication and privacy, because the act of authentication involves some disclosure attribute for use within an authentication system, creating transactional records, and revealing information used in authentication to others with unrelated interests all have implications for privacy and other civil liberties. stronger authentication for the internetas discussed in chapter 2, digital information is inherently anonya given party with any given piece of information. the internet is a means for transporting information from one computer to another, but today™s internet protocols do not require a validated identity to be associated with the packets that are sent.nevertheless, nearly all users of the internet obtain service through an internet service provider, and the isp usually does havešfor billing purposesšinformation about the party sending or receiving any given packet. in other words, access to the internet usually requires some kind of authentication of identity, but the architecture of the internet does not require that identity to be carried with sent packets all the way to the at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 67intended recipient. (as an important aside, an isp knows only who pays a bill for internet service, and one bill may well cover internet access for multiple users. however, the paying entity may itself have accounting systems in place to differentiate among these multiple users.)in the name of greater security, proposals have been made for a ﬁstrongly authenticatedﬂ internet as a solution to the problem of attriresponsible for a cyber incident. if cyber incidents effectuated through could be established and penalties meted out for illegal, improper, or to improve attribution capabilities.services provided at the packet level of the internet, as described in chapter 2. alternatively, strong authentication could be a service implemented at the applications level, in which case authentication would be the responsibility of individual applications developers that would then design such services as needed for the particular application in question.although the availability of a strongly authenticated internet would certainly improve the security environment over that of today, it is not a panacea. perhaps most important, users of a strongly authenticated internet would be highpriority targets themselves. once they were compromised (likely through social engineering), their credentials could then be used to gain access to the resources on the strongly authenticated internet. the intruder could then use these resources to launch further hostile operations against the true target, masking his true identity.in addition, strong authentication, especially if implemented at the packet level, raises a number of civil liberties concerns, as described in chapter 5. forensicsand science of obtaining useful evidence from an ostensibly hostile cyber event. cyber forensics are intended to provide information about what an forensics are necessary because, among other things, intruders often seek to cover their tracks.tal information carries with it no physical signature that can be associated nature on a document says something about the computer that signed the at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policydocument using a private and secret cryptographic key, it does not necessarily follow that the individual associated with that key signed the document. because the key is a long string of digits, it is almost certainly stored in machinereadable form, and the association of the individual with the signed document requires a demonstration that no one else could have true in practicešthat the owner of a wifi router has willfully allowed for information that the perpetrator of a hostile action may have tried to delete or did not know was recorded, audits of system logs for reconstructions of a perpetrator™s system accesses and activities, statistical and hisfurther review and investigation. conducted in real time, an audit could send a warning to system administrators of wrongdoing in progress.precisely what must be done in any cyber forensic investigation depends on its purpose. one purpose, of course, is to obtain evidence that may be usable in court for a criminal prosecution of the perpetrator. in this event, forensic investigation also involves maintaining a chain of custody over the evidence at every step, an aspect of the investigation that is likely to slow down the investigation. but businesses may need to conduct a forensic investigation to detect employee wrongdoing or to protect intellectual property. for this purpose, the evidentiary requirements of forensic investigation may be less stringent and the investigation shorter, a fact that might allow statistical likelihood, indirect evidence, and hearsay to fall within the scope of nonevidentiary forensics; the instrumentation of embedded systems to handling massive data volume and network monitoring, and they require a similar foundation to deal relevant to civil proceedings, both because the standards of proof there are lower and because the use of digital forensics in business activities may also be the subject of litigation.also, the forensic investigator must proceed differently in an afterthefact investigation than in a realtime investigation. law enforcement authorities are often oriented toward afterthefact forensics, which help vention or mitigation of damage is the goal of law enforcement authorities at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 69or business operators, realtime or nearrealtime forensics may be more valuable.when cyber forensics are performed on it systems and networks within the victim™s legitimate span of control, the legal and policy issues are few. such issues become much more complicated if it is necessary to perform cyber forensics on it systems and networks outside the victim™s hostile operation from the computer belonging to an innocent third party that has no relationship to either adversary or victim, conducting forensics on that computer without the third party™s knowledge or permission raises a number of legal and policy problems.4.1.5 building a capacity for containment, recovery, and resilienceacknowledging that defenses are likely to be breached, one can also seek to contain the damage that a breach might cause and/or to recover from the damage that was caused.containment containment refers to the process of limiting the effects of a hostile ing environment designed to be disposablešcorruption or compromise in this environment does not matter much to the user, and the intruder is unlikely to gain much in the way of additional resources or privileges. and the ﬁrealﬂ computing environment in which serious business can be for safe interaction between the buffer and the ﬁrealﬂ environment, and in an imperfectly designed disposable environment, unsafe actions can provide some level of protection against the dangers of running untrusted programs.puting environments. in agriculture, monocultures are known to be of millions of identically programmed computers is systematically vulnerthose computers are attached to the internetša hostile operation that is successful against one of these computers will be successful against all of them, and malware can propagate rapidly in such an environment. if these computers are programmed differently (while still providing the at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policysame functionality to the user), the techniques used in a hostile operation against a particular programming base may well be unsuccessful against a different code base, and thus not all of the computers in the population will be vulnerable to those techniques. however, it is generally more environment, and interoperability among the systems in the population recovery in general, recoveryoriented approaches accomplish repair by restoring a system to its state at an earlier point in time. if that point in time is too recent, then the restoration will include the damage to the system caused by the attack. if that point in time is too far back, an unacceptable a recoveryoriented approach is not particularly useful in any environment in which the attack causes effects on physical systemsšif an puter systems attacked will restore that generator to working order. (but the operator still needs to restore the computer so that the replacement generator won™t be similarly damaged.)in large systems or services, reverting to a known system state before the security breach may well be infeasible. under such circumstances, a more practical goal is to restore normal system capacity/functionality with as little loss of operating data as possible.resilience a resilient system is one whose performance degrades gradually rather than catastrophically when its other defensive mechanisms are form some of its intended functions, although perhaps more slowly or for fewer people or with fewer applications.redundancy is one way to provide a measure of resilience. for account for the loss of intermediate nodesšthat is, to provide redundant a second approach to achieving resilience is to design a system or network without a single point of failurešthat is, it should be impossible to cause the system or network to cease functioning entirely by crippling or disabling any one component of the system. unfortunately, discoverat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 71redundancy for certain systems is simply to replicate the system and run 4.1.6 employing active defensethe limitations of the measures described above to protect important information technology assets and the information they contain are well known. many measures (e.g., repair of system vulnerabilities) can be is, systems and networks that it has the legal right to access, monitor, and modify. these also may reduce important functionality in the systems to use. they are also reactivešthey are invoked or become operational (or is occurring).option for responding to the cyber threat, the department of defense issued in 2011 its department of defense strategy for operating in cyberspace, which states that the united states will employ ﬁan active cyber defense 8the dod does not describe active cyber defense in any detail, but the formulation above for ﬁactive cyber defenseﬂ could, if read broadly, noncooperative measure affecting or harming an attacker™s it systems and networks, any proactive measure, or any retaliatory measure, as long as such action was taken for the purpose of defending dod systems or networks from that attacker.the sections below describe some of the components that a strategy of active cyber defense might logically entail.cyber deception for defensive purposes8 see u.s. department of defense, department of defense strategy for operating in cyberspaceat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policylooks like the real thing may be misled into taking action harmful to his own interests, and at the very least has been forced to waste time, effort, and resources in obtaining useless information.the term ﬁhoneypotﬂ in computer security jargon refers to a machine, a virtual machine, or other network resource that is intended to act as a decoy or diversion for wouldbe intruders. honeypots intentionally conproduction systems. indeed, in most cases, systems administrators want intruders to succeed in compromising or breaching the security of honeythe techniques and methods used by the intruder. this process allows administrators to be better prepared for hostile operations against their real production systems. honeypots are very useful for gathering information about new types of operation, new techniques, and information on how things like worms or malicious code propagate through systems, and they are used as much by security researchers as by network security administrators.when the effects of a honeypot are limited in scope to the victim™s systems and networks, the legal and policy issues are relatively limited. but if they have effects on the intruder™s systems, both the legal and the policy its own offensive operations on b™s systems in certain ways.conﬂ that sends an email to a to report on the environment in which it b™s systems in the future. all of these actions raise legal and policy issues regarding their propriety.disruptiondisruption is intended to reduce the damage being caused by an adversarial cyber operation in progress, usually by affecting the operation of the computer systems being used to conduct the operation.abling the computers that control a botnet. of course, this approach preis used, such knowledge is unlikely. but over time, patterns of behavior might suggest the identity of those computers and an access path to them. thus, disruption would be easier to accomplish after repeated attacks.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 73under most circumstances, disabling the computers controlling an adversarial operation runs a risk of violating domestic u.s. law such as the computer fraud and abuse act. however, armed with court orders, information technology vendors and law enforcement authorities have worked together in a number of instances to disrupt the operation of those botnets.9 in addition, they provided information about the botnets to computer emergency response teams (certs) located abroad, requesting that they target related commandandcontrol infrastructure. at the same time, the fbi provided related information to its overseas law enforcement counterparts.preemptionpreemptionšsometimes also known as anticipatory selfdefensešis conduct a hostile cyber action against a victim. the idea of preemption national security.10preemption as a defensive strategy is a controversial subject, and the tial.11preemption. when the number of possible cyber adversaries is almost limitless, how would a country know who was about to launch such an and other intelligence sources would seem to be a quite daunting task 96, 2013, available at http://www.informationweek.com/attacks/microsoftfbitrumpet10 mike mcconnell, ﬁhow to win the cyber war we™re losing,ﬂ washington post, february 28, 2010, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/ 2010/02/25/ar2010022502493.html.11 herbert lin, ﬁa virtual necessity: some modest steps toward greater cybersecurity,ﬂ bulletin of the atomic scientists, september 1, 2012, available at http://www.thebulletin.org/2012/september/virtualnecessitysomemodeststepstowardgreatercybersecurity.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyand yet necessary in an environment in which threats can originate from nearly anywhere.the adversary take nearly all of the measures and make all of the preparations needed to carry out that action. the potential victim considering preemption must thus be able to target the adversary™s cyber assets that would be used to launch a hostile operation. but the assets needed to (or made entirely invisible)šreducing the likelihood that a serious damagelimiting preemption could be conducted.box 4.4 a brief case studyš securing the internet against routing attacksthe task of securing the routing protocols of the internet makes a good case study of the nontechnical complexities that can emerge in what might have been thought of as a purely technical problem.as noted in chapter 2, the internet is a network of networks. each network acts as an autonomous system under a common administration and with common routing policies. bgp is the internet protocol used to characterize every network to each other, and in particular to every network operated by an internet service provider (isp).in general, the characterization is provided by the isp responsible for the network, and in part the characterization species how that isp would route trafc to a given destination. a problem arises if and when a malicious isp in some part of the internet falsely asserts that it is the right path to a given destination (i.e., it asserts that it would forward trafc to a destination but in fact would not). trafc sent to that destination can be discarded, causing that destination to appear to be off the net. further, the malicious isp might be able to mimic the expected behavior of the correct destination, fooling unsuspecting users into thinking that their trafc has been delivered properly and thus causing further damage.the technical proposal to mitigate this problem was to have the owner of each region of internet addresses digitally sign an assertion to the effect that it is the rightful owner (which would be done using cryptographic mechanisms), and then delegate this assertion to the isp that actually provides access to the addresses, which in turn would validate it by a further signature, and so on as the assertion crossed the internet. a suspicious isp trying to decide if a routing assertion is valid could check this series of signed assertions to validate it.this scheme has a bit of overhead, which is one objection, but it also has another problemšhow can a suspicious isp know that the signed assertion is valid? at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 75it has been signed using some cryptographic key, but the suspicious isp must know who owns that key. to this end, it is necessary to have a global key distribution and validation scheme, which is called a publickey infrastructure, or pki. the original proposal was that there would be a ﬁroot of trust,ﬂ an actor that everyone trusted, who would sign a set of assertions about the identities of lowerlevel entities, and so on until there was a chain of correctnessconrming assertions that linked the assertions of each owner of an address block back to this root of trust.this idea proved unacceptable for the reason, perhaps obvious to nontechnical people, that there is no actor that everyoneševery nation, every corporation, and so onšis willing to trust. if there were such an actor, and if it were to suddenly refuse to validate the identity of some lowerlevel actor, that lowerlevel actor would be essentially removed from the internet. the alternative approach was to have many roots of trustšperhaps each country would be the root of trust for actors within its borders. but this approach, too, is hard to make work in practicešfor example, what if a malicious country signs some assertion that an isp within its border is the best means to reach some range of addresses? how can someone know that this particular root of trust did not in fact have the authority to make assertions about this part of the address space? somehow one must crosslink the various roots of trust, and the resulting complexity may be too hard to manage.schemes that have been proposed to secure the global routing mechanisms of the internet differ with respect to the overhead, the range of threats to which they are resistant, and so on. but the major problem that all these schemes come up against is the nontechnical problem of building a scheme that can successfully stabilize a global system built out of regions that simply do not trust each other. and of course routing is only part of making a secure and resilient internet. an isp that is malicious can make correct routing assertions and then just drop or otherwise disrupt the packets as they are forwarded. the resolution of these sorts of dilemmas seems to depend on an understanding of how to manage trust, not on technical mechanisms for signing identity assertions. 4.2 nontechnological dimensions of cybersecurityan important lesson that is often lost amidst discussions of cybersecurity is that cybersecurity is not only about technology to make us more secure in cyberspace. indeed, technology is only one aspect of such security, and is arguably not even the most important aspect of security. section discusses a number of the most important nontechnological factors that affect cybersecurity.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy4.2.1 economics12many problems of cybersecurity can be understood better from an tory frameworks, and tragedy of the commons. taken together, economic tions, cybersecurity is and will be a hard problem to address.many actors make decisions that affect cybersecurity: technology ment, the intelligence community, and governments (both as technology users and as guardians of the larger social good). each of these actors gets plenty of blame for being the ﬁproblemﬂ: if technology vendors would just properly engineer their products, if end users would just use the technology available to them and learn and practice safe behavior, if companies would just invest more in cybersecurity or take it more seriously, if law enforcement would just pursue the bad guys more aggressively, if policy makers would just do a better job of regulation or legislation, and so on.there is some truth to such assertions, and yet it is important to understand the incentives for these actors to behave as they do. for ity, time, and cost in design and testing while being hard to value or even assess by customers.als do sometimes (perhaps even often) take cybersecurity into account. but these parties have strong incentives to take only those cybersecurity measures that are valuable for addressing their own cybersecurity needs, much of the payoff from security investments may be captured by society promise intermediary m™s computer facilities in order to attack v. this convoluted routing is done so that v will have a harder time tracing the 12 for an overview of the economic issues underlying cybersecurity, see tyler moore, ﬁintroducing the economics of cybersecurity: principles and policy options,ﬂ in national research council, proceedings of a workshop on deterring cyberattacks: informing strategies and developing options for u.s. policy, pp. 324, the national academies press, washington d.c., 2010. an older but still very useful paper is ross anderson, ﬁwhy information security is hardšan economic perspective,ﬂ proceedings of the 17th annual computer security applications conference, ieee computer society, new orleans, la., 2001, pp. 358365.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 77attack back to a. however, the compromise on m™s computers will usually not damage them very much, and indeed m may not even notice that its computers have been compromised. investments made by m to have economic roots. is the national cybersecurity posture resulting from the investment of this question yields ﬁnoﬂ for an answeršwhereas many in the private sector say ﬁyes.ﬂ this disagreement is at the heart of many disputes about what the nation can and should do about cybersecurity policy.4.2.2 psychologya wide variety of psychological factors and issues are relevant to cybersecurity.social engineeringby breaking in or using technical hacking techniques.ﬂ13engineer might try to trick an employee into divulging his password by posing as an it support person.social engineering is possible because the human beings who install, through deception and trickery. spies working for an intruder may be unknowingly hired by the victim, and more importantly and commonly, users can be deceived into actions that compromise security. no malware operates by informing a human user that ﬁrunning this program or openhuman into running a program with that effect.many instances involving the compromise of users or operators initiative of the intruder (often posing as someone known to the victim), 13http://www.csoonline.com/article/514063/socialengineeringthebasics.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyof the latter include links to appealing web pages and or downloadable another channel for social engineering is the service providers on also obtain cybersecurity services from third parties, such as a security software vendor that might be bribed or otherwise persuaded to ignore a particular virus. service providers are potential security vulnerabilities, and thus might well be intermediate targets in an offensive operation directed at the true (ultimate) target. decision making under uncertaintydecision making under conditions of high uncertainty will almost conditions of high uncertainty, crisis decisionmaking processes are often 14sionmaking process, stein points to uncertainty about realities on the suboptimal outcomes because the actors involved do not have or understand all of the relevant information about the situation. uncertainties assessment), the intentions of the various actors (e.g., defensive actions by a are seen as provocative by b, inadvertent actions by a are seen as deliberate by b), the bureaucratic interests pushing decision makers in certain directions (e.g., cyber warriors pushing for operational use of cyber tools), ing, stein points out that because the informationprocessing capability of people is limited, they are forced in confusing situations to use a variety uncertainty, handle information, make inferences, and generate threat perceptions.ﬂ1514the oxford handbook of political psychology15 stein, ﬁthreat perception in international relations,ﬂ 2013.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 79˚interpret ambiguous information in terms of what is most easily available in their cognitive repertoire (availability). thus, if a cyber disaster (real or hypothetical) is easily recalled, ambiguous information about cyber events will seem to point to a cyber disaster.˚estimates of frequency (representativeness). thus, if the available information on a cyber event seems to point to its being a hostile action taken by a nationstate, it will be interpreted that way even if that nationstate has taken few such actions in the past.˚estimate magnitude or degree by comparing it with an ﬁavailableﬂ initial value (often an inaccurate one) as a reference point and making a comparison (anchoring).˚attribute the behavior of adversaries in terms of their disposition and animus but attribute their own behavior to situational factors. that is, ﬁtheyﬂ take certain actions because they want to challenge us, but ﬁweﬂ take the same actions because circumstances demanded that we do so.education for security awareness and behaviorusers are a key component of any information technology system in use, and inappropriate or unsafe user behavior on such a system can easily lead to reduced security. security education has two essential components: security awareness and securityresponsible behavior.˚security awareness refers to user consciousness of the reality and motivates users to adopt safeguards that reduce the likelihood of security compromises and/or the effect of such compromises when they do occur.˚securityresponsible behavior refers to what users should and should not do from a security standpoint once they are motivated to take action.to promote security awareness, various reports have sought to make the public aware of the importance of cybersecurity. in general, these reports point to the sophistication of the cybersecurity threat, the scale of the costs to society as a whole resulting from threats to cybersecurity, and the urgency of ﬁdoing somethingﬂ about the threat. but it is also likely that such reports do not motivate individual users to take cybersecurity that could entail substantial personal costs to them.as for securityresponsible behavior, most children do receive some at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policywhen confronted with suspicious situations, and so on. but a comparable effort to educate children about some of the basic elements of cybersecuto illustrate some of what might be included in education for securityresponsible behavior, a course taught at the university of washington in 2006, intended to provide a broad education in the fundamentals of information technology for lay people, set forth the following objectives for its unit on cybersecurity:16˚learn to create strong passwords. ˚˚use windows update to keep your system up to date. ˚update mcafee virusscan so that you can detect viruses. ˚use windows defender to locate and remove spyware.convenience and ease of useals to manage effectively or to use conveniently. security is hard for users, administrators, and developers to understand, making it all too easy to moreover, security and privacy technologies originally were developed ity for security and privacy protections and in which the users tended to be sophisticated. today, the user base is much wideršincluding the householdsšbut the basic models for security and privacy are essentially unchanged.security features can be clumsy and awkward to use and can presmeasures are all too often disabled or bypassed by the users they are intended to protect. because the intent of security is to make a system balance between the two.two systems because it is much easier than rekeying the data by hand. 16 see university of washington, ﬁlab 11šcomputer security basics,ﬂ winter 2006, available at http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/courses/100/06wi/labs/lab11/lab11.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 81but establishing an electronic link between the systems may add an access path that is useful to an intruder. taking into account the needs of usable security might call for establishing the link but protecting it or tearing down the link after the data has been transferred.in other cases, security techniques do not transfer well from one techpassword on a mobile device than on a keyboard, and yet many mobile applications for a web service require users to use the same password for access as they do for the desktop computer equivalent.well as technological and psychological ones. researchers have found that the development of usable security requires deep insight into the humaninteraction dimensions of the application for which security is being developed and of the alignment of technical protocols for security 4.2.3 lawu.s. domestic law, international law, and foreign domestic law affect cybersecurity in a number of ways.domestic laweral statutes addressing various aspects of cybersecurity either directly or indirectly.17 (the acts discussed below are listed with the date of original passage, and ﬁas amendedﬂ should be understood with each act.)actions. these statutes include the computer fraud and abuse act of 1986 (prohibits various intrusions on federal computer systems or on computer systems used by banks or in interstate and foreign commerce); the electronic communications privacy act of 1986 (ecpa; prohibits 1996 (outlaws theft of trade secret information, including electronically stored information, if ﬁreasonable measuresﬂ have been taken to keep it secret); the federal wiretap act of 1968 as amended (often known as title iii; prohibits realtime surveillance of electronic communications of 1978 (fisa; establishes a framework for the use of ﬁelectronic surveil17 eric a. fischer, federal laws relating to cybersecurity: overview and discussion of proposed revisionswww.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/r42114.pdf.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policylanceﬂ conducted to obtain information about a foreign power or foreign territory that relates to the national defense, the security, or the conduct of the foreign affairs of the united states, also known as ﬁforeign intelligence informationﬂ). as this report is being written, the scope and the nature of precisely how federal agencies have complied with various portions of fisa are under investigation.event that important information is compromised. if such information is of the individuals with whom such information is associated. federal securities law (the securities act of 1933 and the securities exchange act and accurate information about risks and events that is important to an investment decision. under this authority, the securities and exchange commission™s division of corporation finance in 2011 provided volunrelating to cybersecurity risks and cyber incidents.18several federal statutes assign responsibility within the federal government for various aspects of cybersecurity, including the computer security act of 1987 (national institute of standards and technology [nist], responsible for developing security standards for nonnationalsecurity federal computer systems); the paperwork reduction act of 1995 cybersecurity policies); the clingercohen act of 1996 (agency heads policies and procedures); the homeland security act of 2002 (hsa; department of homeland security [dhs], responsible for cybersecurity for homeland security and critical infrastructure); the cyber security research and development act of 2002 (nsf and nist, research responcybersecurity responsibilities, established a central federal incident center, promulgating federal cybersecurity standards).finally, national security law may affect how the united states may itself use cyber operations in an offensive capacity for damaging adversary information technology systems or the information therein. for example, the war powers act of 1973 restricts presidential authority to use the u.s. armed forces in potential or actual hostilities without congressio18 u.s. securities and exchange commission, division of corporation finance, ﬁcf disclosure guidance: topic no. 2šcybersecurity,ﬂ october 13, 2011, available at http://at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 83powers act is poorly suited to u.s. military forces that might engage in within which is resident a great deal of cybersecurity knowledgešcan cooperate with civil agencies on matters related to cybersecurity. international lawcyber operations that cross international boundaries. however, one interrelated actions or activities, to improve national capabilities for investigating such crimes, and to increase cooperation on investigations.19 that convention also obliges ratifying states to create laws allowing law in wiretapping, and obtain realtime and stored communications data, whether or not the crime under investigation is a cybercrime.international law does potentially touch on hostile cyber operations that cross international boundaries when a hostile cyber operation is the instrumentality through which some regulated action is achieved. a parcharter and the geneva and hague conventions.the un charter is the body of treaty law that governs when a nation how the un charter should be interpreted with respect to cyberattacks result from three fundamental facts: ˚the un charter was written in 1945, long before the notion of cyberattacks was even imagined. thus, the framers of the charter could ˚be inferred from historical precedent and practice, and there are no such 19 drafted by the council of europe in strasbourg, france, the convention is available on the web site of the council of europe at http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/185.htm.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy˚the charter is in some ways internally inconsistent. it bans certain acts (uses of force) that could damage persons or property, but allows other acts (economic sanctions) that could damage persons or property. offensive cyber operations may well magnify such inconsistencies.the geneva and hague conventions regulate how a nation engaged to be legally protected entities, such as hospitals); the principle of proportionality (the military advantage gained by a military operation must not and the principle of distinction (military operations may be conducted only against ﬁmilitary objectivesﬂ and not against civilian targets). but as with the un charter, the geneva conventions are silent on cyberattack as one nation to acquire intelligence information from another. espionage is an illegal activity under the domestic laws of virtually all nations, but not under international law. there are no limits in international law on the methods of collecting information, what kinds of information can be collected, how much information can be collected, or the purposes for which collected information may be used.as noted above, international law is also articulated through customary international lawšthat is, the general and consistent practices of in the form of treaties but rather is found in international case law. here too, guidance for what counts as proper behavior in cyberspace is lacking. universal adherence to norms of behavior in cyberspace could help to provide nations with information about the intentions and capabilities such norms today.foreign domestic lawforeign nations are governed by their own domestic laws that relate activities in cyberspace, the united states and that other nation are more likely to be able to work together to combat hostile cyber operations that the production of child pornography and spam.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 85but when security or privacyrelated laws of different nations are inconsistent, foreign law often has an impact on the ability of the united states to trace the origin of hostile cyber operations against the united states or to take action against perpetrators under another nation™s jurisdiction. legal dissimilarities have in the past impeded both investigation and prosecution of hostile cyber operations that have crossed international boundaries. 4.2.4 organizational purviewto a hostile operation in cyberspace by a nonstate actor is often charrequires a law enforcement response or a national security response. this a national security response paradigm, whereas a law enforcement paradigm might call for strengthened passive defense measures to mitigate the immediate threat and other activities to identify and prosecute the perpetrators.to be clear, and many factors relevant to a decision will not be known. for mously, and clandestinely, knowledge about the scope and character of a cyberattack will be hard to obtain quickly. attributing the incident to a period of time. other nontechnical factors may also play into the assessment of a cyber incident, such as the state of political relations with other nations that are capable of launching the cyber operations involved in the incident.once the possibility of a cyberattack is made known to national authorities, information must be gathered to determine perpetrator and purpose, and must be gathered using the available legal authorities. some entity within the federal government integrates the relevant information, and then it or another higher entity (e.g., the national security council) a law enforcement or national security response is called for.how might some of the factors described above be taken into account ties are likely to predominate in the decisionmaking calculus if the scale of the attack is small, if the assets targeted are not important military at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyassets or elements of critical infrastructure, or if the attack has not created as a use of force or an armed attack on the united states had it been carried out with kinetic means would almost certainly be regarded as a nation are the geographic origin of the attack and the nature of the party responsible for the attack (e.g., national government, terrorist group).u.s. law has traditionally drawn distinctions between authorities granted to law enforcement (title 18 of the u.s. code), the department of defense (title 10 of the u.s. code), and the intelligence community (title 50 of the u.s. code), but in an era of international terrorist threats, these distinctions are not as clear in practice as when threats to the united states emanated primarily from other nations. that is, certain threats to the united states implicate both law enforcement and national security equities and call for a coordinated response by all relevant government agencies.when critical infrastructure is involved, the entity responsible for taken has evolved over time. today, the national cybersecurity and comthe u.s. government that fuses information on the above factors and integrates the intelligence, national security, law enforcement, and private20whatever the mechanisms for aggregating and integrating information related to a cyber incident, the function served is an essential onešand if the relationships, the communications pathways, the protocols for well in advance, responses to a large unanticipated cyber incident will be uncoordinated and delayed.4.2.5 deterrence deterrence relies on the idea that inducing a wouldbe intruder to refrain from acting in a hostile manner is as good as successfully defending against or recovering from a hostile cyber operation. deterrence through the threat of retaliation is based on imposing negative consequences on adversaries for attempting a hostile operation.imposing a penalty on an intruder serves two functions. it serves 20 see u.s. department of homeland security, ﬁabout the national cybersecurity and communications integration center,ﬂ available at http://www.dhs.gov/aboutnationalcybersecuritycommunicationsintegrationcenter.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 87the goal of justicešan intruder should not be able to cause damage with impunity, and the penalty is a form of punishment for the intruder™s misdeeds. in addition, it sets the precedent that misdeeds can and will result in a penalty for the intruder, and it seeks to instill in future wouldbe intruders the fear that he or she will suffer from any misdeeds they might commit, and thus to deter such action, thereby discouraging further misdeeds.what the nature of the penalty should be and who should impose the penalty are key questions in this regard. (note that a penalty need not attribution of hostile action to a responsible party is also a threshold issue, because imposing penalties on parties not in fact responsible for a hostile for deterrence to be effective, the penalty must be one that affects the adversary™s decisionmaking process and changes the adversary™s to or destruction of the information technology assets used by the perpetrator to conduct a hostile cyber operation; loss of or damage to other assets that are valuable to the perpetrator; or other actions that might damage the perpetrator™s interests.but the appropriate choice of penalty is not separate from the party tile operation might undertake destructive actions against a perpetrator raises the spectre of vigilantism and easily leads to questions of accountability and/or disproportionate response.law enforcement authorities and the judicial system rely on federal process in which a misdeed is investigated, perpetrators are prosecuted, and if found guilty are subject to penalties imposed by law. as noted in section 4.2.3, a number of laws impose penalties for the willful conduct such laws will deter such violations.national security, the penalty can take the form of diplomacy such as demarches and breaks in diplomatic relations, economic actions such as trade sanctions, international law enforcement such as actions taken in international courts, nonkinetic military operations such as deploying forces as visible signs of commitment and resolve, military operations such as the use of cruise missiles against valuable adversary assets, or cyber operations launched in response.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policydeterrence was and is a central construct in contemplating the use of nuclear weapons and in nuclear strategyšbecause effective defenses retaliation to persuade an adversary to refrain from using nuclear weapons is regarded by many as the most plausible and effective alternative to ineffective or useless defenses. indeed, deterrence of nuclear threats in the cold war established the paradigm in which the conditions for successful deterrence are largely met.it is an entirely open question whether cyber deterrence is a viable strategy. although nuclear weapons and cyber weapons share one key characteristic (the superiority of offense over defense), they differ in many it is not plausible to assume the same for a largescale cyberattack.4.3 assessing cybersecurity have strong intuitions that some systems are more secure than others, but assessing a system™s cybersecurity posture turns out to be a remarkably thorny problem. from a technical standpoint, assessing the nature and ˚precisely specify what it means for the system to operate securely. indeed, many vulnerabilities in systems can be traced to misunderstandings or a lack of clarity about what a system should do under a particular set of circumstances (such as the use of penetration techniques or attack tools that the defender has never seen before).˚a system that contains functionality that should not be present tionality may entail doing something harmful. discovering that a system viewing system security from an operational perspective rather than just a technical one shows that security is a holistic, emergent, multimany factors other than technology affect the security of a system, includof the people using the system, the access control policy in place, the boundaries of the system (e.g., are users allowed to connect their own at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 89threat against the system.accordingly, a discussion cast simply in terms of whether a system is or is not secure is almost certainly misleading. assessing the security what does the discussion above imply for the development of cybersecurity metricsšmeasurable quantities whose value provides informametrics are intended to help individuals and companies make rational quantitative decisions about whether or not they have ﬁdone enoughﬂ with respect to cybersecurity. these parties would be able to quantify be able to determine if system a is more secure than system b. good cybersecurity metrics would also support a more robust insurance market in cybersecurity founded on sound actuarial principles and knowledge.the holy grail for cybersecurity analysts is an overall cybersecurity metric that is applicable to all systems and in all operating environments. the discussion above, not to mention several decades™ worth of be achieved for the foreseeable future. but other metrics may still be useful under some circumstances.it is important to distinguish between input metrics (metrics for what system users or designers do to the system), output metrics (metrics for what the system produces), and outcome metrics (metrics for what users or designers are trying to achievešthe ﬁwhyﬂ for the output metrics).21 ˚ment that are believed to be associated with desirable cybersecurity outrity are not validated in practice, and/or are established intuitively.˚eters that are believed to be associated with desirable cybersecurity outof cybersecurity incidents in a given year. output metrics can often be assessed through the use of a red team. sometimes known as ﬁwhitehatﬂ 21 see republic of south africa, ﬁkey performance information concepts,ﬂ chapter 3 in framework for managing programme performance information, national treasury, pretoria, framework/part3.pdf.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyor ﬁethicalﬂ hackers, a red team attempts to penetrate a system™s security under operational conditions with the blessing of senior management, and then reports to senior management on its efforts and what it has learned about the system™s security weaknesses. red teaming is often the ˚number of cybersecurity incidents and thereby reduce the annual losses curity budget unwisely, the presumed relationship between budget and number of incidents may well not hold.also, the correlation between improvement in a cybersecurity input metric and better cybersecurity outcomes may well be disrupted by an ever, against adversaries that do not adaptšand thus the resulting cybersecurity posture against the entire universe of threats may in fact be improved.4.4 on the need for researchwithin each of the approaches for improving cybersecurity described lems. a good solution to a cybersecurity problem is one that is effective, is includes developing new knowledge on how to improve the prospects for deployment and use of known solutions to given problems.second, even assuming that everything known today about improving cybersecurity was immediately put into practice, the resulting cybersecurity posturešalthough it would be stronger and more resilient than it is nowšwould still be inadequate against today™s highend threat, let alone tomorrow™s. closing this gapša gap of knowledgešwill require substantial research as well.several principles, described in the 2007 nrc report toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, should shape the cybersecurity research agenda:at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing cybersecurity 91˚conduct cybersecurity research as though its application will be importanting how cybersecurity technologies and practice can be applied in realfactors as well as technological ones.˚hedge against uncertainty in the nature and severity of the future cybersecurity threat. a balance in the research portfolio between research addressing lowend and highend threats is necessary. operationally, it means that the r&d agenda in cybersecurity should be both broader and deeper than might be required if only lowend threats were at issue. (because of the long lead time for largescale deployments of any measure, part of the research agenda must include research directed at reducing those long lead times.)˚ensure programmatic continuity. a sound research program should also support a substantial effort in research areas with a long time horiintermediate milestones, although such milestones should be treated as midcourse corrections rather than ﬁgo/nogoﬂ decisions that demoralshould engage both academic and industry actors, and it can involve collaboration early and often with technologytransition stakeholders, even in the basic science stages.˚respect the need for breadth in the research agenda. cybersecurity to imagine that one or even a few promising approaches will prevent or even substantially mitigate cybersecurity risks in the future, and cybersecurity research must be conducted across a broad front. in addition, because qualitatively new attacks can appear with little warning, a broad develop countermeasures against these new attacks when they appear. priorities are still important, but they should be determined by those in a position to respond most quickly to the changing environmentšnamely, the research constituencies that provide peer review and the program managers of the various researchsupporting agencies. notions of breadth and diversity in the cybersecurity research agenda should themselves be interpreted broadly as well, and might well be integrated into other research programs such as software and systems engineering, operating systems, programming languages, networks, web applications, and so on. ˚disseminate new knowledge and artifacts (e.g., software and hardware prototypes) to the research community. dissemination of research results beyond one™s own laboratory is necessary if those results are to have a at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policywide impactša point that argues for cybersecurity research to be conbe shared as widely as possible includes threat and incident information that can help guide future research.as for the impact of research on the nation™s cybersecurity posture, tial difference at all. indeed, many factors must be aligned if research is regard security as a product attribute that is coequal with performance and cost; it researchers must be willing to value cybersecurity research as much as they value research into highperformance or costeffective computing; and it purchasers must be willing to incur presentday costs at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.935tensions between cybersecurity and other public policy concernsas noted in chapter 1, progress in public policy to improve the nation™s cybersecurity posture has not been as rapid as might have been measures taken to improve cybersecurity potentially have negative effects cant tensions.5.1 economicseconomics and cybersecurity are intimately intertwined in the public policy debate in two waysšthe scale of economic losses due to adversary and nature of vendor and enduser investments in cybersecurity. (to date, the economic losses due to cyberattack are negligible by comparison.)5.1.1 economic approaches to enhancing cybersecurity as implied in chapter 4, economic approaches to promote cybersecurity should identify actions that lower barriers and eliminate disincencybersecurity or actions that cause harm in cyberspace. some of the posat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policynational consensus on which of these, if any, should be implemented as policy, and legislation has not been passed on any of these approaches. ˚ š one type of information is more and better information about threats and vulnerabilities, which could enable individual organivictim to a given threat. š a second type of information is information about an individual appropriate bestpractice cybersecurity measures for those sectors. another party, such as a government regulatory agency in the case commission for publicly held companies, would audit the adequacy results of such audits.1 publicity about such results would in prinpostures.˚insurance. the insurance industry may have a role in incentivlosses incurred because of cybercrime will have lower premiums if they have stronger cybersecurity postures, and thus market forces will help to drive improvements in cybersecurity. a variety of reasons stand in the way of establishing a viable cyberinsurance market: the unavailability of actuarial data to set premiums appropriately; the highly correlated nature of losses from outbreaks (e.g., from viruses) in a largely homogethe intangible nature of losses and assets, and unclear legal grounds.˚. this approach is based on three petitive position in the marketplace. relevant standardssetting bodies include the national institute of standards and technology for the u.s. 1 president™s council of advisors on science and technology, immediate opportunities for strengthening the nation™s cybersecurity, november 2013, available at http://www.white at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 95the private sector.˚nonregulatory publicsector mechanisms. this approach uses some of the tools below to promote greater attention to and action on cybersecurity. š procurement regulations can be used to insist that information technology systems delivered to government are more secure. with such systems thus available, vendors might be able to offer them to other customers as well. š the federal government can choose to do business only with  š the federal government itself could improve its own cybersecuinvestment in cybersecurity. š public recognition of adherence to high cybersecurity stan š voluntary standards setting by government can specify cyberse˚liability. this approach presumes that vendors and/or system security breaches will make greater efforts than they do today to reduce the likelihood of such breaches. opponents argue that the threat of liabilsecrets, and reduce the competitiveness of products subject to such forces. moreover, they argue that vendors and operators should not be held responsible for cybersecurity incidents that can result from factors that are not under their control.˚direct regulation. regulation would be based on enforceable mandates for various cybersecurity measures. this is the ultimate form of changing the business casesšcomply or face a penalty. direct regulation kinds of standards relating to cybersecurity ﬁbest practicesﬂ regarding the services they provide to consumers or their own internal practices. opponents of direct regulation argue that several factors would make 2 for used to address actual threats. costs of implementation would be highly variable and dependent on a number of factors beyond the control of the 2 security: implications for regulatory policy,ﬂ journal of regulatory economics 31(1):3755, at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyregulated party. risks vary greatly from system to system. there is wide measures. tant in cybersecurity, the present administration is promulgating its cybersecurity framework. under development as this report is being written, the framework is a set of core practices to develop capabilities to manage cybersecurity.3 to encourage critical infrastructure companies 4˚special consideration in the awards process for federal critical infrastructure grants; ˚priority in receiving certain government services, such as technical assistance in nonemergency situations;˚reduced tort liability, limited indemnity, higher burdens of proof to establish liability, or the creation of a federal legal privilege that preempts state disclosure requirements; and ˚public recognition for adopters of the framework.5.1.2 economic impact of compromises in cybersecurity regarding the negative economic impact of compromises in cybersecurity, numbers as high as $1 trillion annually have been heard in the public debate, and in 2012, the commander of u.s. cyber command asserted that the loss of industrial information and intellectual property through cyber espionage constitutes the ﬁgreatest transfer of wealth in history.ﬂ5 but in point of fact, the uncertainty in the actual magnitude is quite large, and other analysts speculate that the actual numbersšthough known estimates.3 rity framework,ﬂ available at http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/.4 michael daniel, ﬁincentives to support the adoption of the cybersecurity framework,ﬂ august 6, 2013, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/08/06/incentivessupportadoptioncybersecurityframework. 5posts/2012/07/09/nsachiefcybercrimeconstitutesthegreatest transferofwealthinsial and are discussed in section 3.6 on threat assessment.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 97the negative economic impact of adversarial cyber operations. however, intellectual property is unlike physical property in some very important ways, not the least of which is the fact that ﬁstolenﬂ intellectual property is still availablecontrol over it. ﬁstolenﬂ intellectual property is really copied intellectual the value of intellectual property what it cost to produce that intellectual is no assurance that a taker of intellectual property will be able to use it properly or effectively.uncertainties also apply to valuing the loss of sensitive business information (such as negotiating strategies and company inside information). company b, a competitor, knows it, company b may be able to undercut company a and unfairly win a contract. insider information about company c may lead to stock market manipulation. the loss of a contract is easy to value, but given that many factors usually affect the outcomes of such competitions, how could one tie a competitive loss to the loss of vice disruptions often delay service but do not deny it, and a customer who visits a web site that is inaccessible today may well visit it tomorrow when it is accessible. should the opportunity cost of a disruption company suffering a cybersecurity incident that is made public may see its stock price suffer, but a mcafeecsis report indicates that such a price drop usually lasts no more than a quarter.6last, a number of other factors also affect the reliability of various from reporting it. the surveys taken to determine economic loss are often not representative, and questions about loss can be structured in a way that does not allow erroneously large estimates to be corrected by errors on the other side of the ledger.76 center for strategic and international studies, the economic impact of cybercrime and cyber espionagerpeconomicimpactcybercrime.pdf.7 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyestimates of losses due to cybercrime are intended to motivate action to deal with the cybercrime problem, and larger estimates presumably make the problem more urgent for policy makers to address. but disputes about methodology can erode the credibility of demands to take immediate action, even when the lower end of such estimates may be large enough from a public policy standpoint to warrant action.perhaps more important, even if the economic losses are large, users of information technology may be making a judgment that such losses are simply a cost of doing business. although they may be loath to acknowledge it publicly, some users argue that they will not invest in security improvements until the losses they are incurring make such an investment economically worthwhile. although economic calculations of this nature are unlikely to be the only reason that users fail to invest at a level 5.2 innovationa stated goal of u.s. public policy is to promote innovation in products and services in the private sector. in information technology (as in offering, at least until a competitor comes along. during this period, the vendor has the chance to establish relationships with customers and to furthermore, customers of the initial product or service may well be reluctant to incur the costs of switching to a competitor.policy actions that detract from the ability of the private sector to innovate are inherently suspect from this perspective, and in particular policy actions to promote greater attention to cybersecurity in the private sector often run up against concerns that these actions will reduce innovation. the logic of reducing time to market for information technology products or services runs counter to enhancing security, which adds comment is not conducive to focusing on security from the outset. software are thrown away. in this environment, it makes very little sense to invest up front in that kind of adherence unless such adherence is relatively furthermore, to apply secure development principles such as those at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 99very well and in some considerable detail just what the ultimate artifact is supposed to do. but some large software systems emerge from incremental additions to small software systems in ways that have not been anticipated by the designers of the original system, and sometimes users change their minds about the features they want, or even worse, want contradictory features.functionality that users demand is sometimes in tension with security as well. users demand attributes such as ease of use, interoperability, and backward compatibility. often, information technology purchasers ease of use, performance, and dominance in a market, although in recent years the criteria for product selection have broadened to include security ping a productšwhether to ship with the security features turned on or often get in the way of using the product, an outcome that may lead to frustration and customer dissatisfaction. inability to use the product may also result in a phone call to the vendor for customer service, which is with security features turned off tends to reduce one source of customer complaints and makes it easier for the customer to use the product. the rity breaches that may occur as a result, at which point tying those constances, many vendors will chose to ship with security turned offšand many customers will simply accept forever the vendor™s initial default settings.restricting users™ access privileges often has serious usability implications and makes it harder for users to get legitimate work done, as for a timeurgent basis. program features that enable adversary access can be turned off, but doing so may disable functionality needed or desired by users. in some cases, closing down access paths and introducing cybersecurity to a system™s design slows it down or makes it harder to use. other to respond quickly in an emergency situation.at the level of the computer programs needed for an innovative product or service, implementing the checking, monitoring, and recovery needed for secure operation requires a lot of computation and does not come for free. in addition, user demands for backward compatibility at the applications level often call for building into new systems some of the same security vulnerabilities present in the old systems. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy5.3 civil libertiessubstantial controversy. civil liberties have an important informational dimension to them, and cybersecurity is in large part about protecting information, so it is not surprising that measures taken to enhance cybersecurity might raise civil liberties concerns.5.3.1 privacyinformation, the term ﬁprivacyﬂ usually refers to making ostensibly private information about an individual unavailable to parties who should not have that information. privacy interests attach to the gathering, control, protection, and use of information about individuals.privacy and cybersecurity intersect in a number of ways, although the vacy.8 in one basic sense, cybersecurity measures can protect privacyšan intruder seeking ostensibly private information (e.g., personal emails or stymied by good cybersecurity measures.but certain measures taken to enhance cybersecurity can also violate all inbound network than its intended recipient is regarded by some as a violation of privacy, another measure for enhancing cybersecurity calls for sharing techidentifying and responding to intrusions. technical information is information associated directly with the mechanisms used to effect access, to 8 what an individual regards as ﬁprivateﬂ may not be the same as what the law designates as being worthy of privacy protectionšan individual may believe a record of law may say otherwise. no technical security measure will protect the privacy interests of at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 101˚malware (or intrusion) signatures. sharing such information could help installations identify malware before it has a chance to affect vulnerable systems or networks. ˚timecorrelated information on intrusions. such information is an essential aspect of attack assessment, because simultaneous intrusions on multiple installations across the nation might signal the onset of a major attack. important installations thus must be able to report their status to authorities responsible for coordinating such information.˚frequency, nature, and effect of intrusions. how often are intrusions of in some cases, realtime or nearrealtime information sharing is a prerequisite for a prompt response. in other cases, afterthefact coordination of information from multiple sources is necessary for forensic purposes or for detecting similar intrusions in the future. nonetheless, many about possible antitrust or privacy violations and loss of advantages with times reluctant to share such information with government agencies, for fear of attracting regulatory attention. similar issues also arise regarding the sharing of threat information among agencies of the u.s. government, especially those within the intelligence community. the result can be that a particular method of intrusion may be known to some (e.g., elements of the intelligence community or the military) and unknown to others (e.g. industry and the research community), thus impeding or delaying the development of effective countermeasures.information is not removed from the information to be shared, or if the scope of the allowed purposes for sharing information goes beyond matters related to cybersecurity. the essential privacy point is that systematiinspection of allin any way. if the entities with whom the information is shared are law enforcement or national security authorities, privacy concerns are likely to be even stronger.5.3.2 free expressionof speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and freedom to petition the government, encompasses civil liberties that are often infringed at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policywhen the causes involved are unpopular. in such cases, one way of promeans for them to do so anonymously. thus, an individual may choose to participate in an unattributable online discussion that is critical of to strong authentication at the packet level. few people object to online banks using strong authenticationšbut many have strong objections to mandatory strong authentication that is independent of the application in question, and in particular they are concerned that strong authentication that mandatory strong authentication should apply to a second internet, which would be used by critical infrastructure providers and others who preferred to operate in a strongly authenticated environment. although a new network with such capabilities would indeed help to identify attackers under some circumstances, attackers would nevertheless invariably seek other ways to counter the authentication capabilities of this alternative, such as compromising the machines connected to the new network.9in addition, a new network may come with a number of drawbacks, such as retaining the economies of the presentday internet and preventing any connection, physical or logical, to the regular internet through with large networks indicates that maintaining an actual airgap isolation between two internets would be all but impossiblešnot for technical reasons but because of a human tendency to make such connections for the sake of convenience.5.3.3 due processan important element of protecting civil liberties is due processšthe state cannot deprive individuals of civil liberties in the absence of due process. some cybersecurity measures can put pressure on due process. civilians in the process of responding to an adversarial cyber operation.9 steven m. bellovin, ﬁidentity and security,ﬂ ieee security and privacy 8(2, march april):88, 2010.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 103also, it is often alleged that responses to cyber intrusions must happen very rapidlyšin a matter of millisecondsšbecause the intrusions occur very rapidly. leaving aside the question of whether a rapid response is in fact required in all circumstances, even those situations in which a rapid response is necessary raise the question of whether due process can be bution of a cyber intrusion to the legally responsible actor, may simply be impossible to accomplish in a short time, and yet accomplishment of these tasks may be necessary elements of due process.5.4 international relations and national security5.4.1 internet governancein the international environment of the internet, ﬁinternet governet governance includes management and coordination of the technical underpinnings of the internet such as the domain name system, and development of the standards and protocols that enable the internet to function.10there is not broad international agreement, would include matters such as controlling spam; dealing with use of the internet for illegal purposes; resolving the ﬁdigital divideﬂ between developed and developing countries; protecting intellectual property other than domain names; protectecommerce.11international debates over what should constitute the proper scope of internet governance are quite contentious, with the united states gensecurity from threats in cyberspace.but different nations have different conceptions of what constitutes the u.s. conception of cybersecurity. these nations argue that internet poses threats to their national security and political stability (e.g., news 10 lennard g. kruger, ﬁinternet governance and the domain name system: issues for congress,ﬂ congressional research service, november 13, 2013, available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/r42351.pdf.11 national research council, signposts in cyberspace: the domain name system and internet navigation, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2005.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policystories about corruption at high levels of government) and thus that ern nations have opposed such measures in multiple forums, and in particular have opposed attempts to broaden the internet governance nance are thus often disputes over content regulation in the name of internet security.dards for passing information and what these protocols and standards both in other nations and in the united statesšthat would require packetlevel authentication in the basic internet protocols in the name of promoting greater security. requiring authentication in this manner would implicate all of the civil liberties issues discussed above as well as the performance and feasibility issues discussed in chapter 2. 5.4.2 reconciling tensions between cybersecurity and surveillanceas is true for all nations, the united states has multiple policy objecing cybersecurity internationally, as illustrated in the 2011 white house international strategy for cyberspace, a document stating that ﬁassuring the security and privacy of data [emphasis added], and the integrity of the interconnected networks themselves are all essential to american and global economic prosperity, security, and the promotion of universal rights.ﬂ12the united states also collects information around the world for intelligence purposes, and much of such collection depends on the penetration of information technology systems and networks to access the information transiting through them. cybersecurity measures taken by the users, owners, and operators of these systems and networks thus tend to frustrate intelligence collection efforts, and according to public reports, the united states has undertaken a variety of efforts to circumvent or weaken these measures.12 white house, international strategy for cyberspace: prosperity, security, and openness in a networked worldrssviewer/internationalstrategy forcyberspace.pdf.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 105on the face of it, these two policy objectives are inconsistent with each otheršone promotes cybersecurity internationally and the other makers have pursued mutually incompatible objectivesšgovernments of incompatible objectives is to acknowledge the tension between them, of another, and the likely operational impact of policy tradeoffs made in different ways must be assessed and compared.an illustration of this tradeoff is the communications assistance for law enforcement act (calea) of 1994, which directs the telecommunications industry to design, develop, and deploy systems that support law enforcement requirements for electronic surveillance. intelligence derived from electronic surveillance of adversaries (including criminals, hostile nations, and terrorists) is an important factor in shaping the u.s. response to adversary activities. but measures taken to facilitate calealike access of the systems affected by those measures.13efforts continue today to introduce means of government access to the infrastructure of electronic communications,14 and some of these efforts are surreptitious. regardless of the legality and/or policy wisdom of these efforts, a fundamental tradeoff faces national policy makersšwhether reduced security for the communications infrastructure is worth munications may be most obvious in the short term, whereas the costs of reduced security are likely to be felt in the long term. advocates for maintaining government access to adversary communications in this manner opponents of this approach will argue the reverse.13 affair,ﬂ ieee spectrum telecom/security/theathensaffair.14 in the nsa surveillance revelations,ﬂ ieee security and privacy 2013, available at http://www.computer.org/cms/computer.org/computingnow/pdfs/ makingsensefromsnowdenieeesecurityandprivacy.pdf, and ﬁmaking sense of snowden, ieee security and privacy 12(1, msp.2013.161.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy5.4.3 norms of behavior in cyberspace international norms of behavior are intended to guide states™ actions, sustain partnerships, and support the rule of law.15 norms of international behavior are established in many ways, including the customary practice behavior that is permitted or proscribed.the u.s. international strategy for cyberspace states that in cyberspace, the united states supports the development of a variety of norms for upholding fundamental freedoms; respect for property; valuing privacy; protection from crime; right of selfdefense; global interoperability; network stability; reliable access; multistakeholder governance; and cybersecurity due diligence. but even a casual inspection of this set of possible norms would suggest that an international consensus for these norms would not be easy to achieve.to which other parties are in fact complying with themšparties can space to an appropriately responsible actor is problematic under many behavior in cyberspace.for illustrative purposes, two domains in which norms may be relevant to cybersecurity relate to conducting cyber operations for differacceptable and unacceptable behavior.distinguishing between cyber operations conducted for  different purposesin the cybersecurity domain, norms of behavior are contentious as information related to national security and foreign policy and collecting information related to economic and business interests, arguing that the tional law) and that the second constitutes theft of intellectual property and trade secrets for economic advantage. 15 white house, international strategy for cyberspacešprosperity, security, and openness in a networked world, may 2011, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 107most other nations do not draw such a sharp line between these two kinds of information collection. but even were all nations to agree in principle that such a line should be drawn, how might these two types of information (information related to national security and information and others, remain to be answered.and a further policy debate remains to be settled. should the united states maintain the distinction between national security information and advantages and disadvantages, if any, to the united states of abandoning today, the united states does not target intelligence assets for the on the desire of the united states to uphold a robust legal regime for the competitors from different countries to make their best business cases on proprietary information from the u.s. intelligence community about the future generations of foreign products, such as airplanes or automobiles, or about business operations and contract negotiating positions of their competitors.such a change in policy would require the u.s. government to wrestle well with foreign companies that they were trying to persuade to relocate to the united states. and that use of its intelligence agencies might well undercut the basis on which the united states could object to other industries and lead to a ﬁwild westﬂ environment in which anything goes.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policycyberattacks use the same approaches to penetrating a system or netif an intrusion is detected, the underlying intent may not be clear until some time has passed. given that the distinction between an attack and states respond when it is faced with a cyber intrusion of unknown agents in some critical military networks of the united states to collect intelligence information. these agents are designed to be reprogrammable in placešthat is, elbonia can update these agents with new capabilities. during a time of crisis, u.s. authorities discover some of these agents and learn that they have been present for a while, that they are sending back to elbonia very sensitive information, and that their capabilities can be changed on a moment™s notice. even if no harmful action has yet been taken, it is entirely possible that the united states would see itself as being the target of an impending elbonian cyberattack.the possibility of confusion also applies if the united states contion is nondestructive, howšif at allšshould the united states inform are particularly important during periods of crisis or tension. during such periods, military action may be more likely, and it is entirely plausible that both sides would increase the intensity of the security scans each conducts on its critical systems and networks. more intense security scans often reveal offensive software agents implanted long before the onset of a crisis and that may have been overlooked in ordinary scans, and yet discovery of these agents may well prompt fears that an attack may be impending.16attack (or preparations for attack) should not preclude the possibility of suggest that the nature of a targeted entity can provide useful clues to measures in cyberspace, such as agreements to refrain from attacking certain kinds of facilities, can help as well. such questions are open at this time.16 strategic studies quarterly 6(3):4670, 2012.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 109arms control in cyberspace17the intent of an arms control agreement in general is usually to or multilateral, and they can be cast formally as treaties, informally as memorandums of understanding, or even more informally as coordinated unilateral policies.in principle, arms control agreements can limit or ban the signatories from conducting some combination of research, development, testing, production, procurement, or deployment on certain kinds of weapons; limit or ban the use of certain weapons and/or the circumstances under which certain weapons may or may not be used; or oblige signatories to take or to refrain from taking certain actions under certain circumstances dencebuilding measures).for cyber weapons (where a cyber weapon is an information technologybased capability for conducting some kind of cyber intrusion), any limit on research, development, testing, production, procurement, or deployment of certain kinds of weapons is unlikely to be feasible. one that such weapons have legitimate uses (e.g., both military and civilian entities use such weapons to test their own defenses). distinguishing offensive capabilities developed for cyberattack from those used to shore impossible task.cial systems or power grids, much as nations today have agreed to avoid targeting hospitals in a kinetic attack. agreements to restrict use are by has not prevented the world™s nations (including the united states) from ableﬂ restrictions.one issue is that nonstate actors may have access to some of the same cyber capabilities as do national signatories, and nonstate actors are unlikely to adhere to any agreement that restricts their use of such capa17 much of the discussion in this section is based on herbert lin, ﬁa virtual necessity: some modest steps toward greater cybersecurity,ﬂ bulletin of the atomic scientists, september 1, 2012, available at http://www.thebulletin.org/2012/september/virtualnecessitysomemodeststepstowardgreatercybersecurity. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyultimate origin. if the ultimate origin of a cyberattack can be concealed successfully, holding the violator of an agreement accountable becomes problematic.plicate arms control agreements in cyberspace. a detected act of cyber tation would go far beyond the current bounds of international law and for essentially all nations.used to promote stability and mutual understanding when kinetic weapons are involved. some possible tcbms in cyberspace include (but are not limited to):˚. two or more nations agree to notify each other of serious cyber incidents, and to provide each other with information about these incidents.˚joint exercisesa simulated cyber crisis that affects or involves both nations to see what information each side would need from the other.˚publication of declaratory policies and/or doctrine about how a nation intends to use cyber capabilities, both offensive and defensive, to support its national interests.˚ regarding certain activities that might be viewed as hostile or escalatory. ˚direct communication with counterparts during times of tension or crisis. ˚mutual cooperation on matters related to securing cyberspace (e.g., jointly investigating the source of an attack). ˚imposing on nationstates an obligation to assist in the investigation and mitigation of cyber intrusions emanating from their territories.perhaps the most important challenge to the development of useful tcbms in cyberspace is that offensive operations fundamentally depend sures are, as the name suggests, intended to be reassuring to an adversary; the success of most offensive operations depends on an adversary being falsely reassured. thus, the misuse of these measures may well be an element of an adversary™s hostile use of cyberspace. in addition, many tcbms are conventions for behavior (e.g., rules of the road) and as such do not speak to intentšbut in cyberspace, intent may be the primary difference between a possibly prohibited act, such as certain kinds of at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 111ing in a multilateral way various nations™ views about the nature of cyber weapons, cyberspace, offensive operations, and so on could promote greater mutual understanding among the parties involved.tively refute, even in principle, the possibility of meaningful arms control agreements in cyberspace is open to question today. what is clear is that progress in cyber arms control, if it is feasible at all, is likely to be slow.5.4.4 managing the global supply chain for information technologychina play major roles in the it industry, and ireland, israel, korea, traces possible origins for some components of a laptop computer.) integrated circuits at the heart of a product might be designed and developed in the united states, fabricated in taiwan, and incorporated into a table 5.1 supplychain geographyšan illustrationcomponent of  laptop computerlocation of facilities potentially used by supplier(s)liquid crystal display slovac republic, south korea, taiwanmemory puerto rico, singapore, south korea, taiwan, united statesprocessor canada, china, costa rica, ireland, israel, malaysia, singapore, united states, vietnammotherboard taiwanhard disk drivesingapore, thailand, united statesnational securityrelated agencies need to better address risks, at http://www.gao.gov/products/gao12361.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyproduct assembled from components supplied from around the world. similar considerations apply to softwarešand software is important to any device, component, system, or network.the global nature of the it supply chain raises concerns that foreign suppliers may be subject to pressures from their governments to manipulate the supply of critical components of it systems or networks or, even worse, introduce substandard, faulty, counterfeit, or deliberately vulnerable components into the supply chain. u.s. users of these components, which include both commercial and government entities, would thus be using components that weakened their cybersecurity posture.of the components it provides employ a number of strategies, sometimes in concert with each other:18˚using trusted suppliers. such parties must be able to show that they have taken adequate measures to ensure the dependability of the components they supply or ship. usually, such measures would be regarded as ﬁbest practicesﬂ that should be taken by suppliers whether they are foreign or domestic.˚diversifying suppliers. the use of multiple suppliers increases the ˚reducing the time between choosing a supplier and taking possession of the components provided. a shorter interval reduces the window within ˚testing components. components can be tested to ensure that they rule, testing can indicate only the presence of a problemšnot its absence. thus, testing generally cannot demonstrate the presence of unwanted (and hostile) functionality in a component, although testing may be able to provide evidence that the component does in fact perform as it is supposed to perform.the strategies described above address some of the important process and performance aspects of ensuring the integrity of the it supply chain. but implementing these strategies entails some cost, and many of the most stringent strategies (e.g., selffabrication of integrated circuit chips) 18 national institute of standards and technology, ﬁnist special publication 8002010, available at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/80053rev3/sp80053rev3at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 113fair to say that the risk associated with corruption in the supply chain can be managed and mitigated to a certain degreešbut not avoided entirely.5.4.5 role of offensive operations in cyberspace policy regarding the use of offensive operations in cyberspace is gencan be conducted for cyber defensive purposes and also for other purposes.19 furthermore, according to a variety of public sources, policy regarding offensive operations in cyberspace includes the following points:˚the united states would respond to hostile acts in cyberspace as it would to any other threat to the nation, and reserves the right to use all necessary meansšdiplomatic, informational, military, and economicšas appropriate and consistent with applicable international law, in order to defend the nation, its allies, its partners, and its interests.20˚the laws of war apply to cyberspace,21 and because the united states has made a commitment to behaving in accordance with these laws, to the laws of war.˚offensive operations in cyberspace offer ﬁunique and unconventional capabilities to advance u.s. national objectives around the world with little or no warning to the adversary or target and with potential effects ranging from subtle to severely damaging.ﬂ22˚offensive operations likely to have effects in the united states 23˚cyber operations, including offensive operations, that are likely to against the united states; damage to property; serious adverse foreign policy or economic impacts) require presidential approval.24 19 national research council, technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2009.20 white house, international strategy for cyberspacešprosperity, security, and openness in a networked world, may 2011, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/21 interagency legal conference, ft. meade, md., september 18, 2012, available at http://opiniojuris.org/2012/09/19/haroldkohoninternationallawincyberspace/.22 robert gellman, ﬁsecret cyber directive calls for ability to attack without warning,ﬂ washington post23 gellman, ﬁsecret cyber directive calls for ability to attack without warning,ﬂ 2013.24 glenn greenwald and ewen macaskill, ﬁobama orders u.s. to draw up overseas target list for cyberattacks,ﬂ the guardiantheguardian.com/world/2013/jun/07/obamachinatargetscyberoverseas.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyhowever, despite public knowledge of these points, the united states has not articulated publicly a military doctrine for how cyber capabilities might be used operationally. (as a notable point of comparison, u.s. approaches to using nuclear weapons were publicly discussed during the cold war.)a particularly important question about the use of offensive cyber especially in the nuclear domain, are unlikely to apply to escalation dynamics in cyberspace because of the profound differences between the the fact that attribution is much more uncertain, the ability of nonstate a multitude of states that have nontrivial capabilities to conduct cyber operations.last, the fact that the department of defense is willing to consider undertaking offensive operations in cyberspace as part of defending its own systems and networks raises the question of whether offensive operations might be useful to defend nondod systems, and in particular to defend entities in the private sector. today, a privatesector entity that is the target of hostile actions in cyberspace can respond to such threats its defensive posture, and it can seek the assistance of law enforcement authorities to investigate and to take action to mitigate the threat.although both of these responses (if properly implemented) are helpful, their effectiveness is limited. tightening security often reduces important functionality in the systems being locked downšthey become posture is also costly. law enforcement authorities can help, but they cannot do so quickly and the resources they can bring to bear are usually overwhelmed by the demands for their assistance.a number of commentators and reports have suggested that a more aggressive defensive posturešthat is, an active defensešis appropriate under some circumstances.25 such an approach, especially if carried out 25 washington post, february 27, 2012, available at http://www.washington post.com/blogs/checkpointwashington/post/activedefenseatcenterofdebateonhackers, firms salting their servers with fake data,ﬂ washington postavailable at http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/nationalsecurity/tothwartat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tensions between cybersecurity and other policy concerns 115by the targeted privatesector entities, raises a host of technical, legal, and policy issues. a u.s. policy that condones aggressive selfhelp might serve as a deterrent that reduces the cyber threat to privatesector entities. alternatively, it might encourage a freeforall environment in which any ing offensive operations against the alleged offender. this debate is not likely to be settled soon.d1ce6d0ed278story.html; david e. sanger and thom shanker, ﬁn.s.a. devises radio pathway into computers,ﬂ new york timesnytimes.com/2014/01/15/us/nsaeffortpriesopencomputersnotconnectedtointernet.html; and thom shanker, ﬁu.s. weighs its strategy on warfare in cyberspace,ﬂ new york times, october 19, 2011, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/19/world/africa/unitedstatesweighscyberwarfarestrategy.html.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1166findings and conclusion6.1 findingsfinding 1. cybersecurity is a neverending battle. a permanently decisive solution to the problem will not be found in the foreseeable future. for the most part, cybersecurity problems result from the inherent nology systems, and human fallibility in making judgments about what actions and information are safe or unsafe from a cybersecurity perspecnone of these factors is likely to change in the foreseeable future, and thus there are no silver bulletsšor even combinations of silver bulletsšthat can ﬁsolve the problemﬂ permanently.in addition, threats to cybersecurity evolve. as new defenses emerge to stop older threats, intruders adapt by developing new tools and techniques to compromise security. as information technology becomes more ubiquitously integrated into society, the incentives to compromise the security of deployed it systems grow. as innovation produces new information technology applications, new venues for criminals, terrorists, and other hostile parties also emerge, along with new vulnerabilities that ple with access to cyberspace multiplies the number of possible victims and also the number of potential malevolent actors.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and conclusion 117an ongoing process rather than something that can be done once and then forgotten. adversariesšespecially at the highend part of the threat spectrumšconstantly adapt and evolve their intrusion techniques, and the defender must adapt and evolve as well.these comments should not be taken to indicate a standstill in the products in response to enduser concerns over security. many of today™s products are by many measures more secure than those that preceded cantly. and public awareness is greater than it was only a few years ago. without these efforts, the gap between cybersecurity posture and threat with the concurrent rise in the use of it throughout society.ultimately, the relevant policy question is not how the cybersecurity problem can be solved, but rather how it can be made manageable. socidrug abuse, and so on are rarely ﬁsolvedﬂ or taken off the policy agenda so decisively that they will never reappearšand the same is true for cybersecurity. finding 2. improvements to the cybersecurity posture of individuvalue in reducing the loss and damage that may be associated with cybersecurity breaches.if an adversary has the resources to increase the sophistication of its attack and the motivation to keep trying even after many initial attempts fail, it is natural for users to wonder whether it makes sense to bother to deployed is surely a recipe for inaction that leaves one vulnerable to many lowerlevel threats.the value of defensive measures is found in several points:˚malevolent actors need some time to adapt to defensive measures. during this time, the victim is usually more secure than if no defensive measures had been taken.˚a target often has multiple adversaries, not just one. even if it is true that adversary a will adapt to new defenses that are raised against a, adversaries b, c, and d may try the same kinds of techniques and tools at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policythat a originally usedšthese efforts by b, c, and d are likely to be less successful against the target.˚acts as a deterrent of harmful actions.˚unsuccessful attempts to compromise system security cost the adversary timešand an adversary who works more slowly poses less of adversary may help to prevent him from being able to access everything on the targeted system.˚a welldefended target is usually less attractive to malevolent if a malevolent actor™s objectives do not call for compromising that spe˚certain defensive measures may provide opportunities for the victim to gather intelligence on an intruder™s methods and tactics.˚other defensive measures may enable the victim to know of the adversary™s presence and activities, even if the victim is not entirely successful in thwarting the adversary™s efforts.for all of these reasons, efforts to improve cybersecurity postures finding 3. improvements to cybersecurity call for two distinct kinds of activity: (a) efforts to more effectively and more widely use what is known about improving cybersecurity, and (b) efforts to develop new knowledge about cybersecurity. the current u.s. national cybersecurity posturešas it actually isšis determined by knowledge that we have and that we actually use to build a posture that is as robust as we can make it. the gap in security between our national cybersecurity posture and the cyber threat has two essential parts. posture could be if currently known best cybersecurity practices and technologies were widely deployed and used. illustrative of things that we know but ignore or have forgotten about, the part 1 gap is in some sense the difference between the average cybersecurity posture and the best cybersecurity posture possible with known best practices and technolocybersecurity postures that are not the best. the second partšpart 2šis the gap between the strongest posture possible with known practices and at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and conclusion 119part 1 gap were fully closed, the resulting cybersecurity posture would especially the highend threat. the development of entirely new approaches to cybersecurityšis the focus of traditional cybersecurity research. a properly responsive research program is broad and robust, and it addresses both current and possible future threats. knowledge about new cybersecurity technologies, strengthen defenses against an everevolving threat. attending to part 2 that increases the ability to respond quickly in the future when threats unknown today emerge.note that the part 1 gap is primarily nontechnical in nature (requiring, e.g., research relating to economic or psychological factors regarding the use of known practices and techniques, enhanced educational efforts to promote securityresponsible user behavior, and incentives to build ing the part 1 gap does not require new technical knowledge of cyberseresearch is thus needed to understand how better to promote deployment and use of such knowledge. by contrast, part 2 of the cybersecurity gap is the domain where new technologies and approaches are primarily relfinding 4. publicly available information and policy actions to date states as a nation.in 2007, a national research council report titled toward a safer and more secure cyberspace called for policy makers to ﬁcreate a sense of urgency about the cybersecurity problem commensurate with the risksﬂ (p. 229). the report argued that the necessary sense of urgency might be motivated by making publicly available a greater amount of authoritative information about cybersecurity problems and threats and also by enduser attention on the shortterm costs of improving their cybersecurity postures.in the period since that report was issued, the cybersecurity issue has received increasing public attention, and even more authoritative information regarding cybersecurity threats is indeed available publicly. but all at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policytoo many decision makers still focus on the shortterm costs of improving more, little has been done to harness market forces to address matters related to the cybersecurity posture of the nation as a whole.a culture of security would pervade the entire life cycle of it systems operations, from initial architecture, to design, development, testing, deployment, maintenance, and use. such a culture would entail, among other things, collaboration among researchers; effective coordination and information sharing between the public and the private sector; the crestate of the art; the broadbased education of developers, administrators, and users that would make securityconscious practices second nature, make it easy and intuitive for developers and users to ﬁdo the right thingﬂ; the employment of business drivers and policy mechanisms to facilitate security technology transfer and diffusion of r&d into commercial products and services; and the promotion of riskbased decision making (and metrics to support this effort).consider what such a culture might mean in practice:˚developers and designers of it products and services would use design principles that build security into new products and services, and that focus on security and attack resilience as well as performance and functionality.˚security would be an integral part of the initial designs for future secure and attackresilient computer architectures, and it would be integrated into every aspect of the hardware and software design life cycles and research agendas. ˚user mistakes and malicious adversaries.˚security features would be much simpler to use than they are today.˚designers and developers would assume that systems are insecure until evidence suggests their resistance to compromise.˚end users would be aware of security matters and diligent in their efforts to promote security. ˚high degree of security awareness is the norm, would be willing to accept at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and conclusion 121tional goals in order to improve their cybersecurity postures, and would ˚policy makers would be willing to make decisions about tradeoffs those decisions to the nation.as for market forces and cybersecurity, privatesector entities will today™s business cases. in the absence of a market for a higher level of security, vendors will also not provide such security. accordingly, if the nation™s cybersecurity posture is to be improved to a level that is higher than the level to which today™s market will drive it, the market calculus altered somehow, and the business cases for the security of these organifinding 5. cybersecurity is important to the united states, but the imperatives of cybersecurity. tradeoffs are inevitable and will have to be accepted through the nation™s political and policymaking processes.proliferation and terrorism or to rebalancing u.s. military forces to focus nuclear weapons at hiroshima in 1945,1 one critical difference is that the use of a nuclear weapon provides a very important thresholdšthere is no sense in which the use of even a single nuclear weapon could be regarded anywhere in the world, especially one that does damage, is unambigu1vanity fair, april 2011, available at http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2011/04/the atlantic, march 4, 2011, available at http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/03/ christian science monitor, september 22, 2011, available at http://www.csmonitor.com/ usa/2011/0922/fromthemanwhodiscoveredat the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyously detectable. by contrast, cyberattacks are often conducted, not necessarily with government sponsorship or approval (although sometimes also occurs on a large scale, often with no one noticing.but the likelihood of the detonation of a nuclear weapon on u.s. soil is much lower than that of a cyberattack on the united states. so is the nuclear issue, which is more consequential but less likely compared to relations as well, given that the united states usually has many interests very large scale. but china is also the largest single holder of u.s. debt and one of the largest trading partners of the united states. china is the states and china are arguably the most important nations regarding the mitigation of global climate change. and this list goes on. what is the common interests with russia are different.the need to manage multiple common interests with china or russia or any other nation generally requires policy makers to make tradeoffsšpursuing one item on the agenda less vigorously in order to make progress on another item. moreover, making such tradeoffs almost always results in domestic winners and losers, a fact that makes the losers very unhappy and increases their incentives to make their unhappiness known.nor is the competition for policymaker attention limited to national security and foreign relations. domestic concerns about unemployment, access to health care, and climate change are also important to the nation, and who is to say whether cybersecurity is a more important problem for in an environment of many competing priorities, reactive policy making is often the outcome. it is an unfortunate fact of policy and politics that tough decisions are often deferred in the absence of a crisis that forces policy makers to respond. (the same can be true in the private sector as well.) support for efforts to prevent a disaster that has not yet occurred is typically less than support for efforts to respond to a disaster that has already occurred.or few attempts have yet been made to compromise the cybersecurity at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and conclusion 123of application xjustifying why immediate attention and action to improve the cybersecurity posture of application x can be deferred or studied further. reactive discounting of future events but has many other causes as well.progress in cybersecurity policy has also stalled at least in part because we also want a private sector that innovates rapidly, and the convenience of not having to worry about cybersecurity, and the ability for applications to interoperate easily and quickly with one another, and the right to no diminution of our civil liberties, and so on.but the tradeoffs between security and these other national interests case entail sharper and starker tradeoffs than are necessary and that the indeed, proposals may be developed that may advance both interests posture for the nation might also provide better protection for intellectual property, thereby enhancing the nation™s capability for innovation. more usable security technologies or procedures could provide better security and also increase the convenience of using information technology. nonetheless, irreconcilable tensions will sometimes be encountered. at that point, policy makers will have to confront rather than sidestep those tensions, and honest acknowledgment and discussion of the tradeoffs (e.g., a better cybersecurity posture may reduce the nation™s innovative capability, may increase the inconvenience of using information technology, may reduce the ability to collect intelligence) will go a long way toward building public support for a given policy position.finding 6. the use of offensive operations in cyberspace as an instrument to advance u.s. interests raises many important technithe u.s. government.as noted in chapter 5, it is a matter of public record that the united states possesses offensive capabilities in cyberspace, including capabiliestablished u.s. cyber command as an entity within the department of defense that at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policyinformation networks and prepare to, and when directed, conduct full spectrum military cyberspace operations in order to enable actions in all domains, ensure us/allied freedom of action in cyberspace and deny the same to our adversaries.2 the united states has publicly stated that it does not collect intelligence information for the purpose of enhancing the competitiveness or business prospects of u.s. companies. and it has articulated its view that established principles of international lawšincluding those of the law of but beyond these very general statements, the u.s. government has placed little on the public record, and there is little authoritative information about u.s. offensive capabilities in cyberspace, rules of engagement, ties within the department of defense and the intelligence community, and a host of other topics related to offensive operations.discussed at length. but a full public discussion of issues in these areas has thinking on these issues highly opaque. such opacity has many undesirable consequences, but one of the most important consequences is that the role offensive capabilities could play in defending important information technology assets of the united states cannot be discussed fully.what is sensitive about offensive u.s. capabilities in cyberspace is (rather than the nature of that technology itself); fragile and sensitive ticular vulnerability, a particular operational program); or u.s. knowledge vides a generally reasonable basis for understanding what can be done and for policy discussions that focus primarily on what should be done.6.2 conclusionlimited to computer science and information technology, psychology, eco2 fact sheet on u.s. cyber command, available at http://www.stratcom.mil/ factsheets/2/cybercommand/, accessed march 8, 2014. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and conclusion 125decision sciences, international relations, and law. in practice, although technical measures are an important element, cybersecurity is not primarily a technical matter, although it is easy for policy analysts and others to get lost in the technical details. furthermore, what is known about cybersecurity is often compartmented along disciplinary lines, reducing this primer seeks to illuminate some of these connections. most of all, it attempts to leave the reader with two central ideas. the cybersecurity problem will never be solved once and for all. solutions to the problem, limited in scope and longevity though they may be, are at least as much nontechnical as technical in nature. at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.129acommittee members and staffcommittee membersdavid clark, chair, is a senior research scientist at the mit computer receiving his ph.d. there in 1973. since the mid1970s, clark has been leading the development of the internet; from 1981 to 1989 he acted as chief protocol architect in this development, and he chaired the internet tural underpinnings of the internet and at the relationship of technology and architecture to economic, societal, and policy considerations. he is design program. clark is past chair of the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council and has contributed to a number of studies on the societal and policy impact of computer communications. he is codirector of the mit communications futures program, a project for industry collaboration and coordination along the communications value chain.thomas berson is founder and president of anagram laboratories and a visiting scholar at stanford university. he has been a researcher valley entrepreneur three times. he is attracted most strongly to security art of war and its applicability to modern at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130 at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policythe international association for cryptologic research. his citation reads, ﬁfor visionary and essential service and for numerous valuable contributions to the technical, social, and commercial development of cryptology and security.ﬂ berson was an editor of the journal of cryptology for 14 years. he is a past chair of the ieee technical committee on security and privacy and a past president of the international association for cryptologic research. berson has been a member of three previous national research council committees: the committee on computer security in the department of energy, the committee to review dod c4i plans and programs, and the committee on offensive information warfare. berson and a ph.d. in computer science from the university of london in 1977. he was a visiting fellow in mathematics in the university of cambridge, and he is a life member of clare hall, cambridge. berson™s erdös number is 2; his amateur radio call sign is nd2t.1council of advisors on science and technology (pcast) in may 2013, after a decade combining academic leadership at georgetown university with research and advisory activities (including as a rand adjunct) aimed at understanding internet and cybersecurity technology trends and policy implications. she stewards the council and its program of analyses (spanning science and technology) that culminate in policy recommendations to the president and the administration. in fall 2013, pcast published immediate opportunities for strengthening the nation™s cybersecurity. blumenthal joined georgetown university in august 2003 as associate provost, academic, engaging in campuswide strategy and overseeing academic units and special initiatives. she led efforts to strengthen georgetown sciences (culminating in the 2012 opening of a new science building and launch of a new computer science ph.d. program), and she promoted innovation in teaching, launching online@gu and codeveloping the initiative for technologyenhanced learning. between research council™s computer science and telecommunications board (cstb). several of the more than 60 reports produced with her leadership affected public policy and/or became trade books. her cybersecurity computers at risk. blumenthal did her undergraduate work at brown university and received her m.s. in public policy at harvard university.1 ms. blumenthal resigned from the committee on may 1, 2013.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 131staffherbert s. lin is chief scientist at the computer science and telecommunications board, national research council of the national academies, where he has been the study director of major projects on public policy and information technology. these projects include a number of studies related to cybersecurity: cryptography™s role in securing the information society (1996); realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges (1999); engaging privacy and information technology in a digital age (2007); toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007); technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities (2009); and proceedings of a workshop on deterring cyberattacks: informing strategies and developing options (2010). prior to his nrc service, he was a professional staff member and staff scientist for the house armed services committee (19861990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control issues. he received his doctorate in physics from mit. eric whitaker is a senior program assistant at the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council. prior to joining the cstb, he was a realtor with long and foster real estate, inc., in the washington, d.c., metropolitan area. before that, he spent several associate in the corporate support department. he has a b.a. in communication from hampton university.at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132bbibliographythis bibliography lists the reports from the national research council™s computer science and telecommunications board from which this report takes much of its material. all were published by and are available from the national academies press, washington, d.c. chapter 1˚computers at risk: safe computing in the information age (1991) ˚toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)chapter 2˚˚computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering (1992)˚trust in cyberspace (1999)˚being fluent with information technology (1999)˚the internet™s coming of age (2001)˚˚signposts in cyberspace: the domain name system and internet navigation (2005)at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 133chapter 3˚toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)˚˚technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities (2009) chapter 4˚cryptography™s role in securing the information society (1996) ˚who goes there? authentication through the lens of privacy (2003)˚toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)˚˚technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities (2009) ˚˚toward better usability, security, and privacy of information technology: report of a workshop (2010)˚˚letter report from the committee on deterring cyberattacks: informing strategies and developing options for u.s. policy (2010)chapter 5˚toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)˚engaging privacy and information technology in a digital age (2007) ˚˚assessing the impacts of changes in the information technology r&d ecosystem: retaining leadership in an increasingly global environment (2009)˚˚technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities (2009) chapter 6˚toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)˚˚technology, policy, law, and ethics regarding u.s. acquisition and use of cyberattack capabilities (2009) at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.