detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/18769on the full and open exchange of scientific data31 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309304276 | doi 10.17226/18769committee on geophysical and environmental data; national research councilon the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the full and open exchange of scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.