detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/1914keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systemsintegration106 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309045445 | doi 10.17226/1914computer science and telecommunications board, commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applications, national research councilkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s.computer industrycompetitive: systemsintegrationa colloquium report bythe computer science and telecommunicationsboardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics,and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1992ikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. frank press is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomousin its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineeringalso sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. robert m. white is presidentof the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to thenational academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.stuart bondurant is acting president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services tothe government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. frank press and dr. robert m.white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the following organizations and agencies: air forceoffice of scientific research (grant no. n0001487j1110), apple computer, inc., control datacorporation, cray research, inc., the defense advanced research projects agency (grant no.n0001487j1110), digital equipment corporation, hewlett packard, ibm corporation, thenational aeronautics and space administration (grant no. cda860535), the national sciencefoundation (grant no. cda860535), the office of naval research (grant no. n0001487j1110), and pacific bell.library of congress catalog card number 9162172international standard book number 0309045444available from: national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nw washington, dc 20418s404printed in the united states of americaiikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunicationsboardjoseph f. traub, columbia university, chairmanalfred v. aho, bellcoreruzena bajcsy, university of pennsylvaniadavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniasamuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationjohn l. hennessy, stanford universitymitchell d. kapor, on technology, inc.sidney karin, san diego supercomputer centerken kennedy, rice universityleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesrobert l. martin, bell communications researchabraham peled, ibm t.j. watson research centerwilliam press, harvard college observatoryraj reddy, carnegie mellon universityjerome h. saltzer, massachusetts institute of technologymary shaw, carnegie mellon universityedward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicineivan e. sutherland, sun microsystemslawrence g. tesler, apple computer, inc.george l. turin, teknekron corporationwillis h. ware, the rand corporationwilliam wulf, university of virginiamarjory s. blumenthal, staff directorherbert lin, staff officermonica b. krueger, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associatefrank pittelli, cstb consultantdonna f. allen, administrative secretarycatherine a. sparks, project assistantarthur l. mccord, project assistantiiikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsnorman hackerman, robert a. welch foundation, chairmanpeter j. bickel, university of california at berkeleygeorge f. carrier, harvard universitydean e. eastman, ibm t.j. watson research centermarye anne fox, university of texasphillip a. griffiths, institute for advanced studyneal f. lane, rice universityrobert w. lucky, at&t bell laboratoriesclaire e. max, lawrence livermore laboratorychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyjames w. mitchell, at&t bell laboratoriesrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofsciencealan schriesheim, argonne national laboratorykenneth g. wilson, ohio state universitynorman metzger, executive directorivkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethis report on systems integration is the second in a series of computerscience and telecommunications board (cstb) reports focusing on thecompetitive status of the u.s. computer industry. in cstb's initial report,keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: defining the agenda (nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1990), leaders of the computing fieldsurveyed each of the major sectors of the computer industry. to no one'ssurprise, the hardware sector was considered to be under serious competitivepressure, with the semiconductor memory market all but ceded to japanesecompanies. the u.s. competitive position in the software market was deemed tobe strong but precarious, given the weakness in basic hardware components.however, systems integration was identified as a large and rapidly growingmarket in which the united states was a clear leader; unfortunately, few couldagree on just what systems integration was!the present report is based on a colloquium held in january 1991 in whichparticipants from industry, academia, and government discussed what systemsintegration is, its importance and prospects for growth, and why the united statesis perceived to have a strong competitive advantage. a distillation of thecolloquium discussions, this report is designed, in particular, to informpolicymakers, but it should also be of value to anyone with an interest incomputing and telecommunications.the colloquium was organized by a steering committee chaired by laszlobelady, then vice president for software technology and advanced computingtechnology programs at the microelectronics and computer technologycorporation (he is now chairman and director of mitsubishi electric researchlaboratories inc.). other members of the steering committeeprefacevkeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.were samuel fuller, vice president of research at digital equipment corporation;robert lucky, executive director of research, communications sciencesdivision, at&t bell laboratories; and irving wladawskyberger, assistantgeneral manager of development and quality for ibm's enterprise systems.among cstb staff, damian saccocio and catherine sparks had principalresponsibility for the colloquium; they were aided by cstb meeting consultantpamela rodgers and freelance science writer mark bello.joseph f. traub, chairmancomputer science and telecommunications boardprefacevikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 overview 42 applications of integrated systems: evolutionin concept and practice 163 enabling technology: communications andsoftware 414 the next tier: building systems of systems 625 prerequisites for progress 74 appendixes a colloquium program 93b colloquium participants 96contentsviikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsviiikeeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summarysystems integration offers an enormous opportunity for u.s. firms tocapitalize on their strengths in such areas as complex software, networking, andmanagement. although no single definition of systems integration is complete, itcan be broadly considered as the "wiring" together, via hardware and frequentlyvery complex software, of the often already existing islands of computerapplications into a coordinated enterprisewide distributed network system. asthis formulation suggests, the fundamental challenges raised by systemsintegration are those associated with building large systems from heterogeneouscomponents. there is a growing demand for such systems, and a growing need toovercome the vexing challenges inherent in their design and development. at ajanuary 1991 colloquium organized by the computer science andtelecommunications board of the national research council, industry leaders,university researchers, and government policymakers discussed how systemsintegration is taking shape today and why it is expected to define thecharacteristics of computerization for decades to come.systems integration can be viewed as a culmination of computing andcommunications research done to date. to fulfill the promise of systemsintegration, a wide range of component technologiesšincluding databases,operating systems, architectures, networks, security mechanisms, humaninterfaces, artificial intelligence, and communicationsšmust work together.expertise about the many domains in which systems integration is applied(finance, retail, transportation, and so on) must also be invoked. thus aninterdisciplinary approach is essential to successful systems integration, as arecomplementary and coordinated research and development efforts inexecutive summary1keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industry, academia, and government. toward both ends, colloquium participantsurged that universities pay more attention to systems integration in devisingeducational and research programs in computing and communications.the technological challenges encompassed in systems integration areformidable, but for the moment they play to u.s. strengths. for example, muchof systems integration depends on the development of sophisticated and oftenhighly specialized softwareša difficult process but one in which the unitedstates is preeminent. other key abilities essential to successful systemsintegration, also abilities in which the united states excels, include creativeproblem solving and management of complex, often oneofakind processes.one area in which the u.s. record is mixed is that of standards setting. thecontinued development of systems integration as an industry dependsfundamentally on the compatibility of component technologies. thereforestandards of interoperability are indispensable. colloquium participants wereuniform in urging that more attention be paid to the standardsmaking processšby government as well as by industry.systems integration involves more than technology: its highestorder task isintegrating peoplešhelping them assimilate information, create, collaborate,and, in sum, work more productively. while networks of machines and devicesare the ostensible manifestations of the trend toward distributed computing andcommunications, the most significant connections, according to colloquiumparticipants, are those between people and organizational units using linkeddevices. for this reason, systems integration technology, and in particular thesuccessful building and operation of networked computer applications, isconsidered key to the emergence of an information infrastructure for the nation(and the world).colloquium participants expressed both hope and concern for the anticipatedinformation infrastructure. the quality of that infrastructure, as well as its timelydevelopment, hinges on leadership and vision; this was a principal area ofagreement among participants. it also hinges on constructive collaboration amongindustry, government, and academia. the federal high performance computingand communications (hpcc) program was recognized by participants as a keystep toward developing this infrastructure and as a valuable mechanism forfostering interactions among government, industry, and academia. other federalprojects, including systems modernization at government agencies, could alsoserve to demonstrate applications of systems integration and options for crosssectoral collaboration.the united states faces a peculiar challenge in the evolution of itscomputing, telecommunications, and broadcast media infrastructure. the qualityand availability of u.s. telephone service, entertainment, and business computingare unparalleled. but because it was the first country to embraceexecutive summary2keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many of these new technologies, the united states must now build on a rapidlyaging (by the standards of information technology development today)foundation. the huge installed technology base is both an engine for currentactivities and a constraint on the development and implementation of newtechnologies; obtaining the benefit of the new with minimal disruption to ongoingactivities that depend on the old is no small challenge.one important factor in the evolution of information infrastructure is thebody of u.s. telecommunications regulations. colloquium participants observedthat those regulations may not have kept pace with changing technologies andindustry boundaries. in particular, the proliferation of digital technology intocommunications results in an effective convergence of computing,communications, and entertainment (programming) industries that raises newquestions about fairness, competitive conduct, and other concerns long addressedthrough telecommunications regulations.as the predominantly digital technologies essential for systems integrationcontinue to mature, the focus of activity in systems integration may shift fromcreating a solution to a problem to engineering that solution. this change in focusmay allow foreign competitors who excel in engineering and implementation butnot necessarily in devising innovative solutions an opportunity to enter thesystems integration market. u.s. systems integration firms thus should not becontent with being first to market, nor sanguine in their belief in the "american"nature of the industry. u.s. hightechnology industries are rife with instances inwhich american leadership was supplanted by superior production from abroad.moreover, colloquium participants observed that foreign countries, most notablyjapan and countries in western europe, have been developing their informationinfrastructures with greater levels of determination and comprehensiveness thanthose exhibited thus far in the united states.to date, systems integration has been a success story. it is time thatgovernment, industry, and academia collectively acknowledge the value ofsystems integration and act to assure the ongoing vitality and competitiveness ofu.s. technical and commercial activities in systems integration.executive summary3keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1overviewnow into its fifth decade, the socalled computer age has wrought anexpectation of rapid technological progress. in fact, the sustained pace of rapidadvance in hardware has become formulaic. the storage capacity of dynamicrandom access memory chips quadruples about every four years, processingspeeds increase at doubledigit annual rates, and the cost of computing declinesbetween 20 and 30 percent each year. add to these computing trends a growingarray of digital communication devices and related technologies, and the rawcapabilities of modern information technology can astound. indeed, thetechnologyšfrom automatic teller machines to laser scanning at the checkoutstand to desktop publishing and to global distributed computing networksšhastransformed spheres of business and many other areas of human endeavor. tomany, today's applications are early manifestations of a seemingly endless streamof possibilities flowing from the font of information technology.still, society's appreciation, mastery, and application of informationtechnology have grown more slowly and more fitfully than have the power andpotential of hardware. the learning curve associated with the technology hasproved to be steep. but organizations that have managed to move high up on thecurve are reaping substantial benefits. these organizations have advanced beyondusing computers to automate existing processes and have proceeded toenterprisewide systems integration. capitalizing on the convergence of computerand communications technology, they use hardware and very complex software toconnect islands of computer applications into coordinated distributed networksystems that often are global in reach. the integration entails far more thansystems engineeringšthe physical linkageoverview4keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of disparate and onceincompatible technologies. it involves melding applicationdomains, such as manufacturing, finance, retail, or transportation, with asupporting infrastructure of information technology components, includingdatabases, operating systems, architectures, networks, communications devices,and security measures. the result is a transformation of the business environmentand of business processes, a strategic change aimed at rapid capture andassimilation of information for planning and decision making.today, executives and researchers speak of ''learning organizations'' and ofthe need for businesses to "reinvent" themselves as competitive conditionschange. both concepts reflect the critically important enabling role played byinformation technology.systems integration represents, in effect, the fruitful culmination ofcomputing and communications research and experience, and it is digitaltechnology's point of departure into the information age. "if there is any trendthat has been consistent over the last four decades of computation, it isintegration," explained laszlo belady, former vice president for softwaretechnology and advanced computing technology at the microelectronics andcomputer technology corp. (he is now chairman and director of mitsubishielectric research laboratories inc.). "forty years ago," he continued, "everythingwas isolated in terms of computer usešisolated in space and time. now we seethat both dimensions are integrated. there is continuity in electronic information,in time, and more and more applications have become interconnected. this leadsto distributed computing networks."some u.s. businesses and government organizations are investing heavily intheir information futures. corporate spending for private networks now accountsfor more than half of all investment in u.s. communications networks.1 this hasspawned an amalgam of uncoordinated networking initiatives, but manyorganizations remain untethered to the electronic connections that have sproutedover the last decade. some small and midsize companies have formedinformation partnerships and pooled their resources to overcome the largefinancial and technical obstacles to exploiting the advantages of integrating andlinking their information technology.2 most have not.many observers believe that the united states must build a nationalinformation infrastructure and that this informationage equivalent of the nationalhighway system will not materialize from the ad hoc networks that have emergedin recent years. advocates, including members of the computer science andtelecommunications board, believe that the potential benefits wrought by newdigital technologyšas well as those to come, when information in all its diversetextual, graphic, and audio forms can be transmitted electronicallyšwill multiplyif the economy and all of society are integrated into a cohesive nationwidenetwork with links to the rest of the world.3overview5keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in january 1991, the computer science and telecommunications board(cstb) of the national research council sponsored a colloquium to contemplatethe future of systems integration on scales small and large. participants includedrepresentatives of manufacturers of information technology, systems integrationfirms, and businesses that are heavy users of information technology;government agencies; and universities.in particular, participants evaluated the implications of the trend towarddistributed computing networks for the u.s. computer and telecommunicationsindustries. more generally, they assessed the significance of this trend for theu.s. economy and debated the roles of government, industry, and universities indeveloping a nationwide information infrastructure, a computing andcommunications network with universal access.this report summarizes the proceedings of the daylong colloquium.supplementary materials, referenced in the text, were used to augment or amplifythe points made by participants. the remainder of this chapter provides ahistorical overview of the systems integration industry and of the trendsunderlying the growth of distributed computing networks. chapter 2 describesapplications of integrated information systems in business, as well as thechallenges that information networking poses. enabling technology, especiallysoftware and communications technology, is the focus of chapter 3. in chapter 4,views of the future and the evolution of today's information networks intosystems of systems are discussed. the final chapter summarizes the main issuesand themes that emerged during the colloquium.evolution of a u.s. business conceptlike the computer and the telephone, systems integration is a product ofu.s. innovation. its roots can be traced to the 1960s, when federal agencies firstcontracted with firms to design largescale systems for data processing,communications, and aerospace and defense applications. opportunities in thecommercial sector grew in step with advances in computing technology and withthe proliferation of proprietary hardware and software products. some businesscustomers persisted with a single vendor, assuming, sometimes incorrectly,compatibility across different families and generations of products. requiringfeatures or applications not offered by the supplier of their original equipment orresponding to better price offerings, other customers picked and chose amongrival vendors and became the owners of collections of incompatible hardware andsoftware items. in addition, many organizations developed their own customizedsoftware applications. with each passing year, it became increasingly difficult toincorporate new technology into the existing base of hardware, software, anddatabases.user demand for connectivity of hardware fueled the growth of systemsengineering businesses, as did the emergence of affordable desktop maoverview6keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chines, which led to what has been described as the democratization ofcomputing. subsequent demand for interoperability of software applicationscreated new business opportunities. from these beginnings and with the aid of thecomputer industry's gradual and stillcontinuing migration to open architecturesand networking standards, systems engineering evolved into systems integration,a more robust and more comprehensive undertaking that goes beyond makingincompatible machines "talk" to each other. today, systems integration isrecognized as a problemsolving activity that entails harnessing and coordinatingthe power and capabilities of information technology in ways tailored to meet acustomer's welldefined set of needs. the result is a complex oneofakind systemthat, for a business, is intended to increase productivity, flexibility,responsiveness, and, ultimately, competitive advantage. value is derived from theability to achieve systemwide synergy among the technological elements andamong the people linked by the network.typically, the end products are "large complex applications" built with a"broad range of knowledge," explained ivan selin, then under secretary formanagement in the u.s. department of state (he is now chairman of the nuclearregulatory commission). ''although hardware and software may be the bulk ofwhat is delivered, there is a lot of consulting, a lot of modification, interfacing,coding, installingšmaking this operation work in a large application," he said.such work requires an interdisciplinary approach that includes not only hardwareand software experts but also experts in the application domain for which thesystem is being developed (e.g., in a steel foundry it is vital to include individualswho understand steel manufacturing). according to selin, founder of the systemsintegration firm american management systems, ''knowhow" is the primarysource of value added.status of the u.s. industryunlike some other segments of the u.s. computer sector, the systemsintegration industry is thriving and is positioned well ahead of stillembryonicforeign competition. in 1990, the systems integration industry had estimatedrevenues of $14.9 billion; revenues in 1991 were projected to grow 13 percent to$16.8 billion.4 enlarging foreign markets, especially europe, are expected todrive rapid revenue increases during the next five years.5about 1,600 firms earn all or the bulk of their revenues from systemsintegration. the largest of these include electronic data systems, a subsidiary ofgeneral motors with annual revenues of almost $6 billion, and andersenconsulting, a division of the accounting firm arthur andersen & co. among thenewest competitors in the commercial market are defense firms that havedeveloped their systems integration expertise in designingoverview7keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and developing complex computercontrolled weapons systems or parts of theu.s. military's sophisticated command, control, communication, and intelligencenetwork.in an industry traditionally structured to sell hardware components andsupporting software products, systems integration is having profound effects onbusiness strategy. companies are maneuvering to meet the demands and needs ofdroves of customers who are linking their information technology into networks.in 1990 alone, u.s. businesses connected nearly 4 million personal computers tolocal networks, bringing the total number of networked pcs to more than 11million.6many companies already providing computing and communication productsand services have pegged systems integration and networked computing as keygrowth areas. examples include the international business machines corp.,american telephone & telegraph co., digital equipment corp., xerox corp.,hewlettpackard co., unisys, motorola inc., compaq, and the ncr corp. (whichrecently merged with at&t). major independent software publishersšamongthem microsoft, the lotus development corp., computer associatesinternational, and the oracle corp.šhave followed suit and have madenetworking applications a priority. also vying in the market are retailer sears,aircraft manufacturers mcdonnell douglas and boeing, and accounting firmsarthur andersen & co., price waterhouse, ernst and young, and kpmg peatmarwick. these and other firms with considerable experience in building andmanaging complex systems of information technology to support their main linesof business have created separate divisions to market their systems integrationexpertise.sometimes called flexible partnerships, alliances among firms are common.on one project, companies with complementary expertise may combine theirresources and skills, but on another former partners may vie as competitors.moreover, large businesses with inhouse personnel assigned to building andmanaging information systems may call on outside firms for needed expertise inparticular areas.the strategic importance of systems integration and prospects for continuinghigh rates of systems integration are influencing both the behavior and structureof the computer and communications industries. in increasing numbers, hardwareand software manufacturers are moving away from building proprietaryequipment and applications and committing themselves to "open systems"šmaking software and hardware that conform with industryaccepted standardsand, therefore, can work with the offerings of other vendors.recent acquisitions provide further evidence of the profound influence ofsystems integration and information networking. the most notable, perhaps, isat&t's purchase of the ncr corp., the nation's fifthlargestoverview8keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer manufacturer. a prime motivation behind at&t's prolonged buteventually successful takeover, at&t chairman robert e. allen was quoted assaying, was to create a company capable of providing "global networks as easy touse and as accessible as the telephone network is today."7 also acting tostrengthen its competitive position in the market for networking applications andservices, the lotus development corp., one of the country's largest independentsoftware publishers, purchased cc: mail, a company with expertise in electronicmail applications. previously, lotus and novell inc., the largest maker ofsoftware for managing networks of personal computers, had explored thepossibility of a merger, another indication of how companies are maneuvering tocompete in the growing market for intraand internetworking products andservices.global prospectssystems integration remains largely an american phenomenon, but one thathas captured the attention of foreign businessesšas customers and ascompetitors. although beginning from a small base, foreign sales represent thefastestgrowing market segment for some established u.s. systems integrationbusinesses. opportunities in foreign markets are likely to stimulate localcompetition, as well as draw new international competitors. several colloquiumparticipants said that they anticipated greater interest from japanese electronicsand telecommunication conglomerates, such as toshiba, fujitsu, nec, nippontelephone and telegraph, and hitachi, each with annual revenues in excess of$10 billion. in europe, cooperative governmentsponsored research anddevelopment projects focusing on future computing and telecommunicationstechnologies raise the specter of greater local competition in that lucrativemarket.despite the expectation that foreign firms will make a determined push inglobal markets for systems integration services, belady and other colloquiumparticipants suggested that at this stage in the evolution of informationtechnology, the emerging opportunities are there for u.s. firms to lose. systemsintegration, said selin, is a "particularly strong example of [a] uniquely americanability to solve oneofakind problems or solve very complex, very difficultproblems in ways that are very hard to imagine. . . .[w]e're very effective when itcomes to providing technological solutions to difficult problems."for now, selin added, the u.s. systems integration industry benefits fromdemonstrable successes that have made it the "recognized world leader." becauseof u.s. accomplishments in designing, developing, and implementing largecomputer and communications systems, "being an american is a big advantage,not a disadvantage [as it is in] a number of other parts of our industry," he said.overview9keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles s. feld, vice president for management information systems atfritolay inc., also noted a significant gap between the systems integrationcapabilities of u.s. companies and those of foreign firms. having built anadvanced information network that links all elements of its domestic operations,fritolay intends to build a counterpart for its expanding international business,which has units in 22 countries. the task has proved to be very challenging. inhis visits to foreign operations acquired by fritolay, feld has found that, "eventhough the hardware is exactly the same as what we would be using here, it is likebeing back in the 1960s in terms of the way people do projects and the way theythink about things. i think we really do have a national asset here that istremendous."nevertheless, there is concern that the flagging competitive status of u.s.firms in "upstream" hardware manufacturing industries, particularlysemiconductor manufacturing equipment and certain segments of the semiconductor industry, could place the u.s. systems integration industry at adisadvantage in international markets. foreign firms with strengths in thesebuildingblock industries, such as the japanese firms mentioned above, couldleverage their technological advantages in the expanding market for computer andcommunications networks, especially if u.s. systems integration firms do nothave timely access to new hardware products.sources of u.s. advantageu.s. leadership in systems integration is attributed to a variety of factors,some more tangible than others. an acknowledged source of advantage is thecontinuing strong performance of the u.s. software manufacturers, who accountfor more than 60 percent of the global market. software, particularly customizedprograms, is the primary source of the "valueadded or content of the systems webuild," explained samuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporation's vicepresident for research. virtually all colloquium participants agreed thatmaintaining the u.s. advantage in software design and development is critical tofuture success in the emerging global market for systems integration services."ultimately," said alfred v. aho, assistant vice president at bellcommunications research, "software is going to be the limiting factor" indetermining the value and utility of integrated systems, as well as the success offirms vying to build these systems.also important but often unappreciated, according to several speakers, is theadvantage conferred by international acceptance of many computer andcommunications standards that originated in the united states. this conformancewith u.s. standards reflects in large part the nation's pioneering role indeveloping and applying information technology, resulting in a kind of afterthefact acceptance of proven technologies. international adoptionoverview10keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of technology developed in the united states opened world markets to u.s. firmsand obliged local competitors to follow the u.s. lead.however, international standards organizations are becoming much moreproactive and are attempting to anticipate technological progress. their aim is tointegrate important innovations into standards as new technology nearscommercial application, avoiding the ferment of de facto standardization andproviding informationtechnology users with an efficient means of linkingexisting and new hardware and software. in practice, international standardsbodies have far to go to achieve this model of efficiency, but proactiveapproaches significantly enhance the strategic importance of standards making.firms that are the most adept in the standards arena may be able to leapfrog thecurrent competition when new generations of computing and communicationtechnology are ready for the marketplace. in the opinion of some colloquiumparticipants, u.s. firms and the federal government have been far more passivethan their european and japanese counterparts in international standardssettingactivities that are likely to shape the future of information networks.the success of u.s. systems integration firms may also stem from what anumber of colloquium speakers described as an american capacity for flexiblethinking and managing complexity, a hallmark of integrated informationsystems. irving wladawskyberger, assistant general manager of developmentand quality for ibm's enterprise systems, emphasized that the nation's prowess indesign and innovation and its propensity for change helped stake the u.s.industry to its leadership position. selin expressed a similar view. "as long as ourcomputer industry concentrates on building applications and building problemsolving systems and not just trying to produce chips or simple devices in largernumbers and more cheaply than other people do, i think we'll do very well," hesaid.but the complexity wrought by an evergrowing web of interconnectedtechnologies, people, and organizations has also led to efforts to create order andsimplicity. standards are one manifestation of these efforts (see chapter 3appendix, "standards making at a glance"). for example, the evolving standardfor integrated services digital network (isdn) service promises to provide aninterface for worldwide networking. growing interest in objectorientedprogramming and in reusable software elements is another illustration of effortsto simplify systems integration and eliminate some of the complexity andredundancy in building information networks.within these emerging areas, cautioned wladawskyberger, may lie theseeds of problems for u.s. systems integration firms. "executing well isabsolutely paramount," he said. "it may be that the design part of systemsintegration, which is where we excel, is becoming an eversmaller part of thetotal problem, and the execution part of itšthat is, 'get the damn thing built andworking'šis where more and more of the problems are. now,overview11keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice that, while we in the united states are superb in this ferment of design andinnovation, lots has been written about our weaknesses in the back end, inexecuting. . . . that is something i think we need to watch out for."selin noted, however, that greater standardization and uniformity inapplications would likely create more opportunities, at both the low and highends of the market. with increasing standardization, he said, "the detailedspecification of the components becomes less important. . . . what happens isthat for problems that took a oneofakind solution, where everything wascustomized and therefore so expensive that very few companies could afford tosolve their problems, it now becomes feasible to do threequarters of the softwarewith an applicationsspecific piece of software. therefore," he continued, "youmake it economical for a much larger range of companies to come in. . . . [t]hetotal size of the market will increase considerably because more and moreorganizations will be able to afford what only a few could before. at the sametime, you go out and you do tougher things."as technology and skills improve, selin added, systems integrators will becalled on to solve "oneofakind problems that are more complex than anythingwe thought possible 10 years ago."converging technology: a driving forcea common base of digital technology is evolving rapidly. the computer nowexists in many formsšfrom supercomputers and massively parallel machines tothe ubiquitous desktop and laptop personal computers to the highly portablepenbased and palmtop computers that are now emerging. just as significant asthis diversity is the tremendous variety of complementing devices forcommunicating, gathering, and presenting information. besides the familiarprinter, the "peripheral" devices of computers now include copiers, facsimilemachines, telephones, answering machines, pagers, scanners, electronic cameras,datastorage devices, optical and electronic sensors, and a vast and growing arrayof computercontrolled machinery.although the decadeold prediction of a personal computer in every home isnot even close to being realized, digitally controlled devices with embeddedsoftware and hardware are pervasive in the home: video cassette recorders andcameras, compact disc players, telephones, microwaves, and other appliances. inprospect is an alldigital highdefinition television system, a development thatcould transform that most ubiquitous and passive of household appliances into amachine capable of storing, retrieving, and manipulating video images.the convergence of technologies is also evident in the area of wirelesscommunications, now principally the domain of cellular telephones. severaloverview12keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.firms have developed wireless methods for linking computers in networks. suchovertheair connections between computers will make network configurations asflexible as those for cellular telephones.as the communication capabilities of computers grow and as communicationdevices become more computerlike, opportunities for information services andproducts multiply. the hybridization of information technology blurs distinctionsbetween industries, giving rise to rivalries among firms that once competed inseparate markets. for consumers, the ubiquity of digital technology createsexciting new opportunitiesšnew ways to gather and manipulate information, newways to work and recreate, and new ways to collaborate. for businesses, thetechnology creates new opportunities that extend throughout and acrossorganizations. many firms are now seeking to achieve the synergies afforded byinformation networking through systems integration.today, however, systems integration is an option largely restricted to largefirms, some of which have invested over $1 billion to revamp their corporateinformation systems and create an infrastructure for distributed computingnetworks. such high costs attest to the complexity and the magnitude of the task.the expense and complexity also reflect the difficulties posed by the lack ofstandards and communication protocols essential for networks linking aheterogeneous collection of equipment. as a result, many of today's networks donot achieve the ideal of a seamless computing and communications environment.each brand of equipment may have its own control computer, and even the mostvigilant network management teams can have trouble isolating and responding toproblems that can disrupt the entire information system. the potential forproblems is magnified, and new ones, such as the threat of security breaches,arise when organizations link their private networks to those of otherorganizations or when network access can be achieved through public telephonelines.a networked society: issues and challengesas ambitious as they are, today's systems integration projects aremicrocosms of the nationand globespanning information networks that areexpected to evolve. in effect, said robert l. martin, vice president for softwaretechnology and systems at bell communications research, the benefits nowbeing reaped by firms that have invested in their own information networkswould be extended to small businesses and individuals. "you could bringintelligence further down the economic hierarchy," he added.visions of the computer age's more revolutionary successor, the informationage, cast the computer as a gateway that provides access to information invirtually all parts of the world. proponents of the informationageoverview13keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.equivalent to universal telephone access contend that a national informationinfrastructure is vital to the nation's economic competitiveness."i believe the broader issue is to change the concept of a system to a highlynetworked distributed base," martin said. "you would then have an educationnetwork that could bring the appropriate educational talent to the disabled, thegifted, or the average student. you would have a very different form of healthsystem."such thinking is not confined to the united states. in europe and japan,government and industry are funding collaborative research and developmentprojects to address the technological hurdles that must be overcome to develop aninfrastructure and the services it would support. the japanese and europeangovernments are also fostering development of key standards for achievingcompatibility and interoperability. several european nations have implementedaccelerated schedules for installing the digital networks and common channelsignaling necessary for isdn service. in japan, the nippon telephone andtelegraph co. has announced its intention to develop the most advancedtelecommunications system in the world. by 1995, it intends to offer isdnservice in all 56 japanese cities, and by the year 2015, it will link all homes byoptical fiber.8 at the same time, japan's ministry of international trade andindustry (miti) has initiated a series of programs designed to integrate itscomputer, telecommunications, and other informationrelated industries and tonetwork its society. recently announced initiatives include research anddevelopment projects on interoperable database systems and improved graphicaluser interfaces, modeling studies of "information age cities," and severalcooperative research programs aimed at helping developing countries build theirown information networks.9colloquium participants did not see u.s. government and industry asattending to the nation's information infrastructure with the same levels ofdetermination and comprehensiveness as those exhibited in japan and europe.virtually all endorsed administration and legislative proposals calling for thecreation of a national research and education network (nren), an information"superhighway" that eventually would transmit data at rates of several billion bitsper second, or more than 1,000 times faster than today's standard data networks.as proposed, nren would connect the nation's universities and collaboratingcompanies. the administration's initiative, called the high performancecomputing and communications (hpcc) program, would provide a focal pointfor developing the hardware, software, and systems that a truly nationalinformation infrastructure will require. (see chapter 4 for a discussion of thehpcc program.)indeed, whether practiced on the scale of a single company or on the scaleof an entire nation, systems integration poses a variety of technical, social,economic, and regulatory issues, which are examined in the next chapters.overview14keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. durros, irwin. 1990. "calling for cooperation," bellcore exchange, novemberœdecember, p. 7.2. for example, 18 midsize paper companies with collective annual revenues of $4 billion pooledtheir resources to create a $50 million global information network that links the companies,offices of major customers, and international sales offices. this system permits samedayresponses to inquiries from customers, as compared with the industry average of 12 days.(konsynski, benn r., and f. warren mcfarlan. 1990. "information partnershipsšshareddata, shared scale," harvard business review, septemberœoctober, pp. 115œ118.) also, anumber of wall street security firmsšwhere information technology expenditures canaccount for 15 percent to 20 percent of expensesšare engaged in several types ofcooperative activities, including sharing disasterrecovery sites, combining and distributingtheir analytical libraries, and developing a shared electronic data interchange network.(ambrosio, johanna. 1991. "wall street firms try shared technology," computerworld,june 24.)3. computer science and technology board, national research council. 1988. the nationalchallenge in computer science and technology, national academy press, washington,d.c. see also the september 1991 issue of scientific american, which has several articlesrelating to information infrastructure.4. department of commerce. 1991. u.s. industrial outlook 1991, information services, governmentprinting office, washington d.c., p. 275.5. as reported in gartner group inc. 1990. "systems integration scenario," gartner group inc.,greenwich, conn., p. 7.6. rothfeder, jeffrey, peter coy, and gary mcwilliams. 1990. "taming the wild network," businessweek, october 8, p. 143.7. shapiro, eben. 1991. "at&t buying computer maker in stock deal worth $7.4 billion," newyork times, may 7, p. a1.8. bellcore technical liaison office. 1990. "japanese telecommunications," unpublished paper,bellcore, morristown, n.j., july, p. 21.9. for a compelling discussion of the enormous potential for an information infrastructure to transformsociety as seen by japan's ministry of international trade and industry (miti), the reader isreferred to the socalled "sixth generation" or new information processing technology(nipt) project currently proposed by miti and discussed in its report of the researchcommittee on new information processing technology, industrial electronics division,machinery and information industries bureau, ministry of international trade and industry,march 1991.overview15keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2applications of integrated systems:evolution in concept and practiceask a dozen practitioners what systems integration is, and you will probablyget as many different definitions (see box 2.1). ask that same group whatsystems integration is intended to accomplish, and the answers are likely to bemore uniform. the standard response is "solutions" or "application solutions."for people who are not steeped in the field, however, that answer prompts afundamental question: what's the problem in the first place?typically, the set of needs and problems that an integrated computing andcommunications system addresses is unique to an organization. at snack foodmaker fritolay, for example, the challenge was to develop an informationsystem that helped the company leverage the advantages and efficiencies thataccrue to its large size and yet enabled the national firm to maneuver flexibly inlocal markets, where it sells the 5 billion packages of snack food that generateannual revenue of $4.5 billion. the company's integrated system, widely used asan example of an effective corporate information system, links all parts of itsoperations. the system has allowed fritolay "to be decentralized in itsmarketplace activities," explained charles s. feld, vice president formanagement information systems, "and at the same time, leverage our wholemanufacturing and logistics system. we have been able to do that through the useof information and technology, primarily by providing information to the peoplethat have to make decisions lower in the organization." (see box 2.2.)motivations for systems integrationdespite the great variability in the issues and needs organizations seek toresolve with applications of information technology, there are at least fivegeneral categories of motivations for investing in systems integration.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice16keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.1. definitions of systems integration''fulfilling a practical objective through the assemblage ofdiverse component technologies and disciplines that are critical toeach other's success. it is a teaming of technology components thatresults in high synergy.''šjeffrey m. heller, senior vice president, electronic data systemssystems integration is "process innovationšto simplify basicbusiness operations, to compress the time they require, and to narrowthe gap between the product or service and the customer."šw. james fischer, managing partner, andersen consulting"people building upon existing components to satisfy acustomer's need."šrobert l. martin, vice president for software technology andsystems, bell communications research"effective integration implies a systemlevel architecture thatpermits the integration, or connection, of system components andpermits later integration of unplanned components. effectiveintegration also implies an integrating mechanism that permitscomponents to share data. it implies an overall model that permits theuser to understand what the system is doing. it implies a constantuser interface. it also requires integration of the functions of theapplications that the system supports."šlarry e. druffel, director, software engineering institute, carnegie mellon university"it started with technologyšputting bits and pieces togetheršand grew into managing information. it has grown into understandingprocesses and now, i believe, it is getting into understanding thehuman element of what we are trying to accomplish."šmichael taylor, central systems engineering manager, digitalequipment corporation"solving a problem efficiently, recursively; giving disparatecomponents a singlesystem look and feel. . . we should keep[integrated information systems] simple so that we can maintain themand use them, and we should keep them affordable so they will deliverthe greatest value to the largest number of people."šalfred v. aho, assistant vice president, bell communicationsresearchapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice17keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.2. the fritolay information systemif an executive at fritolay headquarters near dallas wants to knowhow his company's products are faring on supermarket shelves in boston,or the price of a corn futures contract at the chicago board of trade, or thefuel efficiency of the company's delivery fleet, that information is instantlyavailable. in fact, current information on virtually every aspect of the snackfood maker's operationsšmanufacturing, purchasing, warehousing,distribution, marketing, sales, management, and researchšis easilyretrieved with the company's information system and presented in the levelof detail desired.widely cited as a model of an effective corporate information system,fritolay's computer network has established itself as the company's mostimportant strategic and competitive tool. executives say it is a requirementfor business survival in the 1990s.a national company competing against local and regional snack foodmanufacturers for shelf and display space in more than 400,000 stores, thesubsidiary of pepsico inc. has used its comprehensive intelligence totransform itself into a "micromarketer" that enjoys the economies of scalethat accrue to a multibilliondollar enterprise."we learned how to handle the volume, we learned how to handle thespeed over the years," explained charles s. feld, fritolay's vice presidentfor management information systems. ''but what has happened to us is, ourmarketplace has gotten very complex. boston is now very different fromchicago, very different from california; supermarkets are different fromconvenience stores; and products are differentiated by flavors and bagsizes. the world is no longer one size or one color of jeans. everybodywants diversity. so we have had to figure out a way to leverage our size andprowess in the marketplace and still be able to compete on a very targetedbasis."the company's 10,000person sales force provides the informationthat is key to fritolay's nimble performance in local markets. equippedwith handheld computers, a sales person keys in orders during sales callsand furnishes customers with a printout, an onthespot sales receipt withtax, discounts, and promotions included. at the end of each day, the salesforce electronically transmits sales, orders, and other information to theheadquarter's mainframe computer. the next morning, the sales people linkup again with the mainframe to receive the day's routing and schedulinginformation.with the dailyupdated information from the field, the company cantrack performance in precise detail, down to the sales movement of anindividual product in a single store. as a result, managers say they knowmore about local marketing conditions than their competitors do, and theycan devise sales strategies accordingly.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice18keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.before the networked information system was introduced, thecompany's marketing strategy consisted of two or three national initiatives,formulated at the top of the organization. now, with the benefit of detailedknowledge of local markets, middle managers generate and execute some300 salesbuilding ideas each year. while top management oversees theselocal and regional marketing initiatives, the shift in tactical responsibilitiespermits executives to focus more on the company's strategic direction.executives at the 60yearold company, which employs 26,000 people,cite effective teamwork across the organization as the primary advantageof the information system. benefits have been realized in many forms.electronic data entry by the sales force eliminated timeconsumingpaperwork, saving between 30,000 and 50,000 hours each week. thecompany was able to consolidate 400 sales routes even as its annual salesvolume increased to $4.5 billion, from $3.7 billion. improved tracking ofproduct movement reduced the number of "stales" (products that haveexceeded their shelf lives) from 2 percent of sales volume to less than 1percent, resulting in annual savings of $39 million.designed to accommodate changing needs and new applications, theinformation system continues to evolve and increase its strategic andoperational value to the company.feld attributes the success of the system to three enabling factors: "abusiness proposition worthy of the investment" in information technology,systems integration skill, and "the will to see the job through during toughtimes."1. for many organizations, experiences with information technology have not lived up to expectations. american business investedbillions in computing and communications technology during the1980s.1 at the start of the decade, the nation's inventory of computerterminals totaled about 4 million; as of today, some 75 millionibmcompatible personal computers alone have been sold, and halfof all u.s. office workers have a computer on their desks.2 manyfirms realized significant benefits. but a large number did not, or atleast returns to their investments were not commensurate with initialexpectations. one major disappointment was the negligibleimprovement in the productivity of the service sector (although gainswere made in the quality and diversity of service output), which hasbeen estimated to account for about 85 percent of the nation's totalstock of information technology items.3hindsight offers some valuable lessons. the most obvious, ofcourse, is that merely possessing technology, regardless of itscapabilities, does notapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice19keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.translate automatically into an organizational asset. as simple as itmay seem now, this lesson is actually the product of evolutionarychanges in technology and, most important, in understanding the roleof that technology.2. the proliferation of information technology products and vendors has produced the need for connectivity and interoperability. manyorganizations own heterogeneous collections of computing andcommunication equipment, purchasing, for example, one vendor'smachines for engineers, another's for administrative support staff,and yet another's for managing large databases and onlinetransactionprocessing activities. because of incompatibilities inoperating systems and other vendorspecific peculiarities, dissimilarmachines, and the people who used them, functioned in isolation.exchanging information between these computing islands entailedlaborious translation procedures or, worse yet, manual reentry ofinformation.this state of affairs led to user demand for connectivity, a meansto let unlike systems perform at least rudimentary tasks such asexchanging files. but connectivity was not enough. users alsowanted their hardware and software to be interoperable, that is, tomake applications, information, and peripheral devices easilyaccessible to any computer, regardless of who made it and whatoperating system it used.3. an installed base of information technology has to accommodate newtechnology and new capabilities. the need to combine the old withthe new is a perennial source of headaches for managers ofinformation systems. firms that have invested vast sums ininformation technology cannot simply jettison that investment andstart anew with each successive wave of commercial innovation. norwould they want to even if they could afford it. the databases andapplications embedded within existing information systems are oftendescribed as the "corporate jewels," strategically important assetsthat are integrally related to the firms' operations. moreover, thevalue of existing information and programs can be increased greatlywhen integrated with the capabilities of new hardware and software.4. advances in technology, combined with growing appreciation of what can he accomplished with that technology, have promptedfirms to search for new applications and sources of competitiveadvantage . although the computeršor, more appropriately, theevergrowing family of digital technologiesšmay not yet merit thetitle of universal machine, growing appreciation of its potential isinspiring organizations to apply the technology in new ways and, inso doing, pursue new business opportunities. just as important, newcapabilities in computing and communications are motivatingindividual firms and groups of firmsšsuppliers and customers andeven industriesšto reevaluate their entire way of doing business.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice20keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5. in an increasingly global economy, firms must rely ontelecommunications and information technology to manage andcoordinate their operations and to stay abreast of internationalcompetitors. the ability to communicate and transmit large volumesof data nearly instantaneously facilitates closer linkages with foreignsubsidiaries, suppliers, and customers, but it also telescopes the timeorganizations have to respond to changes in international markets andto the actions of competitors. if, for example, a manufacturing firm'scompetitors can place electronic orders with foreign suppliers orchange the specifications for a part and transmit the new designimmediately to a collaborator located half the world away, then thatfirm must also have the same capabilities just to keep pace with thecompetition.none of these motivations stands entirely apart from the others.collectively, they are driving businesses and other organizations to use theirinformation technology innovatively and effectively. moreover, informationnetworking technology is so intricately related to the broader phenomenon of thegrowing interdependency among regional, national, and global economies that theimportance of its role can only be expected to increase.distributed networked computing: evolution inunderstandingthe steady stream of complementing innovations in computer andcommunications technology provides the building blocks of systems integrationprojects. components of hardware and software are integrated into distributedcomputing networks, which many firms view as their "central nervous systems,"the means to coordinate all elements of their operations into a synergistic whole.the result is a sprouting of electronic and opticalfiber connections that link theinformation age's equivalents to the pools of neurons of varying size and functionthat make up the central nervous system and work in concert with the brain.centers of activity range from individual computers on a network to local areanetworks (lans), which connect computers at single sites, to wide area networks(wans) that link lans or individual machines across a region, a nation, or theworld.while networks of machines and devices are the ostensible manifestationsof the trend toward distributed computing and communications, the mostsignificant connections, according to colloquium participants, are those betweenpeople and organizational units using linked devices. it is at the level of theworker that systems integration and distributed computing should have itsgreatest impact, many asserted.this expectation is markedly different from the notions of automation thathave heavily influenced computer applications since the 1960s. in theapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice21keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.early days of commercial computing, companies used the technology to automate"simple standalone processes," explained gerard r. weis, senior vice presidentat sears technology services inc. "we would do things like capture data,keypunch it, and report on it simply to compress the time from the time we gotthe data until we produced a report and to obtain operational cost savings byreducing the number of people who manually produced those reports."in the following decade, according to the recounting of weis and otherparticipants, firms began to link automated processes within some units of theirbusiness. the result was what has been described as archipelagos of automationcreated from islands of automation."the 1980s," said weis, drawing on his own company's experiences, "sawus take two divergent paths. . . . on the business side, we focused on dataintegration and databased management so that we began to tie togetherinformation in the various lines of businesses. on the technology side, we focusedon pushing down the cost of running those systems and on making sure that theinfrastructure would support the data integration that was going on at theapplications level."what many firms have learned during this 30year evolution is thatautomating business as usual did not tap the most significant competitiveadvantages that can be achieved with information technology, explained w.james fischer, managing partner for technology services at andersenconsulting. whatever the gains inherent in this approach of assigning computingtechnology to its most obvious usesšpreparing payrolls, budgets, and inventoriesand performing other numbercrunching tasksšthey were likely to be shortlivedadvantages because such applications are readily available to all competitors, hesaid.in contrast to the past pattern of responding incrementally and, often, inpiecemeal fashion to the growing capabilities of information technology, firms inthe current decade may use the technology to redefine themselves. that is whatweis foresees happening at sears. "[w]e have to reassess our business processesand our culture," he said, "and figure out then how to make the business rundifferently and to exploit technology in fostering that change."systems integration as "process innovation"structural and cultural change is a formidable challenge for any firm, publicagency, or other type of organization. yet for most organizations, maintaining thestatus quo will likely mean that they will not realize the most significantadvantages afforded by the technology, contended fischer, whose responsibilitiesat andersen consulting include devising a comprehensive firmwide view forapplying information technology.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice22keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved."[s]ystems integration," he said, "really ought to be about the business ofprocess innovation," which, by definition, necessitates change. process innovationentails changing the ways companies "perform their standard business functions,changing the way they manufacture, changing the way they distribute, changingthe way their orders are taken, and changing the way they sell their product," heexplained.ultimately, fischer said, the aim is to "simplify the business": to reduce thetime it takes to perform key activities and to narrow the gaps between thepersonnel and the functions that support those activities. within manufacturingfirms, this requires erasing barriers between design, engineering, production,marketing, and distribution. fischer also maintained that the new cooperativelinks forged by systems integration should extend outside the organization andtighten relationships with suppliers and customers.mark teflian, vice president and chief information officer at covia, whichoperates the world's secondlargest computerized airline reservation system,offered a different yet complementary conceptual framework for appraising thetransformational role of networked information technology. global competitionand the rapid diffusion of technology across international borders, he said, haveshortened the competitive life of most products and, consequently, collapsed thetime a firm has to recover costs and generate profits that support succeedingcycles of innovation and product introductions. increasingly, teflian predicted,firms will regard their products as perishable products with limited shelf lives.seizing shortlived marketing opportunities and optimizing pricing strategies willrequire timely capture of information at the point of sale and rapid response tochanging market conditions.the growing value of timely information, teflian asserted, will spur wideadoption of online transactionprocessing (oltp) systems. pioneered by airlinesthat developed computerized reservation systems, oltp systems providecomputer users on a network with simultaneous realtime access to shareddatabases. whenever necessary, users can retrieve information, change it, andenter new information, thereby updating the databases and providing others onthe network with the most current information available. according to teflian,such online systems offer firms the means to broaden and deepen theirintelligence, a fundamental requirement for rapid and informed decision making.assimilating information and enabling peopleas customers, software and hardware manufacturers, and system integratorsreassess the roles and uses of information technology, people emerge as the mostcritical element and as the element most resistant to the organizational changesthat systems integration fosters. integrating peoplešhelping them assimilateinformation, create, collaborate, and, in sum, workapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice23keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more productivelyšis the highestorder task of systems integration. ultimately,the success or failure of systems integration is determined not by "groups oftechnology," teflian contended, but by how effectively networks help people"process and assimilate information." overcoming incompatibilities betweencomputer operating systems and other systemsengineering hurdles are "minorproblems," he said, compared with the challenge of adapting the technology toensure that it is truly an enabling tool for the people who use it.systems integrators and their customers have devoted most of their attentionto technical issues, which, obviously, if not resolved will impede effective use ofinformation technology. but such issues should not obscure the fact that the truemeasure of information technology's value is its impact on human andorganizational performance, advised max hopper, american airlines senior vicepresident for information systems. to illustrate his point, hopper offered as anexample his company's collaboration with the french national railroad to developa computer reservation system, called reservrail. through the systemsintegration project, the railroad is taking a 20year "leap" in technology, he said,but the physical deployment of the enabling computer and communicationsequipment represents only a secondary part of the process. "i do not think it is apiece of hardware," he explained. "i mean, it did not make a damn bit ofdifference whether the computer that is used is a pc [personal computer or asupercomputer. it . . . really relates to changing the way the company doesbusiness. that is where, i think, there is skill [needed]."that skill, however, is at a nascent stage of development. "i think we arejust starting to understand the fact that the computing system has to be driven bythe human system," said michael taylor, central systems engineering manager atthe digital equipment corp. "we are starting to think in terms of a new paradigmthat says you start with the people, the way those people need to do work. forgetall this technology. that will come later. but look at the people, look at whatthose people have to do, and see what you can do to make them moreproductive."with this perspective on using information technology to make workersmore effective, the purview of systems integration expands greatly. into a domainlargely devoted to solving detailed technical problems enter issues intricatelyrelated to cultural notions of work. for example, networking is expected to enablegreater cooperation and interaction among workers, but it is not at all clear how tofoster a truly collaborative, computersupported work style and to capture theanticipated productivity benefits.achieving effective systems integrationfaced with a task of such breadth and complexity, systems integrators andtheir customers may be tempted to dissect the economic, technological,applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice24keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational, and cultural problems and issues they confront into eversmallerparts. but feld of fritolay warned against this tendency. "we need to thinkabout [information systems]," he said, "in much longer time frames and from amuch higher mountain. . . . breaking down the problem to smaller elements isgoing in the wrong direction because you cannot see what is happening. youhave got to be able to step above it" and view the system as a whole.yet, the whole is a composite creationša oneofakind assembly of manypeople and many individual pieces of hardware and softwarešbuilt byinterdisciplinary and often geographically separated teams. coordination isessential and difficult. in such a complex undertaking, the systemwideperspective that feld advocated can easily be lost. moreover, methodologicaltools to guide systems integration projects and help ensure congruence andcomplementarity among supporting tasks and products are at a rudimentarystage. in fact, colloquium participants generally agreed that building largeintegrated systems from heterogeneous collections of hardware and softwareremains more an imperfect art than a structured scientific or engineeringdiscipline.numerous pitfalls are inherent in the process and, consequently, it is notuncommon for an information system to fall short of expectations held at thebeginning of a systems integration project. for example, more than a fewanecdotal accounts describe projects that greatly exceeded their budget or, worseyet, were abandoned after considerable investments of money and time. considerthe experiences of the federal government, the largest user of systems integrationservices. in 1990 the general accounting office reported that the governmentspends $20 billion annually to improve its 53,000 computer systems. but thewatchdog agency found that "attempts to modernize the government's informationsystems have produced few successes and many costly failures." 4in addition, problems arise after information systems are up and running.equipment problems, programming errors, and other disruptive events causenetwork failures, resulting in annual losses estimated to range from $600,000 to$3 million for firms with large systems. 5,6 moreover, unauthorized use ofnetworks and other security abuses have resulted in large, but untabulated, lossesof money and information. 7acknowledging the difficulties and complexities that can undermine theaims of system integration, colloquium participants identified some of the keyattributes of efforts to build effective information systems, as well as the essentialfeatures of those systems.understanding the organization and the application areafrom the various definitions of systems integration offered by participants,one might deduce that effectiveness is variously perceived by theapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice25keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beholdersšthe organizations and people who will use the information system.for example, jeffrey m. heller, senior vice president at electronic data systems,described an effective systems integration project as one that fulfills a "practicalobjective through the assemblage of diverse component technologies anddisciplines that are critical to each others' success." at a general level, thisdefinition seems straightforward enough, but it can become exceedingly complexat the operational level of an individual organization. "the formulation ofcustomer requirements," heller said, may be the most important and leastappreciated aspect of systems integration. added feld of fritolay, "you have tohave a business proposition that is worthy of the investment" in an integratedsystem of information technology.translating a business plan into an integrated set of hardware, databases, andapplications, according to fischer of andersen consulting, requires an approachthat encompasses each of the main elements common to every company: theoverriding business strategy, the technology and the operations supporting thatstrategy, and the skill levels of the work force. "these four elements must besynchronized, or important synergies will be lost," fischer said. "if any of youhad the opportunity to review systems that were designed in the past 20 years,you would find that none of them reflects an understanding of all four elements."an essential element of this understanding, according to severalparticipants, is comprehensive knowledge of the particular attributes of theindustry in which a client company is competing and of the unique characteristicsof that customer's business. customized applications developed without thisknowledge are not likely to satisfy a customer's information needs, nor to providethe competitive advantages that the firm was seeking from its investment intechnology. for u.s. systems integration firms aiming to compete in foreignmarkets, advised ivan selin, thorough familiarity with the application area aspracticed in target countries may be the most important determinant of exportingsuccess. (see box 2.3.)increasingly, integrators are recognizing the need to be intimately familiarwith application areas, a recognition that has motivated strategic partnerships withconsulting organizations expert in the strategic issues of a particular industry. inaddition, there is growing appreciation of the multidisciplinary nature of systemsintegration and the concomitant need for collaborative teamwork throughout thedevelopment process. the need for expertise in computers, software,communications, and the application domain remains critical. but someintegrators are choosing to broaden their perspective and are now augmentingtheir teams with anthropologists, social scientists, and other specialists who can,for example, address issues related to the design of user interfaces and to howpeople adjust to collaborative work environments.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice26keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.3 thoughts on exportingsystems integration has the ''makings of a great export industry," ivanselin, then under secretary for management in the u.s. state department(he is now chairman of the nuclear regulatory commission), told thecolloquium. for u.s. firms to preserve and build on their commandingposition in the emerging international market, selin emphasized, they mustexecute a lesson already learned in the domestic market: to build effectiveintegrated information systems, firms must be intimately familiar with thecharacteristics of the foreign industries and companies they are workingwith. he expanded on this point:first, of course, are the obstacles to any kind of hightechnologyexport. you have to know the language, you need entree to the customers,you may need local partners, [and so on]. . . . then there are someadditional obstacles specific to integrated systems. first of all, by definition,we're talking about major applications. we're talking about a lot of time, alot of effort, a lot of customized software, a lot of industryspecific standardsoftware, and a lot of hardware. before you can sell one of these majorapplications you really need to know the industry as practiced in the targetcountry, not just as practiced in the united states. depending on theindustry, there are major differences from country to country.but you also need to know the company, because, again, these arenot products off the shelf; they're specific to a particular company'sapplications, and these are hard to know. even if you devote a lot of timeand effort to understand international banking or, say, trade documentation,when you go to japan you find out that documents are done differently fromthe way they are done in the united states. the companies are different,the culture is different, what they are willing to share from one company toanother is different. . . .on top of that, . . . you are talking about doing applications that aredeeply involved in the "innards" of how the company operates, and socompanies tend to be very reluctant to bring in outside firms to do reallymainline systems. it's one thing to buy something off the shelf or out of acatalogue; it's another to trust an outsider to come in and develop a systemthat will be central to the operation of that company for a long time to come.on the one hand, the company is terribly dependent on the outsider toprovide the system successfully; on the other hand, that outsider is going towalk away with a lot of inside information, and in many societies and manycompanies that is something that is given up very reluctantly. finally, youneed to have experts in the country to which you are exporting. it's notenough to have very good sales representatives and very goodmaintenance peoplešyou need to have the people who have a fair shareof the information that was necessary to develop the system in the firstplace.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice27keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.''to be successful," said albert b. crawford, executive vice president forstrategic business systems at american express travel related services, "asystems integration contractor must demonstrate relevant experience in multipledisciplines and in successfully managing extremely large, complex projects."however, finding people with the requisite mix of skills to achieve that level ofperformance is becoming increasingly difficult for the systems integrationindustry.recognizing essential features of information systemssystem architecturethe rapid advance of computer and communications technology underlies aneverchanging set of user needs. new capabilities create new businessopportunities and, at the same time, open the door to new competition,necessitating a change in business strategies and operations and, consequently, inthe information systems on which firms depend. as a result, businesses want tobe able to capitalize on new technology offerings, but without having to start fromscratch with each new round of innovation or each newly identified informationneed.thus a key attribute of an integrated information system is flexibility, theability to evolve to accommodate unforeseen technologies and information needsand to be adapted with relative ease to address new competitive challenges. suchflexibility, however, has not been a hallmark of information systems.in the past, said taylor of the digital equipment corp., integrators "createdsome very innovative, very creative, very unique solutions to the businessproblems of the era. the bad news was that with this very creativeness anduniqueness, we caused difficulties. . . . companies [now] looking at theseintegrated solutions of a few years ago find that, because they are unique, they aredifficult to migrate forward, they are difficult to evolve as the underlyingtechnology changes, and what, at the time, was a competitive advantage for thefirm could well become a competitive disadvantage if indeed that solution is rigidand inflexible and geared to a way of doing business that is no longer in tune withthe way that corporation now wants to do business."these experiences point to the need for a consistent systems architectureassembled with modular building blocksšhardware, software, database, andcommunications platforms with flexible linkages, or interfaces. standardizationand the move toward open systems are yielding modular products that, in effect,can be bolted on or plugged into existing systems and yet are malleable enough tolink to tomorrow's technology."from a technology perspective," taylor explained, "we are taking aapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice28keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.much more architectural approach. that says you need building blocks, you needto innovate within those building blocks but you need to retain that architecturalframework so that the whole evolution is not impeded by the fact that everythingis interconnected to everything else."the growth of information networking, however, has outpaced standardsdevelopment and the computer industry's migration to open systems. manyorganizations that are pioneering applications of information technology still bearthe risk of being locked into proprietary systems that may restrict future optionsfor connectivity and interoperability. 8 for now, these organizations must choosefrom among competing platforms, hoping that their selections will become thenationally and internationally accepted and implemented standards.if a firm is large enough, it can try to dictate its architectural requirements toprospective suppliers, as american express travel related services has done inthe area of communication components. according to crawford, who overseesdevelopment of the subsidiary's global information system, american expresshas stipulated a set of standard interfaces that equipment suppliers must provide.american express, like many other firms, is now endeavoring to build anunderlying architecture for its global information system, a framework on whichto combine old and new technology and build coherent solutions rather than apatchwork of partial solutions. like a wellconceived plan that includescontingencies for uncertainty, a good systems architecture is expansive andadaptable. but, crawford explained, it also exerts controls to ensure that newequipment, databases, and applications achieve the desired levels of connectivityand interoperability.fritolay's new corporate information system provides an example of thebenefits that accrue to an architecture that can evolve with changing needs. "oneof the fundamental design criteria" in fritolay's layered architecture, explainedfeld, who directed the development of the company's system, is the ability toaccommodate change. for example, only minor database adjustments are requiredif the firm revamps its employee pay structures or even if it restructures theorganization. "we have 32 areas of the country now," feld said. ''if we wanted todrop down to 28, it is a weekend database reorganization." because of thedisaggregated nature of the information system, major alterations in one area donot generate unwanted and unforeseen changes in others, he explained.data communication capabilitiesbecause of heavy network and internetwork traffic or because of their needfor specialized computing and communication capabilities, such as thetransmission of large graphics files, firms are paying as much attention toapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice29keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.their datatransmission capabilities and informationretrieval times as they are tosuch perennial issues as processing power and memory and storage capacity.some have invested in building private information infrastructures, often atconsiderable expense. for example, when general motors (gm) initiated itsmassive program to automate its manufacturing operations, about half of itsoutlays for computer systems went for communicationsrelated equipment andsoftware.9 today, corporate spending for private networks accounts for more thanhalf of all spending for communications networks in the united states.10but in building their highspeed networks, firms are entering into murkywaters. the unsettled state of highlevel communications protocols necessary forexchanging information and applications within and between networks meanstoday's choices could complicate efforts to satisfy tomorrow's networking needsif alternative conventions emerge as the industry standards. moreover, even thelargest firms are discovering that, as the trend to internetworking andinterenterprise cooperation proceeds, they can no longer entirely bypass publictelecommunications carriers, an amalgam of international, national, regional, andlocal utilities, or the growing number of thirdparty suppliers of enhancedtelecommunications and information services. this increases the number ofinterfaces and, therefore, potential bottlenecks that must be negotiated forinternetworking applications, while increasing the vulnerability of a firm'scommunications and information system to security violations and technicalfailures.securityas internetworking grows, the potential for theft of data, other securityabuses, and accidents also increases. for example, technical problems in onenetwork can cause deterioration of service in connected networks. internalsafeguards developed by managers of private networks will no longer suffice, buteffective responses to new risks have yet to be developed."five years ago," explained weis of sears, "we were less concerned aboutthe outside world, and we had pretty good security means that we couldimplement privately within the company." but today, as sears makes greater useof public voice and data communication networks, its information system hasbecome more vulnerable, he saidš"there are some policy issues that need to beresolved." for example, automatic number identification, which provides thetelephone number of a person who gains access to an information system bymeans of a modem, would permit managers to audit usage. the technology,however, has raised privacy issues that have resulted in lawsuits.better security, said fischer of andersen consulting, is "an extremely severechallenge for the future." with more and more companies billing,applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice30keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ordering, and handling other tasks through electronic data interchange (edi) andas electronic links to consumers increase, he added, "you can see how thepossibilities for security violations go up exponentially. so it is a problem that wesee as very, very key for the future of the industry."network management and reliability"nobody has yet given us the capable tools for network management of thescale, type, and variety that we need," complained crawford of americanexpress. as a result, american express, in collaboration with ibm, is developingits own system for network management and control. as part of the developmenteffort, american express has determined what data it needs for effective networkadministration, and it now requires prospective suppliers of network managementproducts to satisfy those data needs.the shortcomings of network management tools are widely acknowledged,the subject of numerous articles in the field. suppliers of those tools arestruggling to meet the need and, in the process, capture a share of a rapidlygrowing market (variously estimated to be a few hundred million dollars inrevenues per year). what users hope these products will provide are a simple,unified means for monitoring the performance of an entire network and alertingmanagers to failures or deterioration in performance; straightforward methods foranalyzing and pinpointing the causes of problems; and a comprehensive set oftools for responding to problems and rerouting traffic around trouble spots.management issues extend beyond the need to keep networks up and running,however. also important, for example, are tools for controlling softwaredistribution, preventing the introduction of unlicensed programs (which maycontain viruses and other problems), and maintaining data integrity.ease of use and effective presentation of informationsimplicity, according to colloquium participants, is the ultimate determinantof an information network's effectiveness. if information technology is not easy touse, if information is not easy to access, select, and share, and if applications arenot easily mastered, then an information and communication system fails toaccomplish its primary function of enabling people.for the average user, first impressionsšthat is, interactions with the userinterfacešcan be lasting ones. rather than breeding the familiarity that fostersgreater use and exploration of network applications, several participants noted,differences in user interfaces can cause considerable frustration and confusion,dissuading employees, for example, from using electronic mail features orentering information into a database on potential customapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice31keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ers. a networked information system, maintained robert l. martin, vicepresident for software technology and systems at bell communicationsresearch, should have a "common look and feel." an underlying consistency inthe appearance and functionality of applications and databases not only hastenslearning and, perhaps, lowers expenditures for training employees who areexpected to use the network, but it also makes it easier to tap the functionality ofsuites of applications.with the emergence of multimedia applications that combine information inall its textual, graphical, and audio forms, new types of interfacesšthose that, forexample, respond to voice commands or eye and hand movementsšwill also beintroduced. these offerings will greatly enhance the utility of informationsystems. but, said larry e. druffel, director of the software engineering instituteat carnegie mellon university, integrating new interface technology should notrequire revamping the information system and its underlying applications anddatabases.of course, the utility and diversity of applications and complementing toolsdetermine what users can actually do with an information system. today, mostorganizations have a backlog of ideas for new customized applications awaitingdevelopment. ideally, workers or groups of workers should be able to build theirown applications to help them accomplish their tasks. new organizationalsoftware that allows groups to work together is a step in this direction. it strives tocreate what, in essence, is a flexible programming environment that enables usersto create their own applications. such software often includes programming toolsand prepackaged bits of programming code, or objects, that help users create newapplications and databases by combining the components of existing ones. withsignificant advances over the next 10 to 15 years, suggested weis of sears, theseprogramming aids may enable business professionals to "specify, in anonprocedural way, the business functions that they want to perform and thenturn those rules or nonprocedural statements into a system" that performs thedesired applications. today, however, the gap between promise and reality islarge. even for the most experienced systems integrators and software designersand programmers, it remains exceedingly difficult to develop an application orsuite of applications that, at the implementation stage, works according to plansand expectations.a major unsolved problem in this area is in the statement of requirements in aformat understandable to the end users and also to the developers. these twogroups usually come from very different job backgrounds and frequently sharevery little common terminology. methods such as "rapid prototyping," whichallow end users to observe the "look and feel" of the final systems beforecommitting to fullscale development, have been very successful in definingexpectations.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice32keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues and research needslike the process of systems integration itself, the issues and challenges thatwill shape the evolution of distributed, networked computing must be assessedfrom several interrelated perspectives. a rapidly growing industry with apotentially large international market, the systems integration industry mustattend to matters that will affect its competitive status. the businesses and otherorganizations that are now the primary users of systems integration services facechallenges in making the most advantageous use of their information technology.finally, as the web of interconnected computing and communication devicesgrows, the entire economy and all of u.s. society become affected, introducing amore encompassing set of needs and issues.today's experiences with networked information systems are testimony tothe advantages to be reaped on scales small and large. but they are also testimonyto the tremendous challenges positioned between the reality and the promise ofinformation networking. one assessment of the current reality is this: "we havenow reached a stage of uncontrolled chaos in the marketplace of data processingand data communications. multivendor systems are almost universal, and theinability of the elements in this heterogeneous environment to interwork islegion." 11many organizations have mastered these difficulties and are realizingsignificant benefits, but many are still struggling to take full advantage of theirintegrated systems of information technology. more important, mostorganizations, daunted, perhaps, by the prospect of sizable investments and themire of technical issues, are not even pursuing many of the advantages affordedby information networking. at the colloquium, representatives of systemintegration firms and organizations that are major users of information technologyoffered their perspectives on the issues and research questions that stand in theway of effective use and widescale adoption of an information network by u.s.businesses. in subsequent chapters, many of these same issues are discussed insocietal and global contexts.adapting the installed base of information technologyinformation technology is a large and growing portion of the capital stock ofu.s. businesses. a major challenge, therefore, is what many in the systemsintegration industry call migration, a "forwardengineering" process that enablesowners of information technology to preserve and build on their installed basesof hardware, software, and information. given the additional complexity thisimposes on the already complex process of systems integration, it sometimes mayseem that razing the existing system andapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice33keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.starting anew is preferable to the often massive restructuring that moving todistributed, networked computing entails."is our historical investment [in information technology] a plus or a minus?"asked heller of electronic data systems. the answer, according to othercolloquium participants, is probably both, with the relative balance between assetor hindrance hinging on progress in developing methodologies for forwardengineering and the reuse of software and databases (see section immediatelybelow).unlike firms in asia and, to a lesser but still significant degree, those ineurope, said fischer of andersen consulting, u.s. organizations "have anenormous installed base of packaged knowledge, of business logic, of systemsacross the country. we cannot come in with a clean sheet of paper and say, 'point bis where i want to be; a is where we are. let's just do it.' we have got to have away to recover design, to recover the logic out of the existing systems we have. . . .we need to be able to accumulate what has been done over the past 30 years withthe automation projects, be able to collect that knowledge and that information in arepository, and be able to forwardengineer it to new solutions."the issues involved transcend systems engineering, the act of connectingisolated devices and applications into networks. improved systems engineeringtechniques are needed to strengthen the competitive status of the u.s. systemsintegration industry, according to fischer and others. but far more challenging,they stressed, are the difficulties involved in restructuring existing technology andknowledge in ways so that this base both enhances and is enhanced by computingand communication capabilities.research on forward engineering and migration strategies is under way,much of it under the sponsorship of the u.s. department of defense. thus far,however, the returns to these efforts have been limited. "current reengineeringtechnology," said barry boehm, director of the defense advanced researchprojects agency (darpa), "tends to take unstructured, outmoded adp[automated data processing] systems and turn them into structured, outmodedadp systems."software design, development, and reuseevery digital device is programmable. software, therefore, is the glue thatlinks the vast array of digital devices into a network, and through applications, itis the primary determinant of the network's value to an organization. it alsorepresents the major expense of an integrated information system, much of itstemming from the customized programming involved and from the cost ofmaintaining and upgrading applications. in addition, poor software design andprogramming errors are not infrequent causes of network failures.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice34keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a recurring theme throughout the colloquium was the need to improvemethods for software design and development to make the process more efficientand to make information systems more reliable. this is a longrecognized need,but, participants pointed out, its importance grows with the complexity ofnetworked systems and with the size of the potential losses incurred when thesesystems fail.part of the answer rests with tools and techniques for reusing andinterchanging components of existing software, which are also essential forefforts to forwardengineer the installed base of information technology. "often,the need to upgrade or change hardware, software, or communications[technology]," explained heller of eds, "requires companies to consider thenecessity of reprogramming their existing applications to take advantage of thenew advances in computer technology. to reduce this necessity, new toolsšmodeling, case [computeraided software engineering], objectorientedtechniques, and so onšneed to be analyzed for their viability." thus the ability tocarry forward such things as the design rationale inherent in the software is anexample of a subtle but important consideration in building large systems thatmust accommodate future developments."today," heller added, "application building is far too expensive."boehm of darpa concurred: [i]t is time to start building softwarecomponent by component rather than construction by construction."methods for adapting and reusing existing programs in new applications andfor restructuring old data are improving, some participants noted, citing progressin objectoriented programming as an example. nonetheless, significant problemsremain. positive steps in this direction are continuing enhancement of casetools for computeraided program development, objectoriented techniques forusing preprogrammed bits of software, formal techniques for verifying whetherprogramming code performs according to specifications, and nonprocedurallanguages that permit users to write their own programs without using a formalprogramming language. for now, it is uncertain whether one method or acombination of these methods will yield improvements on the scale that isneeded.several panelists suggested that objectoriented techniques hold considerablepromise in achieving interoperability among the functions within separateapplications and in salvaging past programming work. case tools, in contrast,they observed, have yet to yield the promised productivity benefits. indeed, in arecent survey of users of case tools, more than a third reported thatprogramming productivity had not increased.12in the meantime japanese software firms and, recently, european companiesare concentrating on manufacturingstyle approaches to software development.approaches vary, but qualityassurance methods and automation are commondenominators.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice35keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.methodologies to guide organizational changefull assimilation of an integrated information system often implies acorresponding integration of the business organization and its processes.typically, this may entail flattening the organizational hierarchy, revamping thescope of business, and linking units that were once functionally isolated. suchsweeping change is not accomplished easily. but experiences of the last twodecades demonstrate that the competitive advantages gained by automating thestatus quo evaporate quickly.many systems integration firms use formal methods for analyzing how firmsuse and communicate information internally and externally. on the basis of suchanalyses and close consultation with their clients, integrators develop anarchitectural plan for "defining technology requirements," said heller of eds,and for "blending . . . investments in computing and communication [equipmentand software] and in structuring data into information that is meaningful inbusiness terms." nonetheless, he added, the process is a "little bit fuzzy.""there are a lot of disciplines required," he said. "not all of these disciplinesare strictly technical or technologybased. but it takes a multidisciplinary teamapproach, in our experience, to deliver to a customer, to meet his requirements ineven small areas that are well bounded, to say nothing of a full business."because each organization is unique, it would be unreasonable to assumethat systems integration and the implementation of changes in businessoperations and worker relationships can be reduced entirely to a formalmethodology. still, better tools are needed, according to fischer of andersenconsulting. "we need some packaged or agreedto methods and tools to help usfigure out how to go about redesigning the business process," he said.it can be helpful to view the systems integration process in a total lifecycleperspective, one that includes "change" as a builtin attribute. one modelsuggested had five steps: first, identifying the need for change from the currentoperation; second, defining and documenting the requirements for the "new"system; third, implementing and integrating the components of the new system;fourth, making the transition from the current system to the new system withacceptable risk to the business; and fifth, maintaining the new system, includingproviding for quality improvements and upgrades (which takes us back to thefirst step).standardizationwhen the topic of standards arises in a group of hardware manufacturers andsoftware publishers, a heated debate can be expected to ensue. inapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice36keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.general terms, one group will argue that standards can prematurely freezetechnology and dampen innovation, while the other group extols the merits ofeasy connectivity and interoperability for users and, consequently, the marketenlarging effects of standards. no such debate occurred at the colloquium.suppliers of systems integration services and users of information technologyappeared united in their support for standardization of hardware and softwareinterfaces and for communication protocols."standardization does not imply a static situation," said heller of eds."standards must be continually reviewed and modified as requirements changeand technology advances."added crawford of american express, "international standardization andsocalled open systems will add further impetus to systems integration."while espousing the need for standardization, several speakers were criticalof how u.s. industry, the federal government, and users of informationtechnology have participated in the standardssetting process. u.s. computer andcommunications firms are active in national and international standardsorganizations, but too rarely do they act from an industrywide perspective.although increasing numbers of users are becoming more active in standardsissues, sometimes crafting their own standards, most remain passive observers.crawford advised users to "be proactive" in standards issues. two staffmembers in his division work fulltime to advance american express's positionson international telecommunications standards, and another small group ofworkers concentrate on regulatory and standards activities in the united states.several colloquium participants suggested that the federal government couldplay an instrumental role in coordinating u.s. industry's participation ininternational standards activities and monitoring developments in foreigncountries. they pointed out that japan and the european community have taken amore comprehensive and forwardlooking view of standards than have u.s.government and industry.careful monitoring of international activities, said hopper of americanairlines, is necessary because of the impact of standards on the globalization ofinformation technology and because of the potential for nations to devisestandards that serve to protect domestic industries and restrict internationalcompetition. "i am a believer that standards can only help us," he said. "weshould embrace them and not resist their inevitability, but with the caveat that wehave to guard against standards" that are designed to be barriers to internationalcompetition.other facets of standardization are discussed in following chapters (seechapter 3 appendix on standards making).applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice37keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data communication capabilitiesas already noted, large u.s. businesses have invested enormous sums tobuild their own highspeed communication links to connect networks. many havechosen to bypass, as much as they can, the public telecommunications carriersbecause of insufficient datacarrying capacity,13 discontinuities in the serviceofferings of local and regional carriers, and cost savings they can achieve withtheir own networks. these firms have, in effect, built their own informationinfrastructure, an unaffordable option for most organizations that could benefitfrom highspeed internetworking capabilities. thus most of the approximately700,000 private networks in the united states are information outposts linked bythe datatransmission equivalent of onelane highways.14as discussed in the next chapter, the prospect of broadband integratedservices digital network service, which initially would offer transmission ratesof more than 150 million bits per second, is viewed as one potential remedy tothis infrastructural deficiency.personnel needsmany colloquium participants suggested that the growth of the u.s. systemsintegration industry could be constrained by shortages of qualified personnel.while the entire computer sector confronts scarcities of talent in key science andengineering disciplines, the needs of systems integrators may be the mostdifficult to satisfy, at least through the traditional channel of universities.''systems integration demands a special mix of expertise with emphasis onorganizational, consulting, and management skillsšon top of demonstratedtechnical expertise," crawford explained. "there is no way that recent graduatescan acquire those skills through education alone."nonetheless, participants maintained that u.s. universities have animportant education and training role to play. unfortunately, departments ofcomputer science and engineering and other units that concentrate on computerrelated topics have not included systems integration in their domains. "the bestway to get the academic community to address the introduction of systemsintegration into the educational system is to entice the academics to engage inappropriate research," said druffel of the software engineering institute atcarnegie mellon university. "we must develop within the research communityan appreciation for the importance of the problem and its validity as a researchtopic. this also implies the availability of funding, and so the major researchfunding agencies must be convinced [of the need]."currently, many systems integration firms invest heavily in the training oftheir employees. eds and andersen consulting, for example, spend theapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice38keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.equivalent of about 10 percent of their annual revenues on training programs. theneed for these programs will likely remain strong, according to heller.''retraining will be one of the key strategies of systems integration firms formeeting their technical personnel needs," heller said. however, the challenge ofequipping people with the requisite skills and knowledge may become moredifficult, he said. "technical positions in a systems integration firm requiretechnical aptitude, and many people undergoing training will not be successful,"he explained. at the same time, the field is becoming more complex. "thetechnical curricula a company uses for training entrylevel science andengineering graduates will likely require modification in pace and content,"heller said. moreover, imparting technical skills to people with nontechnicalbackgrounds "will require much patience and leadership attention."notes1. for a broad range of historical statistical information see the computer, business equipment,software and services, and telecommunications industry: 1960œ1996, industry marketingstatistics committee, cbema, washington, d.c., 1987.2. gantz, john. 1987. "systems integration: living in a house of our own making,"telecommunication products + technology, may, p. 35. gantz, john. 1991. "doubletrouble," the economist, january 12, p. 63. depke, deirdre a., and richard brandt. 1991."pcs: what the future holds," business week, august 12, pp 58œ64.3. wright, karen. 1990. "the road to the global village," scientific american, march, p. 84.4. general accounting office. 1990. meeting the government's technology challenge, gao/imtec9023, february, p. 4.5. verity, john w. 1990. "taming the wild network," business week, oct. 8, p. 144. dauber, stevenm. 1991. "finding fault," byte, march, p. 207.6. for example, in july of 1991 what eventually turned out to be a "minor" software problem led tomassive failures of telephone networks in several large metropolitan areas, includingwashington, d.c., and los angeles (andrews, edmund l. 1991. "string of phone failuresperplexes companies and u.s. investigators," new york times, july 3, p. a1).7. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1991. computersat risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington,d.c., p. 7.8. for example, the major airline reservation networks and service providers are now going throughan expensive process of replacing their widely used but proprietary airline protocol, theairline link control (alc) with its 6bitpercharacter structure, in favor of standardpacketswitching communication technology widely available on the open market (seecrockett, barton. 1990. "airline reservation nets finally see fit to dump outdatedprotocols," network world, september 24, p. 9).9. in fact, gm defined a new standard (manufacturing automation protocol, or map) for the specificneeds of this application. map is now used widely in plantapplications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice39keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.floor automation systems . see kaminski, michael a. 1990. "the users' viewpoint onstandardsbased communications," crossroads of information technology standards,national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 11.10. dorros, irwin. 1990. "calling for cooperation," bellcore exchange , novemberœdecember, p. 7.11. kleinrock, leonard. 1991. "isdnšthe path to broadband networks," proceedings of the ieee,vol. 79, no. 2, february, p. 112.12. brandt, richard. 1991. "can the u.s. stay ahead in software?" business week, march 11, p.104.13. public telephone companies now offer two types of enhanced service for transmission of digitaldata. t1 service transmits data at the rate of 1.5 million bits per second, sufficient forsimultaneous transmission of voice communication and textual and numerical data; t3service offers a transmission rate of about 45 million bits per second, which accommodatesonly rudimentary realtime graphics applications.14. gilder, george. 1991. "into the telecosm," harvard business review , marchœapril, pp. 150œ161.applications of integrated systems: evolution in concept andpractice40keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3enabling technology: communications andsoftwarebefore our very eyes the now ubiquitious computer is undergoing a profoundmetamorphosis from a largely standalone, allinone machine to a gateway to aworld of information technology and services. indeed, for many people today, thecomputer is as much a communications device as it is a machine that performshighspeed mathematical and logical calculations. not coincidentally, with eachnew wave of technology, the now ubiquitous digital telephone becomes evermore like the computer. as this convergence of computing and communicationstechnology proceeds, it is not entirely clear whether the distinction between thetwo will have any meaning.driving this convergence is the as of yet unabating miniaturization ofelectronic components that make up integrated circuits. as the density of thecomponents on integrated circuits has increased at exponential rates, the speedand power of computers and other digital equipment have improvedtremendously, while their costs have moved steadily downward. for example,workstations have been almost exclusively the tools of scientists and engineers.fast and able to run several applications simultaneously, the highperformancemachines have been too expensive for the average personal computer user. butworkstation prices are dropping rapidly, and, by the end of the decade, somepeople predict, the equivalents of today's highend machines may sell for wellbelow $1,000, making the technology affordable for large numbers of people.already, a wellequipped personal computer based on an intel 80386 processorrunning unix can be purchased for about $3,000, or about the cost (in currentdollars) of the much more primitive ibm pcs in the early 1980s.enabling technology: communications and software41keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the predictable and high rate of progress in hardware has fueled risingexpectations for distributed information networks of immense capacity,capability, flexibility, and reach. these expectations, however, are constrained bytechnical, regulatory, and economic challenges on national and internationallevels. the principal obstacles lie in the areas of telecommunications andsoftware technology, commonly referred to as the "bottlenecks" that impedeprogress toward largescale information networks offering widely availableservices. simply stated, the technical problems are these: first, the informationprocessing capabilities of computers greatly exceed the capabilities of publictelecommunication carriers to transmit data in its many forms between remotecomputers; data arrive in trickles rather than in the torrents that are needed tosupport realtime, multimedia interactive computing. second, advances inhardware have outraced the ability of software designers and computerprogrammers to develop applications that exploit the full capabilities of newdevices. the gap between potential performance and the actual functionalitysupplied by software applications remains large, and, at the same time, softwareaccounts for a large and growing expense in the development of informationtechnology. third is a combined telecommunications and software problem.software of high reliability and quality is a critical component of efforts toimprove the transmission capacity and capabilities of telecommunicationscarriers, as evidenced by the fact that software may account for as much as 80percent of the cost of a telecommunications system. 1,2 building an infrastructureand implementing the associated services necessary to achieve the seamlessconnection of information networks on national and global scales pose large,complex challenges for software development. finally, it is not enough to developtechnological solutions to the impediments that prevent highspeed, highperformance networking. there must also be agreement between thetelecommunications and computer industries on how those solutions should beimplemented into standards. moreover, to promote global networking, standardsdevelopment within nations should complement the work of internationalstandardssetting bodies.although telecommunications and software issues loom large, technicalchallenges also face manufacturers of integrated circuits and the other hardwarecomponents of information technology. for example, in addition to newsoftware, faster and more powerful microprocessors, perhaps using photonictechnology, will be needed to achieve the high switching speeds necessary forrapid transmission between computers of large volumes of data in multimediaforms. moreover, as communications performance improves, computers andother digital equipment, whose capabilities are now constrained by slow datatransmission, will eventually be hard pressed to assimilate data arriving at ratesexceeding a billion bits per second, as envisioned for the national research andeducation network (nren), aenabling technology: communications and software42keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.component of the recently begun federal high performance computing andcommunications (hpcc) program."multigigabit networks represent a change in kind, not just degree, fromtoday's networks," a committee of the federal coordinating council for science,engineering, and technology has explained. "for example, consider that in acoasttocoast communication at three gigabits [3 billion bits] per second thereare at any instant 'in flight' nearly nine megabytes [million bytes, or groups ofeight bits of data, which is more than the memory of most personal computers andworkstations."3at the colloquium, most of the discussion focused on issues related tosoftware and communications. participants also addressed some of the challengesconfronting the hpcc program and, in particular, the nren.communications surveya rule of thumb, based on today's networking experiences with traditionaltechnology, is that the speed and ease of communication decrease as a function ofdistance. the fastest data flows occur within a computer, via the data bus, or theset of wires that shuttle signals between the microprocessor and circuit boardscontaining memory and controlling input and output devices. in local areanetworks (lans) linked by coaxial cable, the typical rate for transmitting databetween computers is 10 million bits per second. data communication betweenlans linked by a wide area network slows to a figurative snail's pace. themaximum datacarrying capacity of a typical copper wire telephone line is 64,000bits per second, but modems generally do not even make full use of this limitedcapacity, with most transmitting and receiving data at rates between 2,400 and19,200 bits per second. specialized data transmission servicesšcalled t1 andt3šoffered by telephone companies can greatly improve this rate, to 1.5 millionbits per second for t1 and 45 million bits per second for t3.but even at a rate of 45 million bits per second, correspondence betweenremote computers is too slow to support interactive, dataintensive tasks,especially sophisticated graphics applications. consider, for example, that onestill image contains between 20 million and 200 million bits of information; indigital form, a typical pair of chest xrays contains the information equivalent offour volumes (text) of the encyclopedia britannica.4 also consider the datacarrying capacities necessary for the following uses of information technology:realtime graphics applications run on remote supercomputers require rates of 50million to more than 700 million bits per second per user; realtime, cooperativecomputeraideddesign systems require 1.5 million bits per user; and televisionquality video and audio require 45 million bits per channel, or less than half therate for digital highdefinition television (without data compression techniques).5, 6, 7enabling technology: communications and software43keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introducing the need to integrate textual, graphical, and audio informationfor multimedia presentations magnifies the need for highspeed transmission, asdoes increasing the number of users on the network.fiberoptic technology figures prominently in proposed measures to enhancetransmission capacities and to integrate multimedia forms of data. indeed, thefiberoptical lines that handle about 95 percent of longdistance telephone calls inthe united states transmit information at a rate of about 2 billion bits per second.with the informationcarrying capacity, or bandwidth, of fiberoptic cableincreasing a hundredfold over the past decade, bandwidths of a trillion bits persecond may be not only achievable but also commercially practical in the nextdecade.moreover, the declining cost of optical fiber has made it competitive withcopper wire for even shortdistance communication links. in terms ofmaintenance and upkeep, fiber offers economic advantages over copper wire.some local telephone companies are running fiber from their central switchingoffices to remote distribution terminals that handle up to 1,000 lines and, fromthere, to streetside pedestals that link to individual homes and most businesses.the cost of completing the final stretch, from curbside to home, remainsprohibitive.8 thus it is not clear when fiber will be extended to residences andbusinesses; nor is it certain whether local telephone companies will be theprimary actors. cable television companies, which have strung coaxial cable to 60percent of u.s. homes and could easily connect nearly 30 percent more,9 appeareager to exploit fiberoptic technology, and some have announced their intentionsto run fiber to the home.10 incentives for completing this important last step,whether done by telephone companies, cable companies, or others, are dependentnot only on perceptions of the market for services made possible by fiberopticconnections, but also on regulations governing the behavior of segments of thecommunication industry. (regulatory issues are discussed in the next chapter.)integrated services digital network servicewhat is clear, however, is that many of the basic tools exist for sending andreceiving multimedia information. moreover, a world vision of highspeedcommunication networks already exists in the form of integrated services digitalnetwork (isdn) service.11 a slowly evolving concept consuming the attention ofindustry, national, and international standardsmaking bodies since themid1970s, isdn is essentially a telecommunications view of a publicinformation infrastructure. it will allow users and carriers to aggregate, ormultiplex, transmissions of data in graphical, textual, and audio forms, permittingmultimedia communication between users on a network.enabling technology: communications and software44keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in its first and current manifestation, however, isdn offers datatransmission at a rate far less than 1 percent of the 150 million bits per secondneeded for realtime interactive multimedia applications. socalled narrowbandisdn (nisdn) service can carry 144,000 bits per second via two 64,000bitpersecond channels and one 16,000bitpersecond channel. communications aredelivered through a standard telephone socket and are parceled out to telephoneand computer, which are linked by wire. with this setup, remote computer userscan converse by telephone and simultaneously exchange alphanumericinformation, which appears on the screens of their terminals. in the unitedstates, about 0.5 percent of equipped access lines supported nisdn as of 1990;many of these were installed to serve the private networks of large companies,partially reducing their need for separate transmission lines for voice and datacommunications.12although the simultaneous linkage of telephone and computer afforded bythe initial isdn offering is significant, data transmission speeds do notaccommodate many types of applications of information technology, and they aregreatly exceeded by service offerings already available, such as t3. moreover,users of isdn service may have to invest in new equipment interfaces. (forexample, an isdn adapter for a personal computer, with accompanyingsoftware, costs about $2,200). in essence, early offerings of isdn serviceenhance the capabilities of the telephone but leave untapped the potential of thecomputer as a tool for sharing, processing, and presenting information inmultimedia forms.successive upgrades in isdn service are in the offing, however. from144,000 bits per second, rates would improve first to 1.54 million bits (24channels, each carrying 64,000 bits per second), a service already used by somebusinesses. from there, rates would move progressively higher, to the 150millionbitpersecond threshold for multimedia applications and upward togigabitpersecond speeds.the migration to the threshold rate (i.e., 150 million bits per second), whichmarks the transition to broadband isdn (bisdn), has been frustratingly slow forusers awaiting highspeed distributed computing networks that are interoperable,accommodate a broad range of interactive applications, and are easy to negotiate.these users want bisdn to be available now rather than at the turn of the centuryor beyond. as a result, many are forging their own solutions to their needs forhighspeed communication and incurring the expense of building privatenetworks.one argument for proceeding with nisdn contends that the initial service isa necessary steppingstone to broadband public networks. for example, whilelarge corporations appear to have an insatiable appetite for communicationsbandwidth, many smaller businesses and most households may see little need fordigital information services, much less a single access point to those services,which isdn would provide. if a reasonableenabling technology: communications and software45keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.level of demand is established for nisdn applications, then telecommunicationscarriers and manufacturers of telecommunications equipment would beencouraged to invest in the technologies required to progress to bisdn.perhaps an even more compelling argument is the growing status of isdnas an international standard interface for global networking. governmentownedcommunications monopolies in japan and europe seem to be more convinced ofthis argument than are u.s. telecommunications carriers and informationserviceproviders. as a result, implementation of supporting isdn standards has beenproceeding more rapidly in japan, singapore, and europe than in the unitedstates. however, in early 1991, major u.s. computer and communications firmsendorsed a set of standard specifications for isdn service.13 the agreement couldlead to conversion of about half of subscriber lines to nisdn service by the endof 1994.14toward broadband networksisdn's modest beginnings might be likened to a narrow river that over timebroadens into a major waterway supporting cargocarrying vessels of every sizeand function and, by means of its tributaries, offering access to any port desired.rather than on geological time scales, however, the transformation from today'sconstricted narrowband communication networks into broadband arteries withimmense datacarrying capacity is expected take place over the span of a fewdecades.fiberoptic technology offers the means for achieving this transformation,but the evolution requires more than glass cables serving as conduits formultigigabit streams of data. in its early stages, the evolution may largely entailpushing the limits of current technology, but moving to gigabitpersecond ratesand beyond will require revolutionary changes in computing and communicationnetworks. "as we move into gigabit networks, however, we must take a 'cleansheet' approach to many of the systems issues," writes leonard kleinrock,professor of computer science at the university of california, los angeles. "thecritical areas to be considered include switching technology, processor interfaces,protocols, connectionoriented communications, routing, layered architectures,and coexistence with carrier environments." 15whither osi?some of the challenges that kleinrock has identified could require a majorrevamping of the international standards organization's open systemsinterconnection (osi) architecture. essentially a composite reference model forbuilding information systems, osi was devised to promote the development ofindustrywide standard protocols to create a common communicationsenvironment for distributed systems. 16 (see box 3.1, "a simpleenabling technology: communications and software46keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.1 a simple protocol analog"the diplomatic use of the term 'protocol,' as a code of etiquette andprecedence derived from the greek roots 'to glue together,' comes close toits meaning in computer networks. the messages that flow betweencomputers follow an established set of rules (etiquette) in proper sequenceto glue the network into a cooperating community. the following humananalog tries to capture the concept of a protocol hierarchy or stack."an american chief executive officer (ceo) wishes to complete abusiness transaction with his or her counterpart (peer) in japan. theamerican ceo, representing the 'application layer/ composes thoughts in amanner that a japanese peer will understand (peer protocol), and dictates aletter to a secretary (presentation layer). the secretary converts thecommunication from one format (voice) to another format (written),representing the service the secretary (lower layer) provides to the boss(higher layer). the secretary then puts the letter in an envelope and puts thejapanese ceo's address on the envelope, thus making a session onbehalf of a higherlayer entity. the letter is mailed (passed down to alowerlayer entity) to the u.s. postal service, a reliable 'datagram' transportmechanism. the post office passes the letter to regional collection centers(switching centers of the network layer) and then on to the destination postoffice via the routing information in the letter's address, usually the zip code(control information). the passing is handled by bundling many differentletters with similar zip codes in bags carried by truck, plane, or ship to thedestination (the physical media, lowest layer). the process now repeats inreversešpost office to secretary to japanese ceošphysical to network totransport to presentation to application layer. the japanese secretary seesto it that the english letter is translated into japanese, the destination'spresentation layer."at each layer of the protocol hierarchy, there is a peer protocol thatunderstands the rules (etiquette) of its peers; the letters are formatted thesame, the envelopes are addressed the same, the mailbags are labeled inan agreedupon format, and so on throughout the process. furthermore,each layer provides a service to its higher layer, and interface protocolsexpress the service requests. figure 13.1] shows this hierarchy of layers:the popular open system interconnect (osi) model of a sevenlayerhierarchy."source: computer science and technology board, nationalresearch council. 1988. global trends in computer technology and theirimpact on export control, national academy press, washington, d.c., pp.110œ11.enabling technology: communications and software47keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3.1 open system interconnect (osi) and dod modelswithrepresentative protocols. source: computer science andtechnologyboard, national research council. 1988. globaltrends in computer technologyand their impact on export control, national academy press, washington,d.c., p. 112.enabling technology: communications and software48keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protocol analog.'') osi divides the workings of a network into seven layers,each composed of one or more protocols. the bottom two layersš''physical" and"data link"šspecify transmission rates, signaling conventions, and otherprotocols for managing communications media. at the top, or "applications"layer, are the protocols for electronic mail and other applications that can beconducted on the network. osi embodied more than 100 international standardsas of 1989,17 and the number continues to grow. most of the protocols, however,attend to the transfer of data; very few pertain to highlevel collaborativeapplications that can be performed over a network.robert martin of bellcore was one of several colloquium participants whosuggested that rather than fostering information networking, standards arebecoming so unwieldy that they may eventually deter its evolution. "the thing iworry most about is the number and the inherent complexity," he said. "we arenot smart enough to manage within this environment."alfred aho, also of bellcore, had a similar lament. "by the time you look atthe total amount of software required to develop the system according to the osiworld," he said, "you are talking about millions of lines of code. if we moveforward into the future, we are going to have components of the systems we arebuilding today for years into the future. who is going to maintain that oldsoftware? who is going to understand it? what kind of return on investment arewe going to get for people who look after this old software and make fixes to itwhen the systems malfunction?"one of the penalties paid for the "openness" that osi is intended to fostermay be exacted in the form of reduced speed, a problem explained by hisashikobayashi, dean of engineering and applied science at princeton university.gigabit transmission rates could overwhelm current and emergingcommunication protocols designed to support the osi reference model, whichhas guided standards development for more than a decade. "it is still too early tosay," he explained, "but people are beginning to realize that the osi layeredarchitecture will be inefficient for a network based on optical technology.communication links will no longer he a bottleneck, but most likely processingpower [of switches] will be." processing power at network switches could beespecially taxed when data flows approach gigabitpersecond speeds.in a typical packetswitched network, the switch must process three layersof osi protocols before sending data en route on to its intended destination. theintelligence required to process these "heavyweight" protocols causes switchingdelays of 50 to 100 milliseconds, which are tolerable when data is traveling at arate of 64 thousand bits per second. as rates improve to hundreds of millions ofbits and higher, the delays could create the equivalent of rushhour traffic jams. inkobayashi's view, protocols for broadband networks will have to be simpler toenable fast response times and to avoid overtaxing the processing capabilities ofswitches, as well asenabling technology: communications and software49keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of computers communicating on the network. "lightweight" protocols, whichmay trade some of the functionality of osi standards for greater speed, should be afocus of research, be suggested, adding that some of the tasks now performed bysoftware may be more efficiently carried out by hardware.in fact, switching hardware itself may have to change. processing andtransmission demands may eventually exceed the speed and capabilities ofsiliconbased integrated circuit electronic devices. faster galliumarsenidesemiconductors would yield substantial improvements in switching performance,but in the long term, photoelectronic, photonic, and perhaps even superconductingdevices may be the sources of the revolutionary advances in switching technologythat many think will be needed to meet future networking demands.18moreover, current protocols assume that errors and data losses are mostlikely to originate in the network, and procedures have been devised to guardagainst such problems. but with a highspeed opticalfiber network, kobayashiexplained, "the traditional notion of error due to noise in the channel is lessrelevant than the possible loss of packaged information due to the finite memoryspace in the buffer," where data awaiting transmission is temporarily stored.also problematic, he said, are network control and management. today,feedback mechanisms are used to ease network congestion: a message is sent tothe sending terminal, which then slows its transmission or waits until thebottleneck is cleared. but with gigabit transmission rates, streams of data packetsalready will be in transit by the time the network can alert the sending terminal toits traffic problems. this means that, instead of reactive or feedback control,methods of "predictive or proactive control" are likely to be needed. "in otherwords, you have to predict the congestion a few milliseconds or nanosecondsahead of time and then take some corrective action to limit the transmission ofyour information," kobayashi explained.integrating communications mediain recent years, wireless communication services have proliferated, placingheavy demands on the already crowded frequency bands of the radio spectrumused for, among other things, radio, television, satellitetoground telephoneservices, cellular and mobile telephones, and pagers. pending uses for the overtheair communication channels include computertocomputer radio connectionsand personal communications networks. with some exceptions, these servicesstand apart from those offered over copper wire and fiberoptic cablešpublictelephone service and data communications. for example, the fastgrowingcellular telephone industry, which hasenabling technology: communications and software50keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.seen its subscribership increase dramatically to 5.3 million in 1990 19 and thepublic switched network are evolving as separate islands rather than ascomplementary components within a larger communications environment.observers have called for a reexamination of communication options, withthe ultimate aim of integrating nowfragmented wireless and wireline servicesinto a coherent framework for internetworking. some would go even further. forexample, there have been suggestions for transmitting television signals by meansof fiberoptic cable, rather than over the air. this possibility is created byproposals for an alldigital highdefinition television (hdtv) standard for theunited states. (the u.s. federal communications commission is evaluating sixproposals for an hdtv transmission standard, four of which are alldigitalsystems. the commission is expected to make its selection in 1993.) the largesegment of the spectrum now consumed by private and public television stationswould be freed for other uses, and at the same time, the new means of deliveringvideo entertainment might create levels of consumer demand sufficient to justifyextending fiberoptic cable to u.s. households, completing all the connectionsnecessary for a nationwide broadband communications infrastructure.softwarepart and parcel of many issues and obstacles confrontingtelecommunications carriers and service providers are those related to the design,development, and maintenance of software. as aho of bellcore suggested withhis predictions of problems associated with osi protocols, complex standards areunderlain by complex software. even in a single selfcontained network, generalmanagement and housekeeping tasks, such as routing, addressing, errorchecking, and protocol implementation, may account for more than 90 percent ofthe data traffic.20the concerns raised by aho are part of a set of issues collectively referred toas the "software problem." the manifestations of the problem are several.advances in hardware have outraced the ability of software designers andcomputer programmers to develop applications that exploit the capabilities of newdevices. new applications are often beset with errors, and, in the opinion of manyobservers, they are difficult to use. modifying old programs and databases towork with new hardware or new software is time consuming and expensive,exacerbating a backlog in new applications awaiting development. applicationsdeveloped to work with one operating system do not easily transfer to another.consequently, one frequently cited testimonial to technological progressšthattoday's personal computers are equivalent to the mainframes of less than a decadeagošis diminished by the fact that available software takes far less than fulladvantage of theenabling technology: communications and software51keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.raw processing power of the modestly priced machines now sitting on millions ofdesks.the trend toward open systems, improvements in tools to aid designers andprogrammers, and other developments have paid dividends. nonetheless,software design and development have proven especially resistant to efforts totransform these activities into a structured engineering discipline, atransformation that, many believe, would contribute directly to progress indistributed network computing. to many, the process is a curious combination,of art and craft, particularly during the early stages of conceptualization anddesign, and of laborious writing of programming code.21"software may be the limiting factor," said larry druffel of carnegie mellonuniversity's software engineering institute. "but remember the other side ofthat: it is the enabling factor as well. . . . obviously, if we are going to do systemsintegration [on a national scale], we really have to deal with the software issuesbecause that is, after all, what allows us to change things after they are built. thatis what it is all about."colloquium participants examined some of the hurdles that must beovercome to improve software design and development and to manage theincreasing complexity inherent in integrating information systems.measures of complexity and performanceeven in smallscale projects, according to aho, systems integration posesthe challenge of transforming abstractions, such as improved customer service orproduct quality, into concrete functions, usually embodied in softwareapplications. consider one of today's popular user interfaces, a graphical modelof the desktop: it is an abstraction that transforms a computer screen into themost common of work environments.in the process of creating systems of systems, each successive layer ofintegration introduces new abstractions underlain by higher levels of complexity,aho explained. it becomes increasingly difficult, he added, to assess theperformance and effectiveness of systems. consequently, integration strategiesthat work well in the context of a single system may be undermined byunanticipated interactions and problems that arise as the scale of internetworkinggrows."i am a great fan of looking at problems in a systems context," aho said."so, the one thing i would advocate to my fellow researchers is that when you doyour work, do the work in a systems context. ask, does this scale up to mediumsized systems and to largesized systems'? we are making substantial investmentsin [integrating systems], and we would like to be able to design systems that arenot the [equivalents] of three mile island."the design of integrated systems, he suggested, would benefit greatlyenabling technology: communications and software52keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from measures that could help integrators and researchers define the complexityand scale of their undertakings. similarly, aho advocated developing measuresfor gauging the performance of systems, such as their costeffectiveness, howeasily they can incorporate new technology and accommodate new applications,and how they respond to accidents and failures. implicit in aho's remarks is theimportance of an interdisciplinary perspective."my theory is that, if you do not look at the sum of the performancemeasures and the underlying architecture, then there will be untoward events inthe future, which will cause the systems to behave adversely land very badly],"aho explained. "we would like to have some kind of performance guarantees inthe running of systems that they will respond gracefully to adverse inputs. wehave lots of examples of systems that have behaved badly under certainconditions."one method being used with increasing effectiveness in the marketplace tomeasure the quality of systems integration, software, and hardware is the use ofservicelevel agreements (slas) as a contract between the providers of servicesand the users. the sla specifically lists measurable attributes such as "uptime,"response time for user transactions, cost per user hour, and other quantitativeitems that can be used by both the provider and the consumer to evaluate thequality of service. definition of an sla also helps in setting expectations for thesystem at the beginning of the development and integration process.software architecturethe traditional definition of architecturešthe art and science of designingand erecting buildingsšcontinues to dominate thinking in systems integration,according to druffel of carnegie mellon university. that is, systems designerstend to think in terms of configurations of hardware, just as building architectstranslate their concepts into specifications for components made of iron and steel."that is kind of what we have been dealing with over the years," druffelsaid. "first, we have a hardware architecture and then the software guys have tofigure out some way to make all that work. as we think about systemsarchitectural issues, we really need to think about the complementary softwarearchitectures. from a software perspective, i would like to know, for example, thefunctional view, the control structures, the expected behavior, how [system]states are stored and communicated, and what the dependencies are."druffel and others underscored the need for standards (see below, "softwarestandards") and other mechanisms that foster a shared perspective on softwarearchitecture and better communication among dispersed groupsenabling technology: communications and software53keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.involved in developing systems software. at their current stage of development,objectoriented programming techniques, case tools, and "layered abstractions,"such as the osi model, represent only a partial response to the need, druffel said,and, in some cases, they interject additional confusion. "each of these approachesreflects a different notion about what services it provides," he explained. ''if youare going to write software that tries to interconnect them, it gets rather messy.""a good example of the problems you run into when people are buildingtools or building components that are later going to be integrated," he added, "arethose that arise from different views of data ownership." often, it is not clearwhich group within a distributed computing environment has responsibility fordatabase control and management, or several groups may assume authority. ineither case, druffel said, configuration managementšessentially, organizing theconstruction of complex software from separate piecesšand control of softwareversions can be problematic. moreover, system components may be designed bypeople who differ in their views of data ownership, resulting in different modelsof how the overall system and its pieces should function. when the time comes tointegrate these differently conceived components, difficulties often arise.the need for a shared architectural view is magnified by the goal ofdeveloping systems that can evolve with technology, a recurring colloquiumtheme. however, this goal can confound software development. "when we aretalking about software," druffel said, "we are talking about components that aregoing to be developed probably without complete knowledge of how they aregoing to be used, and we are talking about systems that have to evolve. that is,they are going to be composed of units without a complete understanding of whatthat end system may eventually be, which adds a little bit of complication to theissue."the added criterion of evolvability presents software developers with thetask of planning for all technological possibilities. at best, developers can onlyapproximate future developments. so rather than being a rigid scaffolding thatgreatly restricts future options for expansion, software architecture must have ahigh degree of flexibility. adoption of new technology and new applicationsshould not require razing the previous system and starting anew."we know that over the next 10 years," aho said, "progress inmicroelectronics is going to make computer chips faster, memories bigger, andbandwidths greater, and we should not forget about algorithms and otherprocedures that will be making our software faster. are systems designers goingto be able to accommodate these improvements?"aho suggested that japanese methods of incremental quality improvementmay be applicable to systems design. "proof of progress over time," he said,should be a hallmark, but operationalizing a model of qualityenabling technology: communications and software54keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improvement poses a "very difficult challenge for the systems designcommunity."software standardsstandards are an essential element of a coherent software architecture.unfortunately, promulgation of common conventions and widely acceptedplatforms for linking applications and other software elements is as prone todelays and other complications as is standards making in the telecommunicationsarea. in fact, development of softwarerelated standards to achieve trueinteroperability of applications may be a more formidable task, beset by moreinterdependencies and greater levels of detail. to convey this complexity,druffel provided a small list of topics awaiting internetworking standards: databindings, language bindings, and bindings between standards, networkmanagement, and security. performing an application on a distributed computingnetwork may invoke standards in all these areas, as well as additional ones.moreover, each area presents its own peculiar set of issues. for example, astandard that is intended to bridge the incompatibilities between differentprogramming languages must not only serve as a translator but also resolve otherdisparities. "it is not just a matter of syntactically communicating between twolanguages," druffel explained. "they really do have different runtimeexpectations. under one language, a default may mean something entirelydifferent from what it means in the other language. these kinds of issues have tobe dealt with as well."consider also all the eventualities and interdependencies that must beaddressed to enable group collaboration on multimedia documents that combine,for example, voice input, graphics, digitized photographs, handwritten notes,spreadsheet tabulations, and keyboard input. the capability to exchangeheterogeneous types of information between points anywhere along a networkand to combine the elements of this diverse compilation according to the whimsof users will require an array of standards and common conventions. but if thesestandards require users to perform laborious routines and entail timeconsumingsteps, the benefits of collaboration will be diluted.converging software interestssince networking, in general, and interoperability, in particular, are themajor motivations for standards making in these and many other technical areas,distinctions between what is a computing standard and what is a communicationstandard have become almost artificial. however, the landscape of national andinternational standards making is divided between theenabling technology: communications and software55keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.two realms and then subdivided among industry domains within each. (seeappendix below for a brief description of major standardsmaking bodies.)although some consolidation of activities and interests has occurred in recentyears, it has not matched rates of consolidation occurring between thecommunications and computer industries and between the information servicesand applications supported by those industries."over the last 20 years," kleinrock of ucla has maintained, "theinnovations in data networking have come from the dataprocessing industry, andnot from the carriers. this is in spite of the fact that the dataprocessing solutionshave used the underlying carrier plant to establish their data networks. as wemove into the broadband era, it is essential that these two merged industriescooperate in providing service to the user community."22many of the obstacles that stand in the way of advanced networking willrequire software solutions. for example, it has been estimated that the scale ofsoftware supporting the next generation of switching systems in the evolution ofisdn will be 10 times greater than that supporting the current generation.23given the magnitude of the need for reliable, highquality software to accomplishcomplex networking tasks, collaborative development of software byrepresentatives of the computer and communications industries, it has beensuggested, may be the most efficient way to address the need.24no matter what the label assigned to a networking issuešcommunicationsor computingšthe ultimate aim is to meet the needs of the same large set ofusers. the overriding goal of standards makers and of software developers whobuild on those standards, druffel reminded, should be simplicity and ease of useš"to simplify rather than to increase the complication."appendix: standards making at a glancethe most wonderful thing about standards is that there are so many fromwhich to choose.šoriginal author unknownworldwide, more than 7,000 professionals working in some 250subcommittees of standardssetting bodies are involved in promulgating, testing,and formalizing standards for information technology.25 these numbers attest toboth the enormous size of the task and to the welter of detail that must beaddressed in enabling electronic access to information. within this domain ofnational and international standards making, much of the activity focuses onprotocols for communicating within and across networks.the following discussion provides an overview of the organizations inenabling technology: communications and software56keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.volved in setting standards for information networking.26 because the complexityand the scale of the effort are often not appreciated, it might be instructive at theoutset to give some indication of the extensive body of informationandcommunicationrelated standards that already exists. at its last quadrennialmeeting in 1988, the international telecommunications union (itu), one of threemajor international bodies that accredit standards for telecommunications andinformation technology, affirmed or adopted nearly 1,600 standards that weredocumented in nearly 20,000 pages of text.27 the itu is an organization of theunited nations.the standardsmaking arena is actually a composite of many differentplaying fields. individual firmsštypically, hardware and software manufacturersand communications carriers and other major service providersšrepresent thesmallest domain of activity, followed by trade associations, user groups, andother groups that may form to back a single standard, developed collectively orselected, perhaps, from several offered by member organizations. in the formal,or de jure, standardization process, these organizations propose standards that aresubmitted for national accreditation. such proposals are usually assigned tosubcommittees of the private, nonprofit american national standards institute(ansi), the principal promulgator of u.s. standards. ansi may form a specialsubcommittee to develop a standard for formal approval, or it may assign the taskto a socalled secretariat. ansi secretariats, usually professional or tradeassociations with expertise in the area (e.g., the institute of electrical andelectronics engineers, the electronic industries association), may provideadministrative support to subcommittees. for example, a number ofcommunicationsrelated standards, including several concerning isdn, have beendeveloped by the t1 committee sponsored by the exchange carrier standardsassociation.at the international level, ansi serves as the u.s. arm of the internationalorganization for standardization (iso) and the international electrotechnicalcommission (iec), which accredit international standards for informationtechnology and its applications. for example, the osi reference model and manyof its supporting standards, such as those for transferring files over a network orfor computerintegrated manufacturing, were developed under the auspices of theiso. along with those submitted by other nations, ansiaccredited standards arereviewed by the iso/iec joint technical committee, which develops standardsfor formal approval by its parent bodies.international telecommunications standards, such as those pertaining toelectronic mail and directory services, as well as more traditional standards likeradiospectrum allocation, are the product of a separate process, dictated by theinternational treaty that formed the international telecommunications union(itu). technical specifications supporting the implementaenabling technology: communications and software57keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tion of the isdn standards are being developed by itu's consultative committeefor international telephony and telegraphy (ccitt). u.s. telecommunicationsstandards are introduced to itu for international approval by the statedepartment, which serves as the representative of u.s. industry and is advised byansi.the federal government also wields considerable influence in thepromulgation and adoption of standards. one source of this influence is thegovernment's huge purchasing power. for example, the federal government hasstipulated that it will only purchase information technology products that adhereto standards supporting the osi architecture, specifically those defined by thegovernment open systems interconnection profile (gosip), published asfederal information processing standard 146.another source of influence is the national institute of standards andtechnology (or nist, part of the department of commerce). its computersystems laboratory (csl) participates in over 85 national and internationalvoluntary standards activities (e.g., the north american isdn users' forum, theu.s. national committee for ccitt, and the ieee standards board andcommittees). a recent independent review of the csl's activities observed thefollowing:for many long years, the csl and its predecessor, the institute for computersciences and technology (icst), have waged a long and lonely, but effective,battle on behalf of federal government agencies whenever agency interests wereopposed to private market segmentation interests of a variety of vendors in thecomputer and communication industry.suddenly, csl finds itself in a world where both users and vendors arediscovering that good standards are in their interest, at least for those areaswhere innovation is not too lively. this shift represents a major environmentalchange for csl and it requires a rethinking of the successful approaches of thepast decade or so.28however, in light of these profound environmental changes that opensystems standards portend, the review panel concluded that the csl's budget is"much too small to address effectively even a small fraction of the topics relevantto csl's mission."29 despite the realities of this budget situation, nist isextensively involved in promoting information technology standards.straddling the formal standardization process are de facto and ad hocinitiatives that seek to establish a particular product or implementation as astandard on the basis of its strong position in the market. the ibm pc computer,microsoft's msdos operating system, and adobe's postscript pagedescriptionlanguage for laser printers are examples of products that have become de factostandards.users are increasingly trying to leverage their purchasing power to hastenthe adoption of standards without waiting for cumbersome formalenabling technology: communications and software58keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.standardization processes to reach agreement on particular specifications or forthe market to cull the array of competing alternatives. examples include thefederal government, as in the case of its gosip osi standards, and the group ofmanufacturers that organized the information technology requirements council.this latter organization, together with its highly visible manufacturingautomation protocol/technical and office protocols (map/top) users group,has recently merged with the corporation for open systems (cos), a tradeassociation whose goal is to bring users and vendors together to promote theutilization of opensystems technology. the britishbased x/open company ltd.is another organization that combines vendors and users to advancestandardization and interoperability, using, like cos, product testing andcertification.30 in january of 1991, the user alliance for open systems (whichincludes representation from over 30 major system users, including such wellknown organizations as eastman kodak, dupont, general electric, and nasa)also joined cos to leverage their mutual interests in the implementation ofcommon requirements for open systems.31 overall, there are at least 20 useralliances devoted to accelerating the standardssetting process.growing appreciation of the importance of standards and the increasingnumber of initiatives it has generated are welcome developments, expected tofree users from the pitfalls of proprietary solutions to their informationtechnology and communications needs. but the proliferation of standardsmakingactivities by ad hoc groups that have grown impatient with formal mechanismsintroduces a new wrinkle, according to michael taylor of the digital equipmentcorp. ''a complication, of course, is that it is no longer absolutely clear whatstandards body is responsible for what," he said. "so, in some sense, we have bothan opportunity to do things faster and a new problem, which is mediating amongthis more complex and disparate group of standards bodies."notes1. the major consequences of even "minor" software errors in such systems were dramaticallyillustrated in the july 1991 outages of telephone networks in several large metropolitanareas, including washington, d.c., and los angeles (andrews, edmund l. 1991. "string ofphone failures perplexes companies and u.s. investigators," new york times, july 3, p.a1). see also, national research council. 1989. growing vulnerability of the nation'spublic switched networks , national academy press, washington, d.c.2. hargrave, andrew. 1987. "communications: towards the 21st century," supplement to scientificamerican, october, p. t14.3. committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinating councilfor science, engineering, and technology, office of science andenabling technology: communications and software59keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology policy. 1991. grand challenges: high performance computing andcommunications, supplement to the president's fiscal year 1992 budget, p. 54.4. kleinrock, leonard. 1991. "isdnšthe path to broadband networks," proceedings of the ieee,vol. 79, no. 2, february.5. ferguson, charles h. 1989. "hdtv, digital communications, and competitiveness: implicationsfor u.s. high technology policy," vlsi memo no. 89506, massachusetts institute oftechnology, cambridge, mass., february.6. wright, karen. 1990. "the road to the global village," scientific american, march, pp. 83œ94.7. herbst, kris. 1989. "getting graphic," network world, july 31, pp. 30, 32, and 45.8. feder, barnaby j. 1991. "optical fiber (almost) at home," new york times, march 24, p. f6.9. slutsker, gary. 1981. "divestiture revisited," forbes, march 18, p. 124. coy, peter, and marklewyn. 1991. "the baby bells learn a nasty new word: competition," business week,march 25, p. 100.10. for example, timewarner inc. has announced that it will run optical fiber to between 5,000 and10,000 homes in a section of new york city. initially, the company will offer customers 150channels and twoway communication features, but the system could be expanded to 600channels. with additional hardware, the fiberoptic system could also provide telephoneservice. (kneale, dennis. 1991. "time warner plans cabletv system with 150 channels,"wall street journal , march 8, p. b10.)11. much of the discussion in this section is based on kleinrock, leonard. 1991. "isdnšthe path tobroadband networks," proceedings of the ieee, vol. 79, no. 2, february, pp. 112œ117.12. u.s. department of commerce, national telecommunications and information administration.1991. the ntia infrastructure report: telecommunications in the age information, ntiaspecial publication 9126, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., october.13. keller, john j. 1991. "standards set for datavoice phone service," wall street journal, february26, p. b7.14. u.s. department of commerce, national telecommunications and information administration,1991, the ntia infrastructure report: telecommunications in the age of information.15. kleinrock, 1991, "isdnšthe path to broadband networks."16. kahn, robert e. 1987. "networks for advanced computing," scientific american , october, pp.141œ142.17. gantz, john. 1989. "standards: what they are. what they aren't," networking management,may, p. 33.18. kleinrock, 1991, "isdnšthe path to broadband networks," p. 116; and optoelectronicstechnology research corporation. (no date). key technology for the 21st century, tokyo,p. 1.19. northern business information. 1990. "u.s. cellular markets," december, p. 55.20. gantz, 1989, "standards: what they are. what they aren't," p. 32.21. computer science and telecommunications board, national research counenabling technology: communications and software60keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cil. 1991. intellectual property issues in software, national academy press, washington,d.c.22. kleinrock, 1991, "isdnšthe path to broadband networks," p. 115.23. kobayashi, t., former president and chief executive officer of the nec corp., as quoted at worldtelecommunications forum, singapore, may 1985. (cited in hargrave, 1987,"communications: towards the 21st century," p. t14.)24. ibid.25. gantz, 1989, "standards: what they are. what they aren't," p. 27.26. for a detailed discussion of relevant standardsrelated issues, readers may wish to consultcrossroads of information technology standards, national research council (nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1990).27. dorros, irwin. 1990. "can standards help industry in the united states to remain competitive inthe market place?" p. 35 in crossroads of information technology standards, nationalresearch council. gantz, 1989, "standards: what they are. what they aren't," p. 28.28. national research council. 1991. an assessment of the national institute of standards andtechnology programs: fiscal year 1990, national academy press, washington, d.c., pp.303œ304.29. national research council, 1991, an assessment of the national institute of standards andtechnology programs: fiscal year 1990, p. 304.30. verity, john w., et al. 1991. "computer confusion: a jumble of competing, conflictingstandards is chilling the market," business week, june 10, pp. 72œ77.31. user alliance for open systems. 1991. overcoming barriers to open systems informationtechnology, corporation for open systems, mclean, va., january 27.enabling technology: communications and software61keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4the next tier: building systems of systemsbroadening perspectivein discussions of systems integration, even the most intent listeners candevelop a kind of informationage vertigo. one must adjust not only to thedizzying pace of technological advance, but also to the political, social,regulatory, economic, interindustry, and international issues that swirl aroundemerging applications of information networking technology. disorientation isalmost inevitable when, for example, one tries to determine the roles ofcommunication carriers and service providers, an amalgam of local telephonemonopolies and emerging competitors, longdistance carriers, equipment makers,and suppliers of information services that operates in a complex, multijurisdictional regulatory environment. in short, the technological complexityinherent in systems integration is subsumed by other types of complexity thatarise as the scope of networking grows from smallša single firmštointermediateša group of firmsšto largešan entire nation and beyond.perhaps the most salient question at this stage in the evolution of distributednetworked computing is, where do we want to go from here? building on theprevious one, this chapter addresses the question by describing the necessaryattributes of information networks as they evolve into "systems of systems" and,as has been predicted, as virtually all types of business and organizational activitygo "on line." it also outlines some of the issues arising from the convergence ofindustries wrought by the digitalization of information.the next tier: building systems of systems62keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.systems as components"what people thought of as a system just a few years ago is a smallcomponent in what people are thinking of as systems today," said michaeltaylor, central systems engineering manager at the digital equipment corp. "weall recognize that one person's system is another person's component."this evolution in the concept and actual embodiment of information systemsimplies an ever expanding sphere of users and applications. it also implies that noinformation system will ever be a finished product. whether hardware, softwareapplications, sources of information, or services, new components can always beadded. consequently, there may never be a definable end point in the evolution.and if there is, it is not discernible from today's vantage point.for comparison, consider the continuing development of the nation'stelephone system. in 1876, alexander graham bell devised the method by whichhuman speech and other sounds can be converted directly into electrical currentand back again. in the succeeding 125 years, the united states, pursuing thesocial goal of "universal access," built the world's best telephone network, anaccomplishment made possible by waves of innovation set in motion by bell'sinvention. however, the telephone network is hardly complete. today it is lookedupon as a component of emerging nationwide and global information systemscomposed of subsystems as vast as the u.s. telephone network and as small as anindividual computer, telephone, or other personal computing or communicationdevice."networkbased systems integration is only emerging," said mark teflian,vice president and chief information officer at covia, the nation's secondlargesttravel reservation system. truly integrated networks not only shuttle data fromone location to another, he said, but also enable assimilation of information, orlearning.according to teflian and other colloquium participants, most of today'snetworked systems do not achieve the levels of integration necessary to help theuser transform data into information and information into knowledge. in a sense,organizations that have effectively linked information technologies and peoplehave scaled a plateau that becomes a staging area for an ascent to a highermountain. these organizations, said robert martin, bellcore vice president forsoftware technology and systems, have managed to create networkbased systemsand, collectively, they face the formidable task of integrating those systems. inmartin's view, at the peak of the mountain they and others must climb is a"national information networking infrastructure."the challenge for today, martin, teflian, and others said, is to build afoundation that supports successively higher levels of integration within andamong information systems and, in so doing, increases the accessibility,the next tier: building systems of systems63keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.utility, and organizational or personal value of information. participants identifiedsome of the transcending features that all emerging systems should possess inorder to achieve systems integration on a national scale.integratable componentsthe fundamental building blocks of an integrated system of systems, saidmartin, are communications and computing devices and software componentsthat ''can be plugged together" to meet a customer's needs today and stillaccommodate the incorporation of new technology. a major issue, he said, is the"design of integratable components for yettobedefined projects.""i think the challenge for the future," martin explained, "is to spread[today's] networks across the country so that we can do an interenterpriseautomation and fundamentally change the nature of the system to where we buildsystems on the fly based on components that already exist across a distributednetwork."connectivity and interoperability would not eliminate the need forcustomized system integration services. the need for specialized applications tosolve complex problems and to address unique organizational needs wouldremain, even with a "highly networked distributed base," martin said.simplicity, transparency, and functionality"heterogeneity is going to be the byword of systems integration for theforeseeable future," alfred aho said. according to the bellcore assistant vicepresident, the biggest sources of this heterogeneity are not the peculiarities ofdifferent types of hardware and software, but rather the people who use, build,and maintain systems of information technology. more important than thephysical connectivity of components and networks, aho said, are the connectionsand processes that integrate people so that they can easily use and manipulateinformation and networkbased services. the underlying hardware, software, andnetworks that constitute a system should be "transparent" to people, hemaintained. an element crucial to achieving simplicity and transparency, headded, is a "singlesystem look and feel," a consistent user interface that wouldeliminate the frustration that people experience today as they move fromapplication to application."i would also advocate," aho continued, "that we want to be able to developfunctionality with which the end user can construct new services and be able tosolve problems with the systems. we would like this functionality to be deliveredin such a way that a person who is in a particular business can understand it. he[should] not have to be a computer scientist or an electrical engineer to be able toinvoke this kind of functionality."the next tier: building systems of systems64keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.selectable speed, reliability, and securitysome users of information technology will require the most advancednetworking capabilities available, but most will not need noisefree, gigabittransmission rates. flexible transport of informationšwhether in the form ofdata, sound or voice, or graphicsšand, therefore, flexible pricing schemes for useof transmission services are so important that martin and others1 consider them tobe defining attributes of information networking.consistent architecture and efficient methods for distributeddevelopment of systemsthe goal of facilitating collaboration among geographically dispersedgroups and among people with different skills and expertise is a major impetusfor information networking. not fully appreciated, however, is the high level ofcollaboration among dispersed parties required to integrate groups of systemsand, ultimately, to create a cooperative environment. the "recursive" nature ofthe integration process, said aho, presents special difficulties that undermineefforts to get systems to work together.these difficulties arise from the fact that parts of the wholešthe systemsthat will eventually be the components of some larger systemšare developed bygroups that have different perceptions of what the entire assemblage should belike and what it should do. "if you look at some of the major integrated systemswe build today," said larry druffel, director of the software engineering instituteat carnegie mellon university, "you see that there are companies distributedacross the country, if not across the world. if people [at different sites] do nothave the same view of the overall architecture, we can be pretty sure that we aregoing to see major disasters when they come together."eventually incompatibilities can be overcome, druffel added, and subsystems "can be glued together," but often at the cost of system efficiency.druffel and aho described a consistent underlying architecture as acornerstone of efforts to achieve higher levels of integration among today'sinformation systems and tomorrow's. unfortunately, said aho, "architecture, ithink, is something that we all talk about but understand very little."network intelligencein addition to collaboration, the perceived benefits of timely capture andeffective presentation of information also drive efforts to achieve higher levels ofintegration. from the perspective of a business, information reduces uncertainty,and the quicker a firm can gather and process information, the quicker it canidentify and respond to market opportunities. teflianthe next tier: building systems of systems65keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of covia made the point this way: "information equals money, and timelyinformation equals more money." therefore, he added, the point of sale should bethe point of information capture. to exploit the advantages that rapid capture andanalysis of information create, teflian predicted, an increasing number ofbusinesses in all sectors of the economy will develop information systems thatenable online transaction processing (oltp). eventually, he further predicted,realtime information retrieval and interactive computing will become thedominant mode of computer usage, inside and outside of business. because ofstiffening global competition and the resultant shortening of product life cycles,most firms will view their products and services as "perishable goods," he said,and oltp systems will be critical to seizing marketing opportunities innarrowing time frames.the american express information network provides an example. there is"an absolute realtime requirement," explained albert b. crawford, thecompany's executive vice president for strategic business systems. "as you useyour credit card, whether you are in bangkok or boston, we have to get thattransaction to phoenix and do some computations to see if you are an authorizedcredit risk or not or a suitable credit risk and back out to that point of sale in lessthan 20 seconds, and [transmission over] the network consumes eight to tenseconds of that."the anticipated transition to oltp systems creates the need for moreintelligent networks, those that are capable of responding to a request withoutrequiring the user to attend to confusing and timeconsuming procedural details.today, for example, there are no complete dictionaries or directories that describeand locate information resources accessible by computer. an intelligent networkequipped with a comprehensive set of these aids, according to teflian, would beable to respond to requests automatically or with only minimal humaninteraction. users need not concern themselves with the specifics of where adesired piece of information or an application resides on a network. nor shoulddifferences in computer languages and protocols within a system interfere withcommunication. in teflian's view, the network should be able to do all thenecessary translations.effective presentation of informationmaking information easily and instantaneously accessible creates the needfor tools that manage flows of information and help users digest responses totheir requests. while the human senses can take in billions of bits of data persecond, the brain processes information at the much slower rate of about 50 bitsper second. therefore, information must be organized in a form and on a scalethat permit people to assimilate and manipulate information as they receive it,teflian said. one simplifying attribute already mentioned isthe next tier: building systems of systems66keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a consistent user interface, which eliminates the problem of adapting toappearances or other sensory cues that are unique to each application.artificial intelligence tools that relegate routine tasks to computers,informationfiltering and informationprioritizing methods, and socalled"knowbots" that essentially act as informationgathering assistants are in variousstages of research and development, and some are already commerciallyavailable.2 the primary aims of these and other efforts, said druffel, should be tofoster human understanding, rather than to overload with information. moreover,he advised, user interfaces should be designed to accommodate newfunctionality. introduction of speech recognition and other capabilities that are instore should not necessitate a major revamping of the interface and existingapplications.an industry of industriesthe convergence of computing and communications and the expanding webof information networks are mirrored by a corresponding convergence of severalmajor industriesšprincipally, computers, communications, publishing, andbroadcasting. all are involved in handling information, which in the past existedin distinct forms. but once information is reduced to binary bits, text, graphics,and audio become complementary parts of a multimedia whole, and theboundaries separating oncedistinct industries fade.equip a personal computer with the hardware for reading a compact disc andproviding sound, and it becomes a means of audio and visual entertainment. withtwoway communication capabilities, a television encroaches on the domains ofthe telephone and the computer. get a "smart phone," and you have acommunications device that takes over the tasks of the computeršfor example,home banking or conducting other online transactions. these presentdayexamples are only early manifestations of technological forces driving thecreation of a large, hybridized information industry. the actions of this industryin formation will steer u.s. society into the information age.3at this stage, it is not entirely clear how this convergence of industries andthe anticipated networking of society will proceed. a few colloquium participantssuggested that the infrastructural melding of networks and systems is proceedingas fast as it can. most were dissatisfied with the pace, with some proffering thatthe more strategic, governmentcoordinated efforts under way in europe andjapan will prove more productive than the piecemeal marketdriven effortsundertaken in the united states. whether the comparatively slow response of theunited states to infrastructural issues marks a period of watchful waiting or oneof indecision is an important question.the next tier: building systems of systems67keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should the market decide?several participants suggested that building a nationwide informationinfrastructure was too important a matter to be delegated entirely to a large andvaried collection of firms responding to market cues and pursuing their owneconomic selfinterest. "if we are strictly market driven, shortterm driven, that is aproblem," maintained mischa schwartz, charles batchelor professor ofelectrical engineering at columbia university. the tendency to focus on theshortterm results in quick responses to immediate market needs, he said, but itdiverts attention and resources from building the capabilities and services thatmay be in demand at the start of the next decade.robert w. lucky, executive director of the communications sciencesresearch division at at&t bell laboratories, offered a similar perspective."there is nobody worrying about putting the nation together" on an integratednational network, he said. "i do not understand, for example, why there is nonational data network. why is there no telephone book for computer users?. . .there is nobody responsible for this. there is nobody who cares to do it. there isnobody who is delegated to do it. there is no motivation for anybody to do it, andyet we would all like it." economic incentives do not exist for services that fall inthe category of the public good, lucky maintained.but if people are not willing to pay for the kinds of services that luckydescribed, the counter argument goes, then perhaps the nation doesn't really needthem or other types of services that a national network could provide. "makinggeneral public knowledge available to the masses would be nice," said teflian,"but who pays for that?" moreover, sidestepping the market could introduce newproblems, he said. ''integrating systems within a company to improve itsproductivity so that it can compete in the world marketplace is one thing," teflianexplained. "integrating systems on a national basis, thus affecting intercompanymarkets, is quite another.''communications: a "halfregulated" industryperhaps most controversial among the issues surrounding the proper roles ofgovernment and the market in the evolution of information networks are thoseconcerning the regulation of communications utilities. especially contentious arefederal, state, and local rules pertaining to the seven regional bell holdingcompanies and the some 1,300 smaller companies that provide local exchangeservice. by virtue of their monopoly in local markets, these telephone companiesmust obtain the approval of state and local utility commissions to raise rates, andthe fees they charge for connecting calls to the longdistance network are set bythe federal communications commission (fcc). in addition, the federal courtrulings that dethe next tier: building systems of systems68keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tailed at&t's divestiture of local telephone service forbade local telephonecompanies from directly engaging in manufacturing, owning local informationservices, and providing longdistance service.the current situation is very fluid and, often, very confusing, given thatactions taken at several levelsšthe courts, the fcc, the u.s. congress, and statelegislatures and utility communicationsšcan alter competitive conditions withinmarkets for communication and information services. bills and rule changes arepending at all levels.4 major changes, in turn, are often subject to appeals.within the current regulatory environment and with the proliferation ofalternative communications technology, many companies have found that theycan save money by bypassing the local telephone network, and they have builttheir own links to longdistance haulers. alternative service providers have alsoemerged within local markets. some offer fiberoptic connections to longdistance carriers and to other sites within the same city. with a recent fccruling, thirdparty service providers can now connect to the switches of localtelephone companies, spawning competition for customers in the same exchangearea. the result of this state of affairs, according to teflian, is a "partiallyregulated industry." "half regulation," he said, has created disincentives to privateinitiatives that would contribute to the building of a national informationnetwork.using local implementation of integrated services digital network (isdn)service as an example, teflian noted that the dispersal of regulatory authoritywill likely result in decisions that create "discontinuities" among service areas.large organizations that require nationwide isdn service, he explained, may beforced to find methods to accommodate these local differences. the challenge,teflian added, is either to develop a regulatory approach that assures uniformityat the local level or to pursue "higher levels of integration" that bridge localdiscontinuities.martin of bellcore suggested that these problems stem from uncertaintiesarising in the aftermath of the breakup of at&t in 1984. "the united states, ithink, is still suffering in postdivestiture confusion," he said, "and i believesomething must be done. the best way to characterize that postdivestitureconfusion is that, since divestiture was announced, there have been no newnational services introduced in the united states, not a one."numerous private information services, most serving specialized businessand legal markets (through their own or thirdparty packetswitched networks),have been established, however. many have not been successful. the largestšand among the newestšof existing services is prodigy, targeted at householdcomputer owners. created by a partnership between sears and ibm with aninvestment of more than $500 million, prodigy offers more than 400 dataservices, including home banking and shopping and information retrieval, andhas about i million subscribers.5the next tier: building systems of systems69keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.colloquium participants did not dwell on specific issues arising from thecomplex and highly fragmented regulatory environment in which the informationindustry finds itself. many of these issues pit industry against industry, eachtrying to preserve or carve out a domain of business activity. rather, severalparticipants pointed out that such issues prove that government policies directlyinfluence the competitive behavior of firms."we do have a telecommunications policy in the united states," martinsaid. "it is enacted every day by many agencies distributed within the u.s.government and across the states, and so there is a policy. the only question iswhat that policy should be."the high performance computing andcommunications program: a step toward anadvanced nationwide information networkalthough many colloquium participants suggested that the path of thenation's migration into the information age is still unmarked, virtually all wereencouraged by the federal government's newly begun high performancecomputing and communications (hpcc) program, an initiative jointly conceivedby representatives of government, industry, and universities."it is a good way to get lots of people excited about the [potential ofadvanced networking], to test a lot of techniques and technologies, and to showthe way as to what needs to get done," explained irving wladawskyberger,ibm's assistant general manager of development and quality. if the approachesand technologies demonstrated in the hpcc program show promise, he added,the risk of moving on to the next tier of innovation and information technologyapplications will be reduced. businesses will have the incentive and some of theknowhow to go on to "build the next version and the version after that."as planned, the program has four major components: (1) research anddevelopment work on highperformance scalable parallel computing systemscapable of sustaining trillions of operations per second on large problems(accounting for 25% of total funding); (2) developing software technology andalgorithms for advanced applications and networking (41%); (3) developing anational research and education network (nren) with, ultimately, a datatransmission rate of several billion bits per second (14%); and (4) investing inbasic research and human resources to address longterm national needs for moreskilled personnel, enhancement of education and training, and development ofmaterials and curriculum (24%).6most discussion at the colloquium focused on the nren, a threephaseproject to be jointly funded by the federal government and industry. during thefirst phase, existing networks linking government, university, and industryresearchers would be upgraded and interconnected. the second phase,the next tier: building systems of systems70keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.much of which has already been installed, would develop a 45millionbitspersecond backbonešthe "longdistance" lines of the networkšpermitting usertouser transmission rates of 1.5 million bits per second for the 200 to 300 u.s.research institutions expected to be linked by the network. the third phase,involving research followed by deployment beginning later in the decade, wouldsupport an aggregate transmission rate of perhaps 3 billion bits per second. thegoals of the first two phases are achievable with commercially availabletechnology (indeed, much progress has already been made); the biggestchallenges lie in the development of software and supporting standards formanaging a large multiorganization network.the final phase, however, will entail a major technological transition. as acommittee of the cstb has noted,7 the highperformance, hightraffic networkenvisioned will require a "cleansheet approach," an appraisal also used todescribe the challenges posed by the less ambitious broadband isdn, or bisdn.in this highspeed distributed computing environment, even the speed of lightbecomes a constraint, posing the problem of propagation delays. technicalissues, the committee pointed out, arise in many areas, including networkcontrol, layered architectures, communication protocols, switching, routing,multiplexing, and processor interfaces. in addressing these and other issues,colloquium participants pointed out, the nren project can clear the technicalobstacles that stand in the way of building an advanced information infrastructurefor the united states.david farber, professor in the department of computer and informationsciences at the university of pennsylvania, elaborated on some of the challenges.when you are operating at a gigabit [rate] across country, there are aremarkable amount of bits stuck in the line being transmitted. so the normalapproach to protocols that we have developed over the years may or may notwork. that is a research question. if they work at a gigabit, will they work at the 2gigabits that we will probably have in another few years? will they work at 10gigabits?can we understand what will happen in the future? big, open question. if youproceed to come up with a protocol that works, . . . then can any operating systemwe have tolerate data rates of that speed? will unix survive when you put agigabit down its throat, even if you can get in'? most likely not. this litany goeson and on and on, and most everything you look at gets affected by trying tostuff that much data at that speed down the throat of modern technology.farber suggested that when computers can exchange data at gigabit speeds, anetwork takes on the characteristics of a massively parallel, or multiprocessor,computer. the network becomes a "pile of computers that all think they are on acommon, multiprocessor environment and communicate via shared memory."the optical fiber linking the network functions like athe next tier: building systems of systems71keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.highspeed bus within an individual computeršthe set of wires, or bidirectionaldata highway, that carries signals throughout the machine. implicit in farber'smodel is the need for network intelligence. "there is no way that massivelynetworked computers can operate without a communications system thatunderstands what, in fact, it is communicating across," he said."this gigabit technology," he told the colloquium, "is the beginning, ibelieve, of a takeoff point in communications. i think there is a gap now betweenthe 'traditional' slowspeed communications of below 100 megabits, and thefuture communications of multiple gigabits that people are talking about. ibelieve the [forthcoming technology] will have a substantial and profound impacton the computer field and offer opportunities that i do not think we are very goodat understanding right now."farber noted that the nren's benefits will take time to unfold. "in aboutthree years," he said, "we will understand better what the issues are, exactly whatthe implications are, and, maybe, whether it is in fact justified as an investmentfor science. all of us believe it is or we would not be spending our time workingtoward it and we would not have the funding to do it. while the government isputting in a substantial amount of money, a large part of the burden is shared byindustry, which is contributing a phenomenal amount of resources, lines,engineering talent, and research talent. so it is a very interesting vehicle, and itmay tell us how we want to do cooperative work in the future in this country."to the extent that the nren project and the entire hpcc program succeedsin exposing and developing these opportunities, the united states will have aclearer technical route into the information age. the nren will serve, in part, asan important test bed for new technologies, applications, and network operationand management policies. perhaps even more importantly, it is likely to setprecedents for many key economic, regulatory, and political issues surroundingthe future development of our national communication and information needs.8careful analysis of such "initial conditions," then, is to be encouraged as theirinfluence can extend for many years into the future.notes1. dertouzos, michael l. 1991. "building the information marketplace," technology review,january, pp. 29œ40.2. the term "knowbots" was originally coined by the corporation for national research initiatives ofreston, virginia; see anthes, gary h. 1991. "let your 'knowbots' do the walking,"computerworld, may 13, p. 17.3. computer science and technology board, national research council. 1990. keeping the u.s.computer industry competitive: defining the agenda, national academy press,washington, d.c., pp. 26œ27.the next tier: building systems of systems72keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4. see, for example, bradsher, keith. 1991. "judge allows phone companies to provide informationservices," new york times, july 26, p. a1.5. shapiro, eben. 1991. "a service is dropped by prodigy," new york times, may 17, p. c3; and"can prodigy be all things to 15 million pc owners?" new york times, june 2, p. f4.konsynski, benn r., and f. warren mcfarlan. 1990. "information partnershipsšshareddata, shared scale," harvard business review, septemberœoctober, p. 116.6. committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinating councilfor science, engineering, and technology, office of science and technology policy. 1991.grand challenges: high performance computing and communications, supplement to thepresident's fiscal year 1992 budget, p. 8.7. computer science and technology board, national research council. 1988. toward a nationalresearch network, national academy press, washington, d.c., pp. 25œ35.8. see, for example, dertouzos, 1991, "building the information marketplace," pp. 29œ40; gilder,george. 1991. "into the telecosm," harvard business review, marchœapril, pp. 150œ161;and weingarten, fred. 1991. "five steps to nren enlightenment," educom review,spring, pp. 26œ30.the next tier: building systems of systems73keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5prerequisites for progressby the end of the 1990s, we will have had five decades of experience withcomputers. but as with several other major commercial innovations (e.g.,automobiles, aviation, telephony, and pharmaceuticals), nearly 50 years ofexperience do not establish computers as a mature technology; nor do theyqualify even the most practiced users as consummate authorities. many observersbelieve that the true potential of digital technology in all its embodiments will notbe realized until well into the next century. this view was expressed by alanperlis, the late yale university computer scientist, in his remarks at the cstb'sinaugural colloquium on the competitiveness of the u.s. computer industry:we must never forget that we are at the beginning of the computer age, sothat exploration of its role must continue into the foreseeable future. thus thephysical form of the computer may change, but our recognition of anddependence on the abstract concept "computation" will continue to deepen. it isinconceivable that we could function without the computer. of course we mustnot worship the machine as an idol but we must domesticate it so that it servesboth as a good and a performer. the computer must be expected to play a role inalmost every human activity.1some might substitute information age for perlis's computer age, but histhemes of exploration and continuing mastery of digital technology are no lessrelevant. in many ways, systems integration marks a new phase of explorationand, as perlis put it, domestication of the technology. the hybridization ofcomputers and communication technology will yield a new progeny ofapplications, perhaps revolutionary capabilities that are not discernible fromtoday's limited vantage point.prerequisites for progress74keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but these expectations are not shared by all. some observers extrapolate fromtoday's experiences with computers and related technology, and they are morecircumspect in their outlook on the future. the current generation of technology,they say, has yet to be domesticated, and, for now, the need for new types ofapplications and information services may be greatly overestimated.colloquium participants offered their own assessments of the nation'sinformation future, with many generally endorsing measures to build anationwide information infrastructure. some described an advanced infrastructureas essential to the nation's economic development. james fischer of andersenconsulting suggested, for example, that as the web of computing andcommunication networks grows, the number and magnitude of the potentialbenefits also grow. as an enabler of innovation, integration can conferadvantages to a single company, he said, "but it also is the basis to give a groupof companies some advantage, and then industries, and ultimately, i wouldassert, the national economy." other speakers predicted a similar cascading ofbenefits in education, health care, government operations, entertainment, andnumerous other areas of social, organizational, and personal activity.in japan and europe, government and industry appear to find the prospectivepayoffs more compelling than do their u.s. counterparts, according to robertmartin of bellcore and several other speakers. indeed, japan's ministry ofinternational trade and industry has estimated that, by the year 2020, thecountry's planned information network will undergird a full third of its economy.2current activities there and in europe are creating a political and economicenvironment that "encourages crossindustry cooperation" on planning andbuilding an infrastructure for the information age, martin said. japan and theeuropean economic community, he added, are "spending more than twice asmuch per capita as the united states to upgrade their infrastructures. each hassponsored cooperative, precompetitive research to define the infrastructure."3while overseas activities may eventually yield returns that could helpforeign competitors eclipse the u.s. leadership in systems integration, colloquiumparticipants were most troubled by the nation's complacency about the role ofinformation technology in its future. with the exception of the hpcc program,neither u.s. government nor u.s. industry has contemplated an initiative toharness the evolving technology to bolster the nation's economy, improve theperformance of its institutions, and better the lives of its citizens. a study by thenational telecommunications and information administration released inoctober 1991 offers some encouragement, because it both articulates theimportance of information infrastructure and considers a range of relevant issuesfrom a public policy perspective.4 the issues involved are numerous andcomplex, and many, such as concernsprerequisites for progress75keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.about personal privacy, cannot be resolved solely in the realms of technology andbusiness.because it was intended as a forum for discussion of varying perspectives,the colloquium did not strive for consensus or sharply focused recommendations.nevertheless, it is possible to distill from participants' remarks several majorissues and concerns requiring the thoughtful attention of business, universities,and government. those include the need for making strategic investments,including demonstration projects by the federal government; attending totechnical standards; enhancing the role of universities; pursuing enablingtechnologies; attending to human elements; providing for system security andprivacy; and developing a shared vision of the information age. these themes arerecapitulated below.making strategic investmentsthe need for government leadershipin 1934, the federal government made universal telephone access a nationalgoal and then built the regulatory framework and provided the incentives that ledto the creation of the world's best telecommunications system. colloquiumparticipants suggested that it is now time to augment that goal in light oftechnological changes profoundly altering the nature of communication andinformation. many also suggested that the federal government can play aninstrumental role in leading the united states into the information age."what we all want to see the government do," said mischa schwartz ofcolumbia university, "is provide a seed or stimulus to progress in some way.that is what is happening in japan and in the european countries."according to schwartz and others, the shortterm, marketdrivenperspectives of most u.s. businesses will likely translate into a continuation of adhoc networking initiatives in the private sector, but the sum of these fragmentedefforts will not be a cohesive nationwide information infrastructure. moreover,colloquium participants questioned whether, on their own, u.s. companies willmake the longterm commitment necessary to resolve the many technical issuesthat a nationwide information network poses. an infrastructure will not developspontaneously, they said, and the decision to build one should be madeprospectively, rather than in hindsight."today, . . . i never hear anybody argue about what is best for the unitedstates," said robert lucky of at&t. "it does not enter any equationwhatsoever." the nation's telecommunications system, he claimed, is evolvinghaphazardly, as all activities are dictated by the need to make money. profitpotential has become the "sole source of leadership," he said.money, however, is not an incidental item in building a national inforprerequisites for progress76keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mation network, one that links every home and business. estimates of the cost ofinstalling optical fiber and associated equipment throughout the united statesrange from $200 billion to about $1 trillion.5 many believe the investment willpay for itself, yielding returns in a variety of ways. for example, one recent studyestimated that the ability to communicate, shop, and conduct businesselectronically over a nationwide fiberoptic network would permit 6 millionpeople to work at home, replace 13 million business trips with teleconferences,eliminate 3 billion shopping trips, and reduce truck and delivery miles by 600million.6 the resultant annual savings, realized in the form of reduced fuelconsumption, pollution, and commuting time, were estimated to total about $23billion. while the transportationcommunication tradeoff has been a subject ofdiscussion, speculation, and disappointment for decades, we appear to be at thethreshold of some real shifts in behavior as a result of changes in technology, theeconomy, and shifting views on important topics like the environment,education, and family.because the cost of building an information infrastructure is large andbecause many of the anticipated benefits might be considered public goods, therehave been calls for costsharing and risksharing between business andgovernment. in addition, the perceived costs and benefits and the magnitude andcomplexity of the task of building an infrastructure were seen by colloquiumparticipants as impetus for measures to foster cooperation and coordination."this is a very long term issue that requires an unusual amount ofcooperation across academia, industry, and government," said martin ofbellcore. in the private sector, he noted, the broadcast, computer, andtelecommunications industries "must learn to cooperate if we wish to have aninformation network." thus an important role for government is to serve as anintermediary and to create a forum for crossindustry participation.martin and other speakers questioned, however, whether a truly coordinatedand cooperative effort is possible within today's fragmented regulatory and policyframework. federal and state policymakers and regulators, he said, "are doingsuperb jobs within their own domains but, i fear, are looking backwards towardsthe old edict of universal telephone service . . . . [w]e need to carefully look athow we are stimulating investment in this infrastructure in the united states."7applications, demonstrations, and incentivesthe fact that u.s. companies spend several billion dollars on privatenetworks indicates a need for a communications infrastructure. but does this needextend beyond business, especially large firms and organizations such as federalagencies? still a matter for debate is the extent to which u.s. consumers maywish to partake of the smorgasbord of informationageprerequisites for progress77keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.services that becomes possible when households are linked to a nationwidenetwork. commercial ventures in videotext and other information services (e.g.,compuserve, prodigy, genie) have served relatively small numbers of customersto date. the development of narrowband isdn and its anticipated growth intobroadband isdn are largely the product of telecommunications carriers'intentions, rather than burgeoning consumer demand and brimming societalexpectations. on the other hand, these services do not go as far as thoseenvisioned for the national research and education network (nren), which isdriven by advanced scientific and technological demands plus concern for theneeds of education.commitment to and momentum toward an advanced broadband networkmust be generated by new applications that appeal to a broad number of people.uncertainty about future markets for information services and applications canimpede steps that would further the development of a national network.according to several colloquium participants, national and regionaldemonstration projects are required to evaluate prospective consumerorienteduses of an information network. today, several local experimentsšat least 50,based on a 1990 estimate8šare evaluating household use of fiber opticallydelivered information and entertainment services. but whether the results of thesetrials will provide definitive evidence of the appeal and utility of such services on anational scale is doubtful.lucky of at&t noted that with at&t's divestiture of the bell operatingcompanies, the united states lost its only mechanism for conducting ''pioneeringexperiments'' to try out new services. "we would give communities certainadvance services and see how they played out," he explained. "we cannot do thisany more. they [trials] do not make money. . . . in the days before divestiture, wehad a great mechanism for doing all this. we had this ratebase business wherewe effectively taxed the telephonepaying public to pay for what we thoughtwould be good for them. we need a mechanism that [permits] . . . the nation todevote some resources to doing pioneering experiments."the authority and means to implement such a mechanism would seem torest with federal and state regulators, several speakers suggested. theycontended, however, that federal and state regulators are principally interested incontrolling the cost of telecommunication services to consumers. longerterminfrastructural issues and their implications for the general public tend to rank lowon the regulatory agenda. without consumeroriented trials of advancedinformation services, said martin of bellcore, conjecture will continue todominate the debate over a nationwide information infrastructure. whetherhooking up households and offices on a network will yield such benefits asindividualized education, better health care as a result of providing access toremotely located medical expertise, and new economic opportunities for decliningrural communities can onlyprerequisites for progress78keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be determined from systematic testing, he said. similarly, results of service trialscould either strengthen or weaken arguments that large businesses would be theprimary beneficiaries of an information infrastructure, he added. evidence, eitherway, would help guide regulators' and policymakers' decisions on financinginfrastructural development.existing federal government programs hold varying degrees of value asdemonstration vehicles. particularly promising is the nren. beginning efforts tobuild a multigigabit network, david farber of the university of pennsylvaniasuggested, are in themselves an "enabling technology." added samuel fuller ofthe digital equipment corp., "here is an ideal project that can only be done incollaboration with industry, and, i believe, the universities can play an importantpart. it seems to me [nren] provides a wonderful, concrete example that willstress a number of key areas that will have to be improved if we are really goingto be effective in systems integration. . . . it provides a rich area for us to developmethods, do research, and make progress."as an additional spur to progress, several colloquium participantssuggested, the federal government could sponsor development and demonstrationprojects that would pioneer applications of advanced information technology tothe missions of informationintensive agencies, such as the social securityadministration (ssa), the internal revenue service (irs), and theenvironmental protection agency (epa). expanding the demonstration potentialof federal systems would build on a large base: the federal government has beenthe largest consumer of information technology in the world, federal needs forsystems have long nourished the systems integration business, and today manyagencies have significant needs to modernize their processes and supportingsystems. historically, information technology projects for government agenciessuch as the national aeronautics and space administration and department ofdefense have broken new applications ground.beyond focusing research and development on civilian, or commercial,applications of information technology, federal systems demonstration projectsare likely to yield tangible dividends in the form of increased effectiveness andefficiency in government operations, as well as improved decision making.achieving this promise, however, would be challenging, as such majorinformationintensive agencies as the ssa and the irs process information on ascale far exceeding that of single companies undertaking systems integrationprojects (tax systems modernization at the irs, for example, is expected toinvolve technology to handle 100 million individual tax returns plusorganizational tax filings, at an investment of $8 billion).9 for a variety ofreasons, information systems at most civilian agencies have not tended to pioneerinnovations; they have in recent years lagged the best commercial practice.nevertheless, initiatives such as gosip, for impleprerequisites for progress79keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.menting osi networking standards; fts2000, for upgrading voice and datacommunications (including isdn implementation); and other federalprocurement activities point to the possibilities for a wide range of federalsystems to implement and demonstrate aspects of systems integration.another option for stimulating investment, suggested by mark teflian ofcovia, is to provide tax incentives to private organizations that invest in advancedtechnology needed to modernize the nation's communications infrastructure. tostrengthen the "competitiveness of u.s. business here and abroad," teflian said,the united states must be able "to get past the point of having to deal with theintegration problems at the lower levelšthe physical transport levels ofcommunications networks." tax incentives might encourage firms to take thenext step and move on to higher levels of integration and internetworking, which,he said, would improve business performance and ultimately benefit theeconomy.attending to standardsefforts to develop communication and information technology standards,one commentator has recently written, "are almost always slow, laborious,political, petty, boring, ponderous, thankless, and of the utmost criticality."10such is the nature of standardization, a process that u.s. companies "tend toflay," said schwartz of columbia university. "sometimes we tend to go with it;sometimes we go against it.''in recent years, however, more and more u.s. companies have come toappreciate the strategic importance of standards. manufacturers and serviceproviders recognize the marketexpanding effects of standards, and users ofinformation technology are wary of proprietary approaches that limit their futureoptions for connectivity and interoperability. unfortunately, this appreciation iscompartmentalized according to industrial domains. communications carriersattend to their own sphere, manufacturers of computer hardware and softwareattend to theirs, and user organizations that get involved in the process focus ontheir specific needs. even within an industry, interests may be specialized andseparate. for example, providers of wireless communication services and firmsthat operate public switched networks have done little to bridge their twooperating domains and create a larger hybridized communications network.11thus standardsetting efforts do not fully reflect the convergence andinterdependence of technologies and industries wrought by the digitalization ofinformation.in europe and japan, several colloquium participants noted, standards havebeen made a top priority by both government and industry. the europeaneconomic community, for example, has created a standards institute to serve as afocal point of standardsmaking activity. collaborators there are placing greateremphasis on developing "prenormative" standards thatprerequisites for progress80keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.anticipate technological advances and future networking needs, but yetaccommodate refinement and adjustment when technology and services are readyfor commercial introduction. in so doing, european companies are strengtheningtheir position in the international standardsmaking arena, participants suggested.participants made several recommendations regarding the development ofstandards that foster the growth of a national communications and informationtechnology infrastructure and that can compete for international acceptance.first, they said, u.s. government and industry must adopt an integrated, strategicapproach to standards making. an important ingredient of such an approach iscooperative precompetitive research, perhaps jointly funded by the federalgovernment and industry. although speakers did not propose a specificmechanism for coordinating standards making activities, most called on thefederal government to play a formative role."the federal government," maintained albert crawford of americanexpress, "should be far more proactive in influencing international informationstandards. government representatives should solicit input not only fromequipment vendors but also from systems integration firms and leadingedgeusers.""standards activity clearly needs to be expedited," martin added, "butfinding the right model that assures ongoing open participation by industry andyet accelerates the process is a very complex matter that requires careful study."many speakers expressed concern over the complexity of current andemerging standards, which, in the long run, could undermine internetworkingefforts and perhaps slow the adoption of new technology. citing one example,alfred aho of bellcore said the communications protocols designed to supportthe open system interconnection reference model "are getting bigger, fatter,more complex, and more numerous. eventually this whole system is going tocollapse under its own weight." aho described standards as "essential" to systemsintegration and networking on national and global scales, but he stressed the needto simplify standards and to increase the speed and efficiency of the standardssetting process.an important challenge for researchers is the development of socalledlightweight communications protocols, those that entail less processing and,therefore, take less time to carry out their functions than do today's"heavyweight" versions. however, current analytical models and othermethodological tools now used to design communications protocols, explainedhisashi kobayashi of princeton university, may not be applicable to effortsaddressing this challenge. "there are a whole range of protocol issues that cannotbe addressed by the existing methodology," he said.moreover, internetworking efforts would benefit significantly from wideradoption of programs for certifying the conformance of products withprerequisites for progress81keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryaccepted standards and from the development of better mathematicaltools to improve the reliability of product testing. however, the former, systemcertification, is the subject of some controversy within industry centered on howbest to demonstrate conformance, while the latter, including verification andvalidation of software, is the subject of vigorous activity and debate in thetechnical community.enhancing the role of universitiesgiven the technical challenges that advanced information networking posesand the systems integration industry's need for a highly skilled interdisciplinarywork force, one might expect the nation's universities to be playing key roles asperformers of research and as trainers of science and engineering personnel.unfortunately, this expectation does not mesh with reality. excluding theinvolvement of some in the young nren project and a few other isolatedexamples, universities have not embraced systems integration as an area offormal inquiry.because the field encompasses many disciplines, kobayashi explained, it"does not really fit in the traditional academic disciplines like computer scienceor electrical engineering. it is not so easy for faculty members and graduatestudents to focus on systems integration in the broader sense of the term." that aninterdisciplinary approach is required, however, was clear from the remarks ofindustry representatives such as jeffrey heller of electronic data systems,charles feld of fritolay, and fischer."much like the difficulties in making software engineering a legitimateacademic topic," added larry e. druffel of carnegie mellon university, "systemsintegration faces the issues of definition, codification, and theory." thus despitethe perceived need on behalf of industry, few universities have thus far set upgraduatelevel programs to address systemsintegration issues. irvingwladawskyberger of ibm challenged university researchers and theirinstitutions to begin addressing the field's complex problems or "risk falling farbehind the state of the art."while acknowledging that systems integration is struggling for recognitionas a legitimate academic topic, university representatives pointed to somepractical impediments.12 one is the lack of private and public funding for theinterdisciplinary research programs that are required to address many of theissues in the field. a related obstacle is the high cost of advanced technology. inthe communications area, for example, most universities do not have theresources to make the transition from the old model of pointtopointtelecommunications to the rapidly evolving model of networking, said schwartz.the modernization, he said, "takes a lot of knowhow, and it takes a lot ofequipment. nobody is providing that knowprerequisites for progress82keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how, and nobody is providing that equipment, and so [universities] are fallingfurther and further behind."druffel concurred: "universities seldom have the funds to support completeintegration, and most do not have the engineering expertise to build and maintainan operational system."heller suggested several prescriptive actions to foster greater universityinvolvement. consortia with members from government, industry, and academia,he said, offer one means for assembling the "critical mass of resources and talent"needed to address complex systems integration problems. heller also adviseduniversities to act on their ownš"to concentrate on understanding systemsintegration, providing input to industry, and teaching" the interdisciplinary andtechnical skills that the field requires. for its part, he added, "business shouldassist universities in upgrading equipment, share its expertise, and provide inputinto curriculum development."pursuing enabling technologiestechnological innovation yields the raw materials of the information age,while systems integration offers perhaps the best means for making the mostproductive and widest use of those materials. the competitive advantages reapedby firms such as fritolay and others that have effectively linked informationtechnology, people, business operations, and longterm strategic planning providecompelling evidence for this assertion.occasional examples of delays, costoverruns, and failed integration projectsnotwithstanding, u.s. firms have pioneered and demonstrated the substantialbenefits that can be gained by networking today's computing andcommunications technology, and they have given a hint of what the future maybring. in growing numbers, foreign firms and governments will seek to capturethe competitive economic advantages that systems integration affords. this willmean an expansion of global markets for systems integration services and theunderlying base of hardware and software on which information systems arebuilt. in turn, a rapidly growing market will also attract new competitors to thesystems integration business.these developments, already unfolding, could eventually lead to therepetition of a lesson that is all too familiar in the nation's computer andelectronics industries. being first in the development and application of newtechnology does not guarantee future commercial success. yet having given birthto information networking, u.s. firms are at least in a position to capitalize on thesecond generation of networking, during which entire industries and entireeconomies and societies will go "on line." that these firms will be able to do so,however, is not inevitable. almost certainly,prerequisites for progress83keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foreign firms will attempt to leapfrog their u.s. competitors and cash in ongrowing opportunities to sell devices, software, and services. the governments ofjapan and european nations are collaborating with industry on a wide range ofinformation technology research and development projects, ranging from themanufacture of advanced semiconductor memory chips to demonstrations of newinformation services to devising security countermeasures and privacysafeguards.colloquium participants identified several key areas of technology andresearch where continuing progress is essential if the u.s. systems integrationindustry is to maintain its worldleading position.systems integration as a science and engineering discipline"we [must] do for systems integration what computer science and computerengineering have done for computing," asserted aho. "if we do not do this, then ithink the kinds of advantages that we currently enjoy will be eroded, and erodedrapidly."behind aho's assertion lies the widely held perception that systemsintegration is largely an art or advanced craft, rather than a fullfledged disciplinebuilt on fundamental scientific, engineering, and design principles. however, theinterdisciplinary nature of the field makes meeting this challenge all the moreimportant and all the more difficult. the transformation from art to sciencerequires contributions from a diverse collection of fields, such as mathematics,ergonomics, and business and management science, as well as softwareengineering and computer science and engineering. although many problems canbe addressed in distinct research domains, the results of investigations willgenerally be partial solutions to larger and more encompassing issues. as thefield's name makes implicit, integration and coordination of researchcontributions will be critical to building the scientific underpinnings of systemsintegration.what is more, there are intrinsic problems in working on large systems.first among these is the inherent difficulty in designing large systems that willincorporate both automated and nonautomated (human, business, or physical)elements. no less a challenge is the innate propensity for large systems to changeor evolve over time. for example, 40 to 60 percent of the effort in thedevelopment of complex software systems typically goes into maintainingši.e.,changingšsuch systems. 13computing hardware and software capabilitiesas suggested in the earlier discussions of the nren project, the expectedemergence of communications and computer networks that permitprerequisites for progress84keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.users to exchange data at a rate of several billions of bits per second (or greater)spawns an array of technical issues. there is need for both incrementalimprovements in existing technology and "clean sheet" approaches to networkedcomputing and communications. in hardware, critically important areas includeadvanced integrated circuits, computer architectures, photonics andphotoelectronics, flat panel displays, switching technology, digital signalcompression, and many others. colloquium participants did not dwell onhardwarerelated issues, but many acknowledged that the future of the u.s.systems integration industry is closely linked to the fortunes of domestichardware manufacturers. they underscored concerns about the competitivenessof certain segments of the u.s. semiconductor industry and about the socalledcommoditization of computers, a trend that favors japanese firms and otherforeign competitors noted for their manufacturing prowess.participants devoted more attention to software, which, as fuller of thedigital equipment corp. (dec) explained, is the primary source of "valueadded" in systems integration. in contrast to the uneven fortunes of u.s. hardwaremanufacturers, the nation's software makers account for over half of world salesof computer programs and related services, having generated revenues of about$63 billion in 1990. 14 this worldleading position appears to bode well for u.s.systems integrators as they venture into foreign markets. but again, japan andeurope are making determined efforts to close the software gap, focusing ondesign and programming methods intended to make software development moreefficient and less prone to quality defects than are the processes used by u.s.producers. japanese designers and programmers have been highly successful increating reliable, highquality software incorporated into consumer electronicsproducts, and they, as well as european software companies, have proven theirability to write customized programs for business applications.fuller and other colloquium participants suggested that improved methodsfor large software development projects would help both u.s. software firms andsystems integrators distance themselves from the competition. especially needed,according to fuller, are better computeraided software engineering (case) toolsfor building "programming environments for system control, revision control, andthe integration testing and verification of large systems." by making thesemethods a research priority, he added, "i think we can continue to differentiateourselves" in the world market for systems integration.two other critical areas, fuller said, are the enhancement of multimediahuman interfaces and development of standardized techniques for managingdatabase systems. both are essential elements of efforts to make computeraidedcollaboration and information networking easier and more productive.prerequisites for progress85keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reengineering and building on the installed base oftechnologycollectively, the nation's businesses, government agencies, and otherorganizations have invested hundreds of billions of dollars in informationtechnology since the 1960s. this large installed base of devices and, inparticular, software and databases is alternatively described as boon and bane.with each wave of advance in commercial technology, organizations are findingit increasingly difficult to combine the old with the new, and yet the informationand applications embedded in yesterday's investments continue to be strategicallyimportant assets. in fact, the value of these assets may actually increase with thenew functions and capabilities made possible by stateoftheart technology, if thetwo can be made interoperable.in the same vein, many organizations have a long list of new softwareapplications awaiting development. progress is slow because each new projectgenerally begins from scratch, even though routines and subroutines that willeventually be incorporated into the final product already reside in existingapplications.both problemsšthe one of reengineering the installed base and the other ofbuilding on past software design and programming efforts to create entirely newapplicationsšare widely recognized. solutions would be especially beneficial toprivate and public organizations that have invested heavily in informationtechnology, most of which are located in the united states. "by one mechanismor another," fuller said, "we have to stand on the shoulders of others rather thanreimplement from scratch."attending to human elementswhile computers are typically viewed as implements of automation, thetechnology is most effective not as a substitute for workers, but as a complementto the capabilities of humans. however, the computer's potential as a thinkingaid, as a tool that fosters creativity and problem solving, and as a means ofcollaboration is not easily achieved.systems integration, said laszlo belady, then of the microelectronics andcomputer technology corp., "is not purely a technology issue. it is, to a largedegree, a human resource issue." but people may be the most unpredictable and,therefore, the most neglected variable in information networking and systemsdesign and implementation."i think we are just starting to understand the fact that, really, the computingsystem has to be driven by the human system," said michael taylor of dec. "sowe are starting to think in terms of a new paradigm that says you start with thepeople, the way those people need to do work."prerequisites for progress86keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.several colloquium participants described systems integration as an agent ofchange. yet change can be disruptive. the transition to, for example, a leanerorganizational structure and a more collaborative work environment may neverbe realized, as may also be the case for many of the benefits the organizationenvisioned when it chose to invest in information technology.today, however, there are few tools to help ensure that a distributedcomputing system will enable increased organizational and personal productivityand creativity. experience provides ample evidence of the importance of training,ease of use, and welldesigned user interfaces. but fundamental knowledge ofhow people think, work, collaborate, and use information technology could leadto significant improvements in the utility and value of the technology.providing for security and privacythe global spread of computing and communications networks heightensconcerns about security and privacy. once organizations begin to link up withothers outside their own private network, as many are now doing, said fischer ofandersen consulting, "the possibilities for security violations go upexponentially." if not addressed with effective countermeasures, colloquiumparticipants noted, increasing vulnerability to security breaches could constrainapplications of information systems. yet, they said, the escalating risk has yet toreceive concentrated attention from industry and government.the implications of this situation were addressed in a recent study by acommittee of the cstb:we are at risk. increasingly, america depends on computers. they controlpower delivery, communications, aviation, and financial services. they are usedto store vital information, from medical records to business plans to criminalrecords. although we trust them, they are vulnerablešto the effects of poordesign and insufficient quality control, to accident, and perhaps mostalarmingly, to deliberate attack. the modern thief can steal more with acomputer than with a gun. tomorrow's terrorist may be able to do more damagewith a keyboard than with a bomb.15moreover, the increasing ease with which information on individuals can beassembled, correlated, analyzed, and distributed may undermine the right toprivacy, explained mary shaw, professor of computer science and softwareengineering at carnegie mellon university. she pointed to two areas of concern.first, shaw said, information that was once difficult to gather is now easilyaccessed with computers."the second factor that is operating," she added, "is that information that haslong been public and probably legitimately so, can now be synthesized," resultingin a composite body of information that is qualitativelyprerequisites for progress87keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.different from the raw data from which it was assembled. ''this qualitative effectis sort of denied by the people who claim they are only bringing togetherinformation that is already public," she continued. but it creates "tension betweenbusiness interests that correlate this information . . . and individuals' personalright not to have it correlated, publicized, and distributed."developing a shared vision of the informationagealthough in itself an important economic activity and a potentially largesource of export earnings, systems integration may derive most of its importancefrom its facilitating role, that of enabling organizations and individuals to useinformation technology most productively in applications ranging frommanufacturing to government services to education to entertainment. recognitionof this value is implicit in the coordinated actions by european countries, japan,and other nations to build regional and national communications and computingnetworks.while not intended to garner unanimity of opinion, the colloquium didgenerate a consensus view on the critical need for this nation to plan for its futurein the information age. throughout the discussion, there were calls for vision,leadership, and even imagination on the part of the federal government."leadership is not a bad thing to expect from your government," saidwladawskyberger. "that is very different from industrial policy or control orregulation."if government can help u.s. industry stake a claim at the frontier oftechnology and demonstrate the potential returns from exploring and developingthat claim, this line of reasoning goes, then the pioneering efforts will attractmany firms to settle and compete for a livelihood at the edge of the frontier. arich cycle of commercial innovation can be expected to follow, yielding benefitsfor the rest of society.but leadership without a committed following, one that is willing toshoulder part of the risk of exploration, is a hollow exercise. firms now calling onthe u.s. government to lead the nation into the information age must also sharethat vision and commit to making it a reality. a recurring question at thecolloquium was whether many u.s. firms are willing to take a longterm viewand to invest in the future, perhaps at the expense of shortterm profits.a firm can be "market driven with the best of them," wladawskybergerexplained, "but if you do not pay a lot of attention to innovation and technologyas one of the major forces that will drive you to the future, then you really do nothave a future. i do not know how you can talk about innovaprerequisites for progress88keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tion and technology, where the payoffs may be more than five years away, if youare not convinced that that is very importantšthat you either push at the leadingedge of technology or you go out of business."notes1. computer science and technology board, national research council. 1990. keeping the u.s.computer industry competitive: defining the agenda, national academy press,washington, d.c., p. 66 .2. gilder, george. 1991. "into the telecosm," harvard business review , marchœapril, p. 158 .3. for example, within the european community the research and development in advancedcommunications technologies for europe (race) program represents a collaborative effortto develop the telecommunications infrastructure required to support future computernetworks. the program was initiated in 1988 as a fiveyear effort with eight nationscontributing over half a billion dollars to develop an integrated broadband communicationssystem for highspeed operation. (blackburn, j. f. 1989. the race program in 1988,office of naval research europe report (onreur), washington, d.c., march; or racedg xiiif (directorate general xiii). 1990. research and development in advancedcommunications technologies in europe. race '90, european commission, brussels,march .) japan, for its part, has committed more than $130 billion through the miti newmedia community and the ntt information network system project to building a nationalisdn network and achieving full digitization of japanese telephone service before the turnof the century (bellcore technical liaison office, "japanese telecommunications,"unpublished paper, p. 21, july 1990 ).4. u.s. department of commerce, national telecommunications and information administration.1991. the ntia infrastructure report: telecommunications in the age of information, ntiaspecial publication 9126, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., october.5. gilder, 1991, "into the telecosm," p. 156.6. arthur d. little, inc., 1991, can telecommunications help solve america's transportationproblems?, arthur d. little, inc., cambridge, mass., may , as reported on in: passel, peter,1991. "the faxes are coming," new york times, april 10, p. d2.7. the ntia infrastructure report referenced above (see note 4) argues for increased competition inrelevant markets as a stimulus to the development of infrastructure, and it also advances anupdated concept of universal service, which it calls advanced universal service access(advanced usa). the report recommends:thus, instead of seeking only to provide a specified package ofservices, the fcc, the states, and the telecommunications industryshould seek to make advanced network capabilities and access to nonnetwork based services available to all users on an optional, lowcostbasis. policymakers should generally define, in a technologicallyneutral way, the features or functionalities that are elements ofadvanced usa. (pp. xxivœxxv)prerequisites for progress89keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8. lopez, julie amparano, and mary lu carnevale. 1990. ''glassed houses: fiber optics promisesrevolution of sort if the sharks don't bite," wall street journal, july 10, pp. a1 and a10.the ntia infrastructure report referenced in note 4 comments on the lower rate of isdnimplementation in the united states as compared to several other countries (pp. 183œ187),and it also references efforts to deploy fiber to the home and fiber to the curb (pp. 100œ109)as part of the improvements to transmission systems under way.9. although the ssa implemented a comprehensive systems modernization plan during the 1980sthat brought its information systems back from the brink of failure, a recent assessmentconcluded that the "ssa can do a great deal more to exploit the benefits of onlineautomation" (national research council, 1991, elements of systems modernization for thesocial security system, and 1990, systems modernization and the strategic plans of thesocial security administration, national academy press, washington, d.c.). the irs isitself on the threshold of a major tax systems modernization program that will significantlyenhance its ability to exploit the benefits of dealing with information in electronic, asopposed to paper, form. that program is under evaluation by the computer science andtelecommunications board.10. kleinrock, leonard. 1991. "isdnšthe path to broadband networks," proceedings of the ieee,vol. 79, no. 2, february, p. 112.11. dorros, irwin. 1990. "calling for cooperation," bellcore exchange , novemberœdecember, pp.7œ8.12. the impediments and other issues are similar to those found impeding progress in systemstechnology generally and notably in the area of software engineering. a discussion of theseissues in the context of software engineering can be found in the following report: computerscience and technology board, national research council. 1989. scaling up: a researchagenda for software engineering, national academy press, washington, d.c.13. boehm, b. w. 1981. software engineering economics, prenticehall, englewood cliffs, n.j.14. brandt, richard. 1991. "can the u.s. stay ahead in software?" business week, march 11, p. 98.15. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1991. computersat risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington,d.c., p. 7.prerequisites for progress90keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes91keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes92keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix acolloquium programjanuary 22, 19915:30 p.m.reception7:00 p.m.dinner and keynote addressivan selin, under secretary for management, u.s. department of statejanuary 23, 19918:30 a.m.registration9:30 a.m.welcome and colloquium introductionrobert m. white, president, national academy of engineeringlaszlo belady (colloquium chairman) vice president, softwaretechnology and advanced computing technology program,microelectronics and computer technology corp.10:00 a.m.applications panel(chair)jeffrey heller, senior vice president, technology services group,electronic data systemsappendix a93keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles feld, vice president for management information systems,fritolay, inc.james fischer, managing partner for technology services, andersenconsultingmax hopper, senior vice president, information systems, americanairlinesgerald weis, senior vice president, sears technology services, inc.audience input12:00 p.m.lunch in refectory alcove1:00 p.m.system and data communications panel(chair)robert martin, vice president, software technology and systems,bell communications researchalbert crawford, executive vice president, strategic businesssystems, american expresshisashi kobayashi, dean of engineering and applied science,princeton universitymichael taylor, central systems engineering manager, digitalequipment corporationmark teflian, vice president and ceo, technical group, coviaaudience input3:00 p.m.break3:15 p.m.enabling technologies panel(chair)robert lucky, executive director, communications sciencesresearch division, at&t bell laboratoriesalfred aho, assistant vice president, bell communications researchlarry druffel, director, software engineering institute, carnegiemellon universitydavid farber, professor, department of computer and informationsciences, university of pennsylvaniamischa schwartz, charles batchelor professor of electricalengineering, columbia universityappendix a94keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.audience input5:00 p.m.closing remarkssamuel fuller, vice president, research, digital equipment corporationirving wladawskyberger, assistant general manager of developmentand quality, ibm corporationlaszlo belady, vice president, software technology and advancedcomputing technology program, microelectronics and computertechnology corp.5:30 p.m.reception in members roomappendix a95keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bcolloquium participantsalfred v. aho, bellcoreedward b. altman, ibm corporationlaszlo a. belady, microelectronics and computer technology corporationherbert d. benington, unisys defense systemskathleen c. bernard, cray research, inc.barry boehm, defense advanced research projects agencyjohn p. boright, u.s. department of statejane bortnick, congressional research servicecharles n. brownstein, national science foundationkelly w. bryant, ii, u.s. department of laborthomas buckholtz, general services administrationjames h. burrows, national institute of standards and technologyvirginia l. castor, office of the secretary of defenseal crawford, american expressjames w. curlin, office of technology assessmentjohn g. dardis, u.s. department of staterenato a. dipentima, social security administrationlarry e. druffel, carnegie mellon universityrobert elson, house science, space and technology committeedavid farber, university of pennsylvaniagilbert fayl, delegation of the commission of the european communitiescharles feld, fritolay, inc.charles ferguson, massachusetts institute of technologyw. james fischer, andersen consultingkenneth flamm, the brookings institutionappendix b96keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.samuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationsusan gerhart, microelectronics and computer technology corporationnorman s. glick, national security agencygregory e. gorman, computer & communications industry assoc.stephen gould, congressional research servicebruce guile, national academy of engineeringjoseph heim, national academy of engineeringjeffrey m. heller, electronic data systemsmerrill m. hessel, national institute of standards and technologymax hopper, american airlinesjose iglesias, ibm corporationluanne james, adapsolionel f. johns, office of technology assessmentrobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiativesthomas kitchens, u.s. department of energyronald j. knecht, u.s. department of defensehisashi kobayashi, princeton universitylouisa koch, washington, d.c.alfred m. lee, u.s. department of commercerobert w. lucky, at&t bell laboratoriesrobert l. martin, bell communications researchjoseph j. minarik, joint economic committeejames m. murphy, jr., office of the u.s. trade representativedavid b. nelson, u.s. department of energythierry noyelle, columbia universitydon page, general services administrationraymond l. pickholtz, george washington universitydonald e. pryor, office of science and technology policytheodore j. ralston, microelectronics and computer technologycorporationcharla rath, u.s. department of commercemichael m. roberts, educomcesare f. rosati, u.s. department of statewilliam scherlis, defense advanced research projects agencycraig m. schiffries, senate committee on the judiciarymischa schwartz, columbia universityivan selin, u.s. department of statemary shaw, carnegie mellon universityelizabeth shelton, u.s. department of statefred sims, general services administrationpaul smith, national aeronautics and space administrationneil j. stillman, department of health and human servicesrona b. stillman, general accounting officeappendix b97keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integrationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.michael g. taylor, digital equipment corporationsteve taylor, u.s. department of statemark teflian, coviatony trenkle, general services administrationphilip webre, natural resources and commerce divisiongerard r. weis, sears technology services, inc.robert m. white, national academy of engineeringgerald whitman, u.s. department of statewilliam e. whyman, office of the u.s. trade representativerandolph williams, u.s. department of commerceirving wladawskyberger, ibm corporationhelen wood, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, staff directordamian m. saccocio, staff officermark bello, cstb consultantpamela r. rodgers, cstb consultantcatherine a. sparks, project assistantappendix b98