detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/19298transport protocols for department of defense data networks:report to the department of defense and the national bureauof standards89 pages | 8.5 x 10 | paperbackisbn 9780309322799 | doi 10.17226/19298committee on computercomputer communication protocols; board ontelecommunications and computer applications; commission on engineering andtechnical systems; national research counciltransport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved... ' . ·'·· . ; ' ł.. : !·· : ł· 1125349 pb85176147/xab transport protocols for o.part.t of def.,se data networks (ftnal rept) national research council, washington, dc. corp. source codes: 019026000 sponsor: defense connuntcations agency, washington, dc.; national bureau of.standards, gaithersburg, md. feb 85 85p sponsored by national bureau of standards, gaithersburg, md. languages: engltsh ntis prtces: pc a05/mf a01 announc ... nt: grai8514 country of publtcatton: untted states contract no.: dca83c0051 co.puter ca.nuntcattons networks have beco.e a very important part of mtlttary and con.erctal operations. raptd, accurate transmtsston of data requires ca.muntcatton ltnks that tte together the .any elements inherent to the communication process. the links constat of a layered sertes of procedures (protocols) performing the necessary functions. the dod and nbs have each developed and pra.ulgated a transport protocol as standard. the two protocols, however, are dtsstmtlar and tnca.pattble. the report ts concerned wtth reco.mendattons for a protocol meeting both agencies needs. descriptors: łpulse communtcatton; data transmtsston: standards identifiers: łprotocols: łcomputer networks: ntisnasnrc; ntisdodsd; ntisnasnae: ntisnasiom section headtngs: 178 (navtgatton, coanuntcattons detection, and countermeasuresconnuntcattons); 98 (electronics and electrical engtneeringconputers); 45c (communtcattoncon.on carrter and satellite); 62ge (computers, control, and information theorygeneral) transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standards committee on computercomputer communication protocols board on telecommunications and computer applications commission on engineering and technical systems national research council · national academy press washington, d.c. february 1985 reference copy for library use oltly libkahv transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board on the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance. this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors, cording to procedures approved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the national research council was established by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and nology with the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and of ing the federal government. the council operates in accordance with general policies determined by the academy under the authority of its congressional charter of 1863, which establishes the academy as a vate, nonprofit, selfgoverning membership corporation. the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in the conduct of their services to the government, the public, and the scientific and ing communities. it is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. the national academy of engineering and the institute of medicine were established in 1964 and 1970, respectively, under the charter of the national academy of sciences. this is a report of work supported by contract no. dca83c0051 between the u.s. defense communications agency and the national academy of sciences, underwritten jointly by the department of defense and the national bureau of standards. copies of this publication are available from: board on telecommunications and computer applications commission on engineering and technical systems national research council 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, d.c. 20418 order from national tethnieaf information semcf, springfield, va. 22161 . p 8 b 5 14 '1 order no.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.board on telecommunicationscomputer applications committee on computercomputer communication protocols chairman c. chapin cutler, professor of ·applied physics, stanford university, stanford, california members herbert d. benington, technical director, system development corporation, mclean, virginia donald l. boyd, director, honeywell corporate computer sciences center, honeywell corporate technology center, bloomington, minnesota david j. farber, professor of electrical engineering and professor of computer science, department of electrical engineering, university of delaware, newark, delaware lawrence h. landweber, professor, computer sciences department, sity of wisconsin, madison, wisconsin anthony g. lauck, manager, distributed systems architecture and advanced development, digital equipment corporation, tewksbury, massachusetts keith a lucke, general manager of control data technical standards, control data corporation, minneapolis, minnesota mischa schwartz, professor of electrical engineering and computer science, columbia university, new york, new york robert f. steen, director of architecture, communication products division ibm corporation, research triangle park, north carolina carl a sunshine, principal engineer, s.vtek, incorporated, los angeles operation, culver city, california daniel j. fink, (exofficio), president, d.j. fink associates, inc., arlington, virginia james l. flanagan, (cets liaison member), head, acoustics research department, at&t bell laboratories, murray hill, new jersey staff richard b. marsten, executive director jerome d. rosenberg, senior staff officer and study director lois a. leak, administrative secretary iii transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on engineering and technical systems board on telecommunicationscomputer applications chairman daniel j. fink, president, d.j. fink associates, inc., arlington, virginia past chairman brockway mcmillan, vice president (retired), bell laboratories, sedgwick, maine members arthur g. anderson, vice president (retired), ibm corporation, san jose, california daniel bell, henry ford ii professor of social sciences, department of sociology, harvard university, cambridge, massachusetts herbert d. benington, technical director, system development corporation, mclean, virginia elwyn r. berlekamp, professor of mathematics, department of mathematics, university of california, berkeley, california anthony j. demaria, assistant director of research for electronics and electrooptics technology, united technologies research center, east hartford, connecticut gerald p. dinneen, vice president, science and technology, honeywell incorporated, minneapolis, minnesota george gerbner, professor and oean, the annenberg school of tions, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pennsylvania anne p. jones, partner, sutherland, asbill and brennan, washington, d.c. adrian m. mcdonough, professor of management and decision sciences (retired), the wharton school, university of pennsylvania, havertown, pennsylvania wilbur l. pritchard, president, satellite systems engineering, inc., bethesda, maryland michael b. pursley, of electrical engineering, university of illinois, urbana, ill1no1s ivan selin, chairman of the board, american management systems, inc., arlington, virginia v transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mischa schwartz, professor of electrical engineering and computer science, columbia university, new york, new york eric e. sumner, vice president, operations system and network planning, at&t bell laboratories, holmdel, new jersey keith w. uncapher, executive director, uscinformation sciences institute associate dean, school of engineering, university of southern california, marina del rey, california james l. flanagan, (cets liaison member), head, acoustics research ment, at&t bell laboratories, murray hill, new jersey staff richard b. marsten, executive director jerome d. rosenberg, senior staff officer karen laughlin, administrative coordinator carmen a. ruby, administrative assistant lois a. leak, administrative secretary vi transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents preface ł ł ł ł ł ł ł . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł ł 1x executive summary ł ł ł . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł xi i ii introduction łłłłłłłłłł review of nbs and 000 objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł ł 1 . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł ł ł 3 iii comparison of 000 and iso protocols ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 13 iv status of dod and iso protocol implementations and specifications ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 25 v markets ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 31 vi development of standard commercial versus special vii commercial products ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 39 responsiveness of international standards process to change ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł . . . . . . . ł ł ł 43 viii options for dod and nbs łłłłłł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 45 ix cost comparison of options ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł ł 47 x evaluation of options ł . . . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł ł ł ł 53 xi recommendations ł ł ł . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ł ł ł ł 61 vii transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface this is the final report of the national research council committee on computercomputer communication protocols. the committee was lished in may 1983 at the request of the department of defense {dod) and the national bureau of standards {nbs), department of commerce, to develop recommendations and guidelines for resolving differences between the two aqencies on a data communications transport protocol standard. computerbased information and transactionprocessing systems are basic tools in modern industry and government. over the past several years there has been a growing demand to transfer and exchange digitized data in these systems quickly and accurately. this demand for data transfer and exchange has been both among the terminals and computers within an organization and among those in different organizations. rapid electronic transport of digitized data requires electronic communication links that tie the elements together. these links are established, organized, and maintained by means of a layered series of procedures performing the many functions inherent in the communications process. the successful movement of digitized data depends upon the participants using identical or compatible procedures, or protocols. the dod and nbs have each developed and promulgated a transport protocol as standard. the two protocols, however, are dissimilar and incompatible. the committee was called to resolve the differences between these protocols. the committee held its first meeting in august 1983 at the national research council in washington, d.c. following tnis twoday meeting the committee held five more twoday meetings, a threeday meeting, and a oneweek workshop. the committee was briefed by personnel from both agencies. in tion, the committee heard from jon postel, university of southern california's information systems institute; dave oran, digital equipment corporation; vincent cerf, mci; david wood, the mitre corporation; clair miller, honeywell, and robert follett, ibm, representing the computer and business equipment manufacturer's association; and john newman, ultimate corporation. in most cases the briefings were followed by discussion. the committee wishes to thank philip selvaggi of the department of defense and robert blanc of the nbs, institute of computer sciences and ix transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology, for their cooperation as their agency's liaison tives to the committee. the committee appreciates the contributions and support of richard b. marsten, executive director of the board on communicationscomputer applications (botcap), and jerome d. rosenberg, botcap senior staff officer and the committee study director. we also wish to thank lois a. leak for her expert administrative and secretarial support. x transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer communication networks have become a very important part of military and commercial operations. indeed, the nation is becoming dent upon their efficiency and reliability, and the recent proliferation of networks and their widespread use have emphasized the importance of developing uniform conventions, or protocols, for communication between computer systems. the department of defense (dod) and the national bureau of standards (nbs) have been actively engaged in activities related to protocol standardization. this report is concerned primarily with mendations on protocol standardization within the department of defense. department of defense's transmission protocol the dod's defense advanced research projects agency (uarpa) has been conduc\ing and supporting research on computer networks for over fifteen years. these efforts led to the development of modern packetswitched network design concepts. transmission between computers is generally complished by packet switching using strict protocols for the control and exchange of messages. the advanced research projects agency network (arpanet), implemented in the early 1970s, provided a testing ground for research on communications protocols. in 1978, after four years of opment, the dod promulgated versions of its transmission control protocol (tcp) and an internet protocol (ip) and mandated their use as standards within the dod. tcp is now widely used and accepted. these protocols meet the unique operational and functional requirements of the dod, and any changes in the protocols are viewed with some trepidation by members of the department. dod representatives have stated that standardizing tcp greatly increased the momentum within the dod toward establishing interoperability between networks within the dod. . international standards organization's transport protocol the nbs institute for computer sciences and technology (!cst), in operation with the dod, many industrial firms, and the international dards organization (iso), has developed a new international standard lthe advanced research projects agency (arpa) was reorganized and became the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) in 1973. xi transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocol (tp4) and a new internetwork protocol.2 these tocols will soon be available as commercial products. although in part derived from tcp, the new protocols are not compatible with tcp.3 the u.s. standards organizations are supporting tp4 in international tions, and the department of commerce is proposing tp4 as a federal information processing standard (fips) for use by all federal agencies. dod operational and technical needs the dod has unique needs that could be affected by the transport and internet protocol layers. although all data networks must have some of these capabilities, the dod's needs for operational readiness, tion, and warfighting capabilities are extreme. these needs include the following: survivabilitysome networks must function, albeit at reduced performance, after many nodes and links have been destroyed. securitytraffic patterns and data must be selectively protected through encryption, access control, auditing, and routing. precedencesystems should adjust the quality of service on the basis of priority of use; this includes a capability to preempt services in cases of very high priority. robustnessthe system must not fail or suffer much loss of ability because of unpredicted situations, unexpected loads, or misuse. an international crisis is the strongest test of ness, since the system must operate immediately and with ly full performance when an international situation flares up unexpectedly. availabilityelements of the system needed for operational iness or fighting must be continuously available. interoperabilitydifferent elements of the department must be able to "talk" to one another, often in unpredicted ways between parties that had not planned to interoperate. 2the iso transport protocol and iso internetwork protocol became draft international standards in september 1983 and april 1984, tively. commercial vendors normally consider draft international dards to be ready for implementation. 3except where noted, the abbreviation tcp generally refers to both the dod's transmission control protocol and its internet protocol. larly, the abbreviation tp4 refers to both the iso transport protocol class 4 and its internetwork protocol. (transport protocol classes 0 to 3 are used for special purposes not related to those of this study.) xi i transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these operational needs reflect themselves into five technical or rial needs: 1. functional and operational specifications (that is, will the protocol designs meet the operational needs?); 2. maximum interoperability; 3. minimum procurement. development, and support costs; 4. ease of transition to new protocols; and 5. manageability and responsiveness to changing 000 requirements. these are the criteria against which dod options for using the iso port and internet protocols should be evaluated. interoperability is a very important dod need. ideally, dod networks would permit operators at any terminal to access or be accessed by cations in any computer. this would provide more network power for users, inteqration of independently developed systems, better use of resources, and increased survivability. to increase interoperability, the office of the secretary of defense has mandated the use of tcp for the defense munication systemłs defense data network (don), unless waivers are granted. in addition. the defense communication agency (dca) is lishing standards for three higherlevel 11utility11 protocols for file transfer, terminal access, and electronic mail. partly as a result of these actions, it has become clear that there is growing momentum toward accepting interoperability and a recognition that it is an important operational need. it is very important, however, to recognize that functional erability is only achieved with full generality when two communication nodes can interoperate at all protocol levels. for the dod the relevant levels are as follows: 1. internet, using ip; 2. transport, using tcp; 3. utility, usinq file, terminal, or mail protocols; and 4. specific applications that use the above protocols for their particular purpose. accordinqly, if a network is developed using one transport protocol, it would generally not be able to interoperate functionally with other networks usinq the same transport protocol unless both networks were also using the higherlevel utility and application protocols. in evaluating whether or not to convert to tp4 and in developing a transition plan, the following factors must be considered: the dod contains numerous communities of interest whose principal need is to interoperate within their own members, independently. such communities qenerally have a specific, welldefined mission. xiii transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the dod intelligence information system (dodiis) and the world wide military command and control system (wwmccs) are examples. interoperability is needed primarily between the higher applications programs initially unique to each community of interest. there are many different kinds of operations needed between munities of interest. examples of such operations are ters' need for access to several subordinate communities and the communities' need for some minimum functional interoperability with each other (such as mail exchange). the need for functional interoperability can arise, unexpectedly and urgently, at a time of crisis or when improved management opportunities are discovered. widespread standardization of tp4 and higherlevel protocols can readily help to achieve these needs. often, special development of additional tions that cost time and money will be necessary. the dod needs functional interoperability with many important external agencies that are committed to iso standards: the north atlantic treaty organization (nato), some intelligence and security agencies, and other parts of the federal government. the same objectives that have prompted the use of standardized protocols at higherlevel headquarters will lead to their use by tactical groups in the field. some comparisons a detailed comparison of the dod transmission control protocol and the iso transport protocol indicates they are functionally equivalent and provide essentially similar services. because it is clear that a great deal of care and experience in protocol development have gone into ating the specifications for tp4, the committee is confident that tp4 will meet military requirements. although there are differences between the two protocols, they do not compromise dod requirements. and, although in several areas, including the data transfer interface, flow control, connection establishment, and outofband, services are provided in different ways by the two protocols, neither seems intrinsically superior. thus, while existing applications need to be modified somewhat if moved from tcp to tp4, new tions can be written to use either protocol with a similar level of effort. the tcp and tp4 protocols are sufficiently equivalent in their securityrelated properties in that there are no significant technical points favoring the use of one over the other. while tcp currently has the edge in maturity of implementation, tp4 is gaining rapidly due to the worldwide support for and acceptance of the xiv transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.open system interconnection (osi) international standards. experimental tcp implementations were completed in 1974 at stanford university and bbn communications corporation. between 1974 and 1982 a large number of plementations were produced. the defense advanced research projects agency (arpa) network switched to a complete use of tcp in january 1983. operations have been satisfactory and its use is growing. a number of tcp implementations are also in commercial use in various private works. in contrast, tp4 has not yet been implemented in any large tional system. it has been tested experimentally, however, and has received endorsement by many commercial vendors worldwide. in addition, substantial portions of tp4 have been demonstrated at the national computer conference in july 1984. the internet protocol (ip) part of the standards is not believed to be a problem. the iso ip is not as far along as tp4, but it is much less complex. the iso ip, based very strongly on the dod ip, became a draft international standard in april 1984. the rapidity of the proqress in iso and the results achieved over the past two years have surprised even the supporters of international dards. the reasons for this progress are twofold: strong market demands stemming from the growing integration of communications and data ing and the progress in networking technology over the past years as the result of arpa and commercial developments. although the dod networks have been a model upon which the iso port standards have been built, the rest of the world is adopting tp4. because the dod represents a small fraction of the market and because the united states supports the iso standard, it is not realistic to hope that tp4 can be altered to conform with tcp. this raises the question as to what action should be taken by the dod with respect to the iso standard. some economic considerations the dod has a large and growing commitment in operational tcp works, and this will increase by 50 to 100 percent in the next eighteen months. this rate of investment will probably continue for the next five years for new systems and the upgrading of current ones. the current military network (milnet) and movement information network (minet) tems are expanding and will shortly be combined. the strategic air mand digital information network (sacdin) and dodiis are undergoing major upgrading. when these changes are completed, there are plans to upgrade the wwmccs intercomputer network (win) and to add separate secret and top secret networks. there are plans to combine these six networks in the late 1980s, and they will become interoperable and multilevel secure using an advanced technology now under development. if these plans are mented on schedule, a delay of several years in moving to tp4 would mean that the dod networks in the late 1980s would oe virtually all tcpbased. subsequent conversion to international standards would be very expensive xv transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.if hastily attempted in order to maintain established dod interoperability and gain interoperability with a large body of users. as the department of defense policy recognizes, there are significant advantages in using commercial vendor products if they meet the ment's operational needs. the major advantages are as follows: costs to the dod for development, production, and maintenance are significantly lower because (1) vendors spread the cost over a much larger user base, (2) commercial vendors are generally more efficient in their operations, and (3) vendors look for ways to improve their product to meet competition. the department generally gets more effective products because vendors integrate the protocol functions into their entire ware and hardware product line. thus the dod may be able tually to use commercial software products that are built on top of, and thereby take advantage of, the transport protocols. by depending on industry to manage the development and tenance of products, the department can use its scarce ment and technical resources on activities unique to its mission. because the costs of transport and internet protocol development and maintenance are so intertwined with other factors, it is impossible to give a precise estimate of the savings that would be achieved by using commercial products. savings will vary in individual cases. the marginal savings should range from 30 to 80 percent. recommendations the iso protocols are now well specified but will not generally be commercially available for many months. nevertheless, this committee believes that the principles on which they are based are wellestablished, and the protocols can be made to satisfy fully dod's needs. the committee recommends that the dod move toward adoption of tp4 as costandard with tcp and toward exclusive use of tp4. transition to the use of the iso standards, however, must be managed in a manner that will maintain dod's operational capabilities and mize risks. the timing of the transition is, therefore, a major concern. descriptions of two options that take this requirement into account follow. a majority of the committee recommends the first option, while a minority favors the second. a third optionto defer actionis also described but not recommended. option 1 the first option is for the dod to immediately modify its current transport policy statement to specify tp4 as a costandard along with tcp. in addition, the dod would develop a military specification for xvi transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tp4 that would also cover dod requirements for discretionary options allowed under the nbs protocol specifications. requests for proposals (rfps) for new networks or major upgrades of existing networks would specify tp4 as the preferred protocol. contracts for tp4 systems would be awarded only to contractors providing commercial products, except for unique cases. existing networks that use tcp and new networks firmly committed to the use of tcpbased systems could continue to acquire implementations of tcp. the dod should carefully review each case, however, to see whether it would be advantageous to delay or modify some of these acquisitions in order to use commercial tp4 products. for each community of user$ it should be decided when it is operationally or economically most tageous to replace its current or planned systems in order to conform to iso standards without excessively compromising continued operations. united states government test facilities would be developed to enable validation of tp4 products.4 the department of defense would either require that products be validated using these test facilities or that they be certified by the vendor. the test facilities could also be used to isolate multivendor protocol compatibility problems. the existing nbs validation tools should be used as the base for the dod test facilities. because under this option networks based on both tcp and tp4 would coexist for some time, several capabilities that facilitate ability among networks would need to be developed. the department of defense generally will not find them commercially available. examples are gateways among networks or specialized hosts that provide services such as electronic mail. the department would need to initiate or modify development programs to provide these capabilities, and a test and demonstration network would be required. option 2 under option 2 the department of defense would immediately announce its intention to adopt tp4 as a transport protocol costandard with tcp after a satisfactory demonstration of its suitability for use in military networks. a final commitment would be deferred until the demonstration has been evaluated and tp4 is commercially avaijable. the demonstration should take at most eighteen months and should volve development of tp4 implementations and their installation. this option differs from option 1 primarily in postponing the adoption of a tp4 standard and, consequently, the issuance of rfps based on tp4 until successful completion of a demonstration. the department, however, should 4validation means a systematic and thorough stateoftheart testing of the products to assure that all technical specifications are being achieved. xvii transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proceed with those provisions of option 1 that may be completed in lel with the demonstration. early issuance of a tp4 military tion, development of validation procedures, and implementation of means for interoperabil1ty would be particularly important in this regard. option 3 under the third option the 000 would continue using tcp as the accepted transport standard and defer any decision on the use of tp4 indefinitely. the department would be expected to stay well informed on the development and use of the new protocol in the commercial and national arena and, with the national bureau of standards, work on means to transfer data between the two protocol systems. testing and tion of tp4 standards by nbs would continue. the 000 might eventually accommodate both protocol systems in an evolutionary conversion to tp4. comparison of options the committee believes that all three options equally satisfy the functional objectives of the 000, including matters of security. it believes the two protocols are sufficiently similar and no significant differences in performance are to be expected if the chosen protocol implementation is of equal quality and is optimized for the given environment. the primary motivation for recommending option 1 is to obtain the benefits of standard commercial products in the communication protocol area at an early date. benefits include smaller development, ment, and support costs; more timely updates; and a wider product ability. by immediately committing to tp4 as a costandard for new tems, option 1 minimizes the number of systems that have to be converted eventually from tcp. the ability to manage the transition is better than with option 2 since the number of systems changed would be smaller and the time duration of mixed tcp and tp4 operation would be shorter. interoperability with external systems (nato, government, commercial), which presumably will also use tp4, would be brought about more quickly. option 1 involves greater risk, however, since it commits to a new approach without as complete a demonstration of its viability. as with option 1, a primary benefit of following option 2 would be obtaining the use of standard commercial products. unit procurement costs probably would be lower than with option 1 because the commercial market for tp4 will have expanded somewhat by the time 000 would begin to buy tp4 products. risk is smaller, compared to option l, because testing and demonstration of the suitability for military use will have preceded the commitment to the iso protocols. transition and support costs would be higher than for option 1, however, because more networks and systems would already have been implemented with tcp. also this is perhaps the most difficult option to manage since the largest number of system conversions and the longest interval of mixed tcp and tp4 ations would occur. in addition, interoperability with external networks through standardization would be delayed. xviii transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.i. introduction for the past two decades industry and government have experienced an increasing need to share software programs, transfer data, and exchange information among computers. as a result, computertocomputer data munications networks and, therefore, communication formats and procedures, or protocols, have proliferated. the need to interconnect these networks is obvious, but the problems in establishing agreements among users on the protocols have heightened. the department of defense (dod) has been conducting research and velopment on protocols and communication standards for more than fifteen years. in december 1978 the dod promulgated versions of the defense advanced research projects (darpa) transmission control protocol (tcp) and internet protocol {ip) as standards within dod. with the ticipation of major manufacturers and systems houses, the dod has mented successfully over twenty different applications of these standards in dod operational data communications networks. the institute for computer sciences and technology (icst) of the national bureau of standards (nbs) is the government agency responsible for developing network protocols and interface standards to meet the needs of federal agencies. the institute has been actively helping national and international voluntary standards organizations develop sets of protocol standaras that can be incorporated into commercial products. working with both industry and government agencies, the icst has veloped protocol requirements based, in terms of functions and services, on the dod's tcp. these requirements were submitted to the international standards organization (iso) and resulted in the development of a port protocol (tp4) that has the announced suppprt of twenty computer manufacturers. although the iso's tp4 is based on the dod's tcp, the two protocols are not compatible. thus manufacturers who wish to serve dod, while remaininq able to capture a significant share of the worldwide market, have to field two product lines that are incompatible but perform the same function. the institute for computer sciences and technology would like to have a single set of protocol standards that serves both the dod, other government agencies, and commercial vendors. it would be to the advantage of the dod to use the same standards as the rest of the world. the dilemma, however, is understandable: the dod 1 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has well satisfied its requirements by its own tried and proven protocols, the agency has invested heavily in systems operating successfully with tcp, and the armed forces is increasingly adopting the protocol. thus, although dodłs policy is to use commercial standards whenever suitable, it is hesitant about converting to the iso tp4 protocols. in addition, the dod is not certain whether the iso tp4 completely satisfies military requirements. in 1983 both dod and the icst agreed that an objective study of the situation was needed. each requested assistance from the national research council. the national research council, through its board on telecommunications and computer applications (botcap}, appointed a special committee on computercomputer communication protocols to study the issues and develop recommendations and guidelines for ways to resolve the ences in a mutually beneficial manner. the six items composing the committeełs scope of work are as follows: 1. review the technical aspects of the dod transmission control and icst transport protocols. 2. review the status of the implementation of these protocols. 3. review the industrial and government markets for these protocols. 4. analyze the technical and political implications of the dod and icst views on the protocols. 5. report on time and cost implications to the dod, other federal entities, and manufacturers of the dod and icst positions. 6. recommend courses of action toward resolving the differences between the dod and icst on these protocol standards. the committee devoted considerable effort to reviewing the objectives and goals of the dod and nbs that relate to data communications, the nical aspects of the two protocols, the status of their implementation in operating networks, and the market conditions pertaining to their use. this process included hearing government and industry presentations and reviewing pertinent literature. the results of this part of the study are presented in sections ii through vii. concurrent with this research and analysis, the committee developed ten possible options that offered plausible resolutions of the problem. these ranged from maintaining the status quo to an immediate switchover from one protocol to the other. from these ten initial options three were determined to hold the greatest potential for resolving the problem. section viii describes the three options, section ix provides a cost comparison, and section x provides an overall evaluation of the three options. section xi presents the committeełs basic and detailed mendations for how best the dod might approach the differences between its protocol and the iso protocol. 2 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11. review of nbs and dod objectives the national bureau of standards and the department of defense are such disparate organizations that the committee felt it needed to begin its study with a definition of the roles and expectations of each with regard to the protocol issues in the following provides a review of each organization's nbs objectives the national bureau of standards has three primary goals in computer networking: 1. to develop networking and protocol standards that meet u.s. ernment and industry requirements and that will be implemented in offtheshelf, commercial products. 2. to develop testing methodologies to support development and plementation of computer network protocols. 3. to assist government and industry users in the application of advanced networking technologies and computer and communications equipment manufacturers in the implementation of standard cols. development of networking and protocol standards the bureau accomplishes the first objective through close coordination and cooperation with u.s. computer manufacturers and communications system developers. technical specifications are developed cooperatively with u.s. industry and other government agencies and provided as proposals to voluntary standards organizations. because the department of defense is potentially the largest ment client of these standards, dod requirements are carefully factored into these proposals. in addition, protocols for computertocomputer communications developed within the dod research community are used as an 5the objectives were reviewed by representatives of nbs and dod, respectively. 3 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exact statement of dod functional needs for a particular protocol and form a basis for the functions, features, and services of nbsproposed standards. to further the development of commercial products that implement dards, the nbs gives priority to the needs of u.s. computer manufacturers who wish to market their products nationally and internationally, not just to the u.s. government. the nbs participates, therefore, in national and international voluntary standards organizations toward the development of an international consensus based on united states needs. specifications, formal description techniques, testing methodologies, and test results developed by the nbs are used to further the international standardization process. development of testing methodologies the national bureau of standards has laboratory activities where totypes of draft protocol standards are implemented and tested in a variety of communications environments supporting different applications on different kinds and sizes of computers. communications environments include, for example, global networks, local networks, and office system networks. applications may, for example, include file transfer or sage processing. the primary purposes are to advance the state of the art in measurement methodologies for advanced computer networking nologies and determine protocol implementation correctness and mance. the nbs views testing as a cooperative research effort and works with other agencies, privatesector companies, and other countries in the velopment of methodologies. at this time, this cooperation involves five network laboratories in other countries and over twenty computer turers. the testing methodologies developed at the nbs are well documented, and the testing tools themselves are developed with the objective of portability in mind. they are made available to many organizations gaged in protocol development and implementations. assisting users and manufacturers the nbs works directly with government agencies to help them use ving network technologies effectively and apply international and ment networking standards properly. when large amounts of assistance are required, the nbs provides it under contract. assistance to industry is provided through cooperative research efforts and by the availability of nbs testing tools, industrywide shops, and cooperative demonstration projects. at this time, the nbs is working directly with over twenty computer manufacturers in the mentation of network protocol standards. 4 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.consistent with overall goals, nbs standards developments, research in testing methodologies, and technical assistance are characterized by direct industry and government cooperation and mutual support. dod objectives the dod has unique needs that could be affected by the transport and internet protocol although all data networks must have some of these capabilities, the dod's needs for operational readiness, tion, and warfighting capabilities are extreme. these needs include the following: survivabilitysome networks must function, albeit at reduced performance, after many nodes and links have been destroyed. securitytraffic patterns and data must be selectively protected through encryption, access control, auditing, and routing. precedencesystems should adjust the quality of service on the basis of priority of use; this includes a capability to preempt services in cases of very high priority. robustnessthe system must not fail or suffer much loss of bility because of unpredicted situations, unexpected loads, or misuse. an international crisis is the strongest test of ness, since the system must operate immediately and with ly full performance when an international situation flares up unexpectedly. availabilityelements of the system needed for operational readiness or fighting must be continuously available. interoperabilitydifferent elements of the department must be able to "talk" to one another, often in unpredicted ways between parties that had not planned to interoperate. these operational needs reflect themselves into five technical or rial needs: 1. functional and operational specifications (that is, will the protocol designs meet the operational needs?); 2. maximum interoperability; 3. minimum procurement, development, and support costs; 4. ease of transition to new protocols; and 5. manageability and responsiveness to changing 000 requirements. these are the criteria against which 000 options for using the iso port and internet protocols should be evaluated. 5 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.performance andfunctionality the performance and functionality of the protocols must provide for the many unique operational needs of the dod. the following paragraphs discuss in some detail both these needs and the they can impact tocol design. survivability includes protecting assets, hiding them, and duplicating them for redundancy. it also includes endurancethe assurance that those assets that do survive can continue to perform in a battle environment for as long as needed (generally months rather than hours); restoralthe ability to restore some of the damaged assets to operating status; and reconstitutionthe ability to integrate fragmented assets into a ing and enduring network. the dod feels that an important reason for adopting international and commercial standards is that under cases of very widespread damage to its own communications networks, it would be able to support dod functions by using those civil communications that survive. this would require operability up to the network layer, but neither tcp nor tp4 would be needed. the committee has not considered the extent to which such creased interoperability would increase survivability through better restoral and reconstitution. availability is an indication of how reliable the system and its components are and how quickly they can be repaired after a failure. availability is also a function of how badly the system has been damaged. the don objective for system availability in peacetime varies according to whether subscribers have access to 1 or 2 nodes of the don. for scribers having access to only one node of the don, the objective is that the system be available 99.3. percent of the time, that is, the system will be unavailable for no more than 60 hours per year. for subscribers having access to 2 nodes, the objective is that the system be available 99.99 percent of the time, that is, the system will be unavailable for no more than one hour per year. robustness is a measure of how well the system will operate fully in face of the unexpected. robustness attempts to avoid or mize system degradation because of user errors, operator errors, unusual load patterns, inadequate interface specifications, and so forth. a designed and tested system will limit the damage caused by incorrect or unspecified inputs to affect only the performance of the specific tion that is requested. since protocols are very complex and can be in very many "states," robustness is an important consideration in ating and implementing protocols. security attempts to limit the unauthorized user from gaining both the information communicated in the system and the patterns of traffic throughout the system. security also attempts to prevent spoofing of the system: an agent attempting to appear as a legitimate user, insert false traffic, or deny services to users by repeatedly seeking system services. 6 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finally, security is also concerned with making sure that electronic sures cannot seriously degrade the system, confuse its performance, or cause loss of security in other ways. encryption of communication links is a relatively straightforward element of security. it is widely used, fairly well understood, constantly undergoing improvement, and becoming less expensive. on the other hand, computer network security is a much newer field and erably more complex. the ability of computer network protocols to vide security is a very critical issue. in the past decade much has been learned about vulnerability of computer operating systems, development of trusted systems, different levels of protection, means of proving that security has been achieved, and ways to achieve multilevel systems or a compartmented mode. this is a dynamic field, however, and new experience and analysis will probably place new requirements on network protocols. crisisperformance needs are a form of global robustness. the nature of a national security crisis is that it is fraught with the unexpected. unusual patterns of communication traffic emerge. previously unstressed capabilities become critical to national leaders. individuals and zations that had not been communicating must suddenly have close, secure, and reliable communications. many users need information that they are not sure exists, and if it does, they do not know where it is or how to get it. the development of widely deployed, interoperable computer networks can provide important new capabilities for a crisis, larly if there is some investment in preplanning, including the level protocols that facilitate interoperability. presidential directives call for this. this will become a major factor in dod's need for erability with other federal computer networks. the dod, as one of the most affected parties, has good reason to be concerned that its network protocols will stand the tests of a crisis. in addition, there are performance and functionality features that are measures of the capability of the network when it is not damaged or stressed by unexpected situations. performance includes quantifiable measures such as time delays, transmission integrity, data rates and efficiency, throughput, numbers of users, and other features well stood in computer networks. equally important is the extent of tionality: what jobs will the network do for the user? the don has established some performance objectives such as end delays for highprecedence and routine traffic, the probability of undetected errors, and the probability of misdelivered packets. such objectives are important to engineer a system soundly. the dod must place greater emphasis on more complex performance issues such as the efficiency with which protocols process and communicate data. the dod has stated a need for an effective and robust system for cedence and preemption. precedence refers to the ability of the system to adaptively allocate network resources so that the network performance is related to the importance of the function being performed. preemption refers to the ability of the system to remove users (at least temporarily) 7 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.until the needs of the highpriority user are satisfied. the arpanet environment in which the protocols were developed did not emphasize these capabilities, and the current milnet does not function as effectively in this regard as dod voice networks. the dod has also stated a need for connectionless communications and a broadcast mode. in the majority of network protocols, when two of more parties communicate, virtual circuits are established between the cating parties. (for reliability, additional virtual circuits may be established to provide an inplace backup.) dod needs a connectionless mode where the message can be transmitted to one or more parties without the virtual circuit in order to enhance survivability; provide a cast capability (one sender to many receivers); and handle imagery, sor data, and speech traffic quickly and efficiently. if intermediate nodes are destroyed or become otherwise unavailable, there is still a chance that the data can be sent via alternate paths. the broadcast capability is particularly important in tactical situations where many parties must be informed almost simultaneously and where the available assets be disappearing and appearing dynamically. the department of defense requires an internetting capability whereby ferent autonomous networks of users can communicate with each other. interoperability presidential and dod directives place a high priority on ability, which is related to the internetworking previously discussed. interoperability is primarily important at two levels: network access and applications. to achieve interoperability at the level of network access,users of backbone communications nets must utilize the same lowerlevel protocols that are utilized by the network. generally these protocols are layers 1, 2, and 3, up to and including part of the ip layer. in other words, interoperability for network access does not depend on either implementation of the transport layer (tp4 or tcp) or of all of the internet (ip) the primary advantages of network access interoperability are twofold: 1. significant economies of scale are possjble since the various users can share the resources of the backbone network including hardware, software, and development and support costs. 2. network survivability for all users can be increased significantly since the network has high redundancy and, as the threat increases, the redundancy can also be increased. interoperability at the applications layer allows compatible users at different nodes to talk to each other, that is, to share their data, port each other, and thereby coordinate and strengthen the management of forces and other assets. interoperability at the applications layer can be achieved through the use of specialized software that performs those functions of higherlayer protocols (such as tcp or tp4, file transfer, 8 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and virtual terminal} that are needed by the particular application. if some of the transport and utility protocols have been loped for particular hosts or work stations, their use greatly reduces development, integration, and support costs, although with a potential sacrifice of performance. interoperability at the applications level, that is, full functional interoperability, is important to specialized communities of users such as the logistics, command and control, or search and development communities. as these different communities utilize the don, they have the advantages of shared network resources. within each community there is full functional interoperability but generally there is much less need for one community to have functional interoperability with members of another community. the implementation of tcp or tp4 within network users, but without the implementation of higherlevel protocols and application ability, is not generally an immediate step in increasing ity. it does have these immediate advantages: it represents an important step in investing in longerterm interoperability. it generally represents an economical nearterm investment on which communities of interest can build their own applications. it facilitates the development of devices for general network use such as terminal access controllers (tacs}. interoperability at the applications level will become increasingly important among the following communities: worldwide military command and control systems, including systems of subordinate commands; ment of defense intelligence information systems; u.s. tactical force headquarters (fixed and mobile); nato force headquarters; other u.s. intelligence agencies; the state department; and the federal bureau of investigation and other security agencies. although interoperability of applications within the dod has the highest priority, it is clear that governmentwide and international interoperability will be an objective with increasing priority. the nato situation is especially important.6 in a somewhat longer time period, dod will want applications erability with many commercial information services. as interoperable computer networks become more common, processing and data services will burgeon in the marketplace. these will include specialized data bases 6europe has been a major force in the development of iso standards. consistent with this is a nato commitment to adopt iso standards so long as they meet military requirements. 9 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and analytic capabilities that all large organizations will need in order to be uptodate and competitive. with regard to interoperability at the network level, dod will want to be able to utilize commercially available networks for both bility and operational effectiveness and economy. in the case of a major war in europe, for example, the united states would want to be able to use surviving ptts (postal, telegraphy, and telephony ministries) for restoral and reconstitution. during peacetime there will be cases where special dod needs can be best satisfied with commercially available capabilities. as technology continues to provide less expensive, smaller, and more reliable data processing equipment, computer networks will become ingly prevalent at lower levels of the tactical forcesland, air, and sea. it will be important that these tactical networks be capable of interoperability with each other (for example, air support of ground forces) and with headauarters. it is likely that the tactical network will need a network architecture and protocols that are different from the arpaand !soderived protocols. if so, the developments will place requirements on the higherlevel dod protocols. if the dod chooses to move from tcp to tp4, this can be done in phases for different communities of interest and subnetworks. in this way if there is difficulty in converting one subnet, the rest of the work need not be degraded. also the different subnets will be able to make the transition at the most suitable time in terms of cost, risk, and the need to interoperate with other subnets. as a result if dod uses tp4 for some new nets or major upgrade of existing nets, this will generally not reduce interoperability in the near term unless interoperability of applications is needed between two communities. in this case specific interoperability needs may be satisfied with specialized gateways for mail or data exchange. the dod points out that it desires all networks to be interoperable since it is not possible to predict when one community will need to municate with another or use the resources of the other. as previously indicated, however, unexpected needs for full functional interoperability can only be met when appropriate higherlayer software is developed. minimize costs the department of defense seeks to minimize costs of development, procurement, transition (if it decides to move to iso protocols), and support. generally the objective is to limit lifecycle costs, that is, the total costs over a 5to8year period with future costs suitably discounted (10 to 20 percent per year). the department of defense has already made a heavy investment in protocols, and the investment has paid off in the success of current protocols operational in many networks. on the other hand, the dod acknowledges the potential advantages of using the iso protocols if made available as commercially supported products. development costs for these 10 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protocols can be small since their development cost is amortized by the commercial vendor over a larger market. support costs for these cols (including minor modifications, integration into other products, documentation, and training} are also significantly reduced because of vendorsupplied services. these cost factors are further discussed in section ix in terms of the three options presented in section viii. ease of transition·and manageability networks must be manageable and capable of growth and improvement. the department of defense generally makes the fastest progress in loping complex information systems if it evolves these capabilities while working in concert with the users and the acquiring agencies. in this light, the following factors are important: minimal interruption of current servicefor most dod networks it is essential that they operate continuously. if there is to be transition to new protocol services (whether based on current dod versions or iso}, it is important that these transitions be planned, designed, and pretested so that the transition will be nondisruptive. verifiabilityit is essential to have a testing capability where new protocol implementations can be thoroughly tested to ensure that they will interoperate, have full functionality specified, do not contain errors, are robust, and meet tative performance needs. the national bureau of standards has established such a capability, and it is being used to verify a number of tp4 implementations, including those demonstrated at the national computer conference in july 1984. an iptesting capability is being added. the department of defense is ning a similar protocol test facility for tcp, but work is just getting underway. if the dod plans to migrate promptly to tp4, there is a question whether this investment is warranted. compatibility with higher protocolsas the transport and protocol layers evolve, it is essential that they maintain full compatibility with higherlayer protocols. this is particularly important for the dod because it will increasingly have operability at the applications level. · responsiveness to evolving dod needscurrent dod needs will change or new needs may arise. it is very likely, for example, that subtle performance problems may be discovered in a protocol that are unique to the strenuous dodoperating environment and that could have serious operational consequences. if the dod is using commercial protocols products based upon international standards, the dod will need two commitments when critical ciencies are discovered. it will need a commitment from the manufacturer that critical problems will be promptly fixed and a commitment from the nbs that it will move quickly to change federal standards and seek changes in international standards. 11 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.minimal risksthe dod needs are so large and important, it cannot afford to take otherwise avoidable risks. maintenance of manageabilitythe don is new a9d is using a new approach after the cancellation of autooin ii. there are pressing operational needs and many impatient users. if the dod delays in moving to iso protocols and later decides to do so, the costs and disruption will be large. on the other hand, moving now to iso will be less disruptive. 7autooin ii was a program to develop a data communications system for the dod. the program envisioned relatively few large packet switches. it was cancelled in 1982 in favor of arpanetderived designs because of considerations of security, architecture, survivability, and cost. 12 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iii. comparison of dod and iso protocols this section presents a general description of the major functional differences between the iso and dod protocol sets at the transport and network and then discusses particular aspects of the protocols: performance, security, and risk. comparison of dod and iso transport layers differences between the defense department's tcp protocol and the international standards organization's tp4 protocol are described in terms of items visible to users of the protocol. internal differences in mechanism that have no effect on the service seen by the user are not sidered. a second much simpler protocol, the user datagram protocol (udp), providing datagram or connectionless service at the transport layer is also briefly considered. / in summary, the services provided by tcp and tp4 are functionally quite similar. several functions, however, including data transfer face, flow control, connection establishment binding, and outofband nals are provided in significantly different by the two protocols. neither seems intrinsically superior, but some effort would be required to convert a higherlevel protocol using tcp to make use of tp4. the exact amount of work needed will vary with the nature of the higherlevel protocol implementations and the operating systems in which they are embedded. a programmmer experienced with the higherlevel protocols would require about six months to design, implement, and test modifications of the three major dod higher level protocols (file transfer, mail, and telnet) to work with tp4. there are sever a 1 areas in which the opennes·s and 1 ack of experience with the tp4 specification leave questions about just what functionality is provided and whether incompatibilities are allowed. these areas clude connectionestablishment binding, flow control, addressing, and provision of expedited network service. the best way to resolve these questions seems to be to implement and test tp4 in a military ment and to further specify desired procedures where there is unwanted latitude allowed by the standard (see the recommendations section xi). there is one area in which the nbsproposed federal information cessing standard (fips) differs from the iso specification: the fips provides a graceful closing service as in tcp, while the iso does not. 13 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.oata·transfer·interface tcp is stream oriented. it does not deliver any end of transmission (eot), but accepts a "push" on the send side which has an effect much like an eot causes data being buffered to be sent. tp4 is block oriented and does deliver eot indications. by ing eot, a sending user should be able to accomplish the same effect as "push" in tcp in most reasonable tp4 implementations. the impact of this is uncertain. neither type of interface is ently better than the other. some applications will find it more nient to have a streamtype interface (for example, interactive terminal handling), while others might prefer a block mode (for example, file transfer). it should be possible for tp4 to approximate the stream mode by forwarding data without an eot from the sending user and delivering data to the receiving user before an eot is received. some work would have to be done on applications using one type of protocol to modify them to use the other. flow control tcp has octet units of allocation, with no eot and hence no impact of eot on the allocation. the segment size, transport protocol data unit (tpou) size, used by the orotocol is invisible to the user, who sees locations in units of octets. tp4 has segment units of allocation, with a common segment size for both directions negotiated as part of connection establishment. although in some implementations the protocol's flow control is not directly ible to the users, in others it is. in the latter case, users of tp4 will see allocations in units of segments and will have to be aware of the segment size for this to be meaningful (for example, to know that a window of four 100byte segments seen will be consumed by two messages of 101 to 200 bytes each). the impact is uncertain. both octet and segment units of flow control can be argued to have their advantages for different types of application. the former makes it easy to indicate buffering limits in terms of total bytes (appropriate for stream transfer), while the latter makes it easy to indicate buffering limits in terms of messages (appropriate for block mode). the way in which flow control is exerted over an interface is complex and one of the most performancesensitive areas of protocols, so a significant conversion and tuning effort would be required to get an aoplication used with one type of highlevel protocol to be able to form using another. error detection tcp applies onescomplement addition checksum. tp4 uses an iso 14 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.algorithm.8 the errordetection properties of the tcp procedure have not been studied carefully, but the iso algorithm is thought to be what stronger and hence allows fewer nondetected errors in data passed to users. it should be noted that the tcp checksum is defined to include certain fields from the ip level including addresses so that double tection against misdelivery errors is provided. the practical difference in errordetection power is probably not important. simultaneous call between·same·users tcp will establish one call. tp4 will establish two calls if both sides support multiple calls, no call if they allow only one call (that is, see each other as busy), or in very unusual circumstances, one call. the impact is minor since most applications naturally have an initiator and a responder side. multiple calls between same addresses tcp allows only one call between a given pair of source and tion ports. tp4 allows more than one by using reference numbers. the impact is minor since it is easy to generate a new percall port number on the calling side in most cases. this can be a problem in tcp, however, if both are wellknown ports. addressing tcp provides sixteen bit ports for addressing within a node identified by the internet layer. some of these ports are assigned to wellknown plications, others are free for dynamic assignment as needed. tp4 provides a variablelength transport suffix (same as transport service access point identifier) in the callrequest packet. the use of addresses at different levels in the iso model has not yet been fied, but it seems likely that addressing capabilities similar to tcp's will eventually be provided by tp4 (or possibly the session layer) along with standard addresses for common applications. the impact is likely to be minimal, but this is an open area of the iso specifications that may need further definition for use by 000. binding user entities to connections tcp requires a prior listen request from a user entity for it to be able to accept an incoming connection request. normally a user entity must· exist and declare itself to tcp, giving prior approval to accept a 8for additional information, see information processin£ systems open interconnection, connectionoriented transpor protocof specif cations, iso dis 8073, section 6.17, page 45. 15 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.call from a specific or general remote entity. in some implementations it may be possible for a nonresident user entity to cause a listen request to be posted and an instance of the entity to be created when a matching connection request arrives. tcp does not queue an incoming connection request with no matching listen request but instead rejects the tion. tp4 requires no orior request but passes a call indication to a user entity whenever a call request is received. it is, however, left open as an implementation decision as to how tp4 finds and/or creates an priate user entity to give the call indication; that is, the service does not include or define how user applications make themselves available for calls (no listen service primitive). the implementation guidelines cate that wellknown addresses, prior process existence, and call request queuing are all facilities that may or may not be provided at the mentor's choice.9 this would seem to allow for different choices and hence failure to establish a connection between standard implementations (for example, caller expects requests not to be queued, while callee does queuing, and hence never responds). the practical impact is uncertain due to lack of experience with how the various options allowed by the tp4 standard will be used in practice. tcp seems more oriented to a prior authorization mode of operation, while tp4 most easily supports an indicationwithlateracceptance scenario. it is not clear how tp4 will support rejecting calls to nonexistent or inactive user entities and how user entities could control how many calls they would accept. this area may require dod refinement. outofband signals tcp allows the user to specify an urgent condition at any point in the normal data stream. several such indications may be combined, with only the last one shown to the destination. there is no limit to the number of urgent indications that can be sent. the tcp urgent messages are sent requesting expedited service from the network layer so network bottlenecks can be bypassed as well. tp4 allows users to send expedited data units carrying up to sixteen octets of user data. these are only half synchronized with the normal data stream since they may be delivered before previously sent normal data, but not after subsequently sent normal data. each expedited data unit is delivered to the destination, and only one can be outstanding at a time. iso has indicated its intention to allow transport protocols to use networklevel expedited service, but this is not yet defined. 9specification of a transport protocol for computer communications, vol. 5: guidance for the implementor, section 2.11.2. national bureau of standards, institute for computer sciences and technology, (washington, d.c.) u.s. department of commerce, january 1983. 16 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact is primarily for applications like terminal traffic dlers that must deal with interrupttype signals of various types. the need to read an arbitrary amount of normal data and recognize urgent data in the normal stream are difficulties with tcp urgent service, but it has been used successfully by the telnet protocol. the lack of full nization of the signal and normal data in tp4 may require users to insert their own synchronization marks in the normal data stream [as was the case with the old arpa network control program (ncp)], and the limitation of one outstanding signal may be restrictive. some effort would be required to convert higherlevel protocols using one transport protocol to using the other. security the committee has determined that the tcp and tp4 are sufficiently equivalent in their securityrelated properties so that no significant technical points favor the use of one over the other. the dod protocol architecture assigns the securitymarking function to the ip layer and provides an 11byte security option with a defined coding in the ip header. tp4 provides a variablelength security option carried in call quest packets ł. a variablelength security option field is also provided in the iso ip. standard encoding of security markings are under ation but not yet defined and accepted. in addition to these explicit securitymarking fields, the existence, coding, and placement of other header fields have security implications. if data is encrypted, for example, a checksum is usually used to mine if the decrypted data is correct, so the strength of the checksum has security implications. precedence tcp supports precedence by using three bits provided in ip headers of every packet. tp4 provides a 2byte priority option in call request packets. a 2byte priority option in the iso ip header is also under consideration. currently, no implementations make use of precedence information (to support preemption, for example)". there should be no impact, therefore, of changing from one protocol to the other. type of service the types of network service that can be requested via tcp and tp4 are somewhat different. the impact seems minimal since few networks do anything with the type of service fields at present with the exception of darpa's packet radio and satellite nets. this may become more important in the future. 17 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datagram service tcp provides only reliable session service. a separate user datagram protocol (udp) in the dod architecture supports transaction or lesstype interaction where individual messages are exchanged. udp is merely an addition of the portaddressing layer to the basic datagram vice provided by ip. no delivery confirmation or sequencing is provided (although ip provides fragmentation and reassembly). the nbs tp4 specification originally presented to the committee vided unitdatatransfer service within the same protocol framework as sessions.lo this material has since been deleted to bring the nbs posal into conformance with iso work. a separate iso datagram protocol similar to udp has been defined and is expected to become a draft proposed standard in june 1984. closing tcp provides a graceful closing mechanism that ensures that all data submitted by users are delivered before the connection is terminated. the nbs tp4 provides a similar mechanism, but is not included in the iso standard tp4, which provides only an immediate disconnect service. pact is significant if the iso version is used because users would then have to add their own graceful termination handshake if desired. comparison of dod and iso internet layers the internet protocols of dod and iso are much more similar to one another than the transport protocols. this is not surprising since the defense department's ip was used as the basis for the international dards organization's ip. some reformatting, renaming, and recoding of fields has been done. hence not only are the services to higher layers essentially equivalent, but the protocol mechanisms themselves are also nearly identical. due to the format changes, however, the two cols are incompatible. it should be noted that the ip itself forms only part of the internet layer. for clarity it should also be noted that the internet layer in iso is considered to be the top sublayer within the network layer. in dod, there is an additional internet control message protocol (icmp) that deals with error conditions, congestion control, and simple routing updates to host computers. there is also a gatewaytogateway protocol (ggp) that deals with internet management and routing updates for in the iso, only the ip itself has so far been considered, lonational bureau of standards, specification of a transport protocol for communications, 3, class 4 protocol, !cst/alnp833, ebruary 1983. 18 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.while most error reporting, control, and routing functions are considered łmanagementł functions that remain to be addressed in the future. the only significant differences in the ips themselves are in the areas of addressing and error reporting. the dod ip has a fixedlength, 32bit source and destination addresses {identifying network and host) plus an 8bit łprotocol number" field to identify the higherlevel tocol for which the ip data is intended. the iso ip has variablelength source and destination addresses whose format and content are not yet specified, although preliminary documentation indicates that iso intends to support a similar level of addressing (network/host) in a more global context which would allow use of current dod addresses as a subset. there is no equivalent of the dod protocol number field, although possibly the tail of the variablelength iso addresses could be used for this purpose. error reporting is provided within the iso ip by means of a separate packet type, while the dod provides more complete errorand reporting functions via the separate internet control message protocol (icmp), including routing "redirect" messages to hosts that have sent datagrams via nonoptimal routes. in summary, from the functional point of view, dod and iso ip can be considered essentially equivalent with the provision that the ing scheme is suitably resolved. the absence of routing and control cedures from the iso internet layer means that additional procedures beyond ip would be needed to produce a complete, functioning, internet even if the iso ip were adopted. it appears that the existing dod icmp and ggp or its successors could be modified to operate with the iso ip with modest effort, but this requires further study and validation in an operational system. a table at the end of this chapter compares dod and iso ip packet formats. comparison on the basis of performance, security, and risk performance the performance of a transport protocol, such as tcp or tp4, is a function of its implementation as well as its inherent design. experience in implementing tcp and other proprietary protocols has demonstrated that implementation considerations usually dominate. this makes it difficult to compare protocols, since a wide range in efficiency of implementations is possible. furthermore, there are a number of dimensions along which an implementation can be optimized. despite the difficulties, protocol designers have developed several metrics for comparing transport protocols. these view protocol mance from a variety of perspectives, including (1) user response time, (2) throughput on a single connection, (3) network and host computer resource utilization. protocol efficiency can also be significantly affected by the communications environment. protocol efficiency must be 19 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.considered in a wide range of communications environments, including local area networks, satellite links, terrestrial links, and switched networks. the critical algorithms most affecting protocol performance are those that perform endtoend error control and endtoend flow control. these algorithms affect the response time, throughput, and resource utilization of the protocol during the data transfer phase. the efficiency of the connection management procedures may also be important in applications involving frequent connections of brief duration. the committee compared the algorithms and message formats specified for each protocol for critical functions, including flowand trol and connection management. they concluded that since the two cols were sufficiently similar there would be no significant difference in performance of tcp or tp4 implementations of equal quality optimized for a given environment. the committee compared the errorandflowcontrol algorithms of tcp/ip and tp4. both employ windowbased techniques using largesequence number spaces and both permit large window sizes. their differences are minor. tcp performs its errorandflowcontrol in units of octets, rather than the protocol data units employed by tp4. this adds a small amount of overhead to tcp calculation in return for a finer control over host buffer memory. the committee did not consider the difference significant, assuming that appropriate buffer management strategies are implemented by transport and higherlevel protocols. tp4 employs more sophisticated techniques to ensure that flowcontrol information is reliably transmitted than does tcp. these more sophisticated techniques may reduce tp4 tocol overhead during periods of light load in some applications, possibly adding slightly more cpu load in other cases. the committee did not sider these effects significant. both protocols employ a threeway handshake for establishing a port connection. the differences between the tcp and tp4 handshake are related to the addressing conventions employed for establishing tions and do not affect protocol efficiency. in the common cases where a client process requests a connection to a server process, the tcp and tp4 operations are equivalent. both protocols permit a range of policy decisions in their tion. these include (1) selection of timer values used to recover from transmission errors and lost packets, (2) selection of window sizes at the receiver and transmitter, and (3) selection of protocol data unit sizes. both permit substantial reduction in controlmessage overhead by expanding window sizes. both permit credits to be granted "optimistically," permitting receiver buffers to be shared over several transport connections and permitting credit reduction in the event of buffer gestion. both permit optimizing protocol efficiency by delaying message traffic when it does not need to be transmitted, combining it with later data or control traffic. 20 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the most significant difference between tcp and tp4 flow control derives from slight differences in expression of flow control at the transport layer service interface. tcp employs a stream model while tp4 uses a message model. these two models are equivalent in function; ever, some higherlevel applications protocols may be more naturally expressed in one model than the other. the committee considered the possibility that current arpa protocols might require some adaptation to operate more efficiently with tp4. for this reason the committee recommends that the 000 study the operation of current 000 higherlevel protocols on tp4 (recommendation 5, chapter xi). security the committee considered the impact of security requirements on port protocols primarily and also on overall protocol hierarchies in the 000, the american national standards institute (ansi), and iso. based on the information the committee received, it finds that: risk the current tcp4 and tp4 are sufficiently equivalent in their securityrelated properties that no significant technical points would favor the use of one over the other. there is no technical impediment to their equivalent evolution over time in the security area. there are several risks in implementing a new protocol or protocol family. these include (1) fatal flaws in protocol design not easily rectified, (2) errors in protocol specification, (3) ambiguities in col specification, (4) errors in protocol implementation, (5) performance degradation due to inefficient implementation, (6) performance tion due to "untuned" implementation, and (7) performance degradation due to untuned application protocols. this list of risks comes from experience in implementing computer networks based on the 000 protocols and proprietary commercial protocols. considering that it took more than ten years for the current tcp cols to reach their current state of maturity and that the tp4 protocol is only about two years old, the committee devoted considerable attention to the maturity of tp4. fatal flaws in protocol design early arpanet protocols had a number of "fatal" design errors that resulted in deadlocks or other serious system failures. commercial works had similar problems in early design phases. the committee sidered the possibility that tp4 could suffer from similar faults and concluded that this was unlikely. tp4 employs design techniques similar to those of tcp and proprietary transport protocols. the faults tered in the arpanet are now well known. indeed, the state of the art in 21 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocol design is now quite mature. the developers of the tp4 protocol were familiar with the earlier protocols and their problems. errors and ambiguities in protocol specification early in the development of tp4, nbs developed a formal protocol specification and a test environment based on this specification. a protocol implementation can be partially compiled automatically from the formal specification. other implementations can be tested against this master implementation. the nbs protocol laboratory was used to debug the formal specification of tp4 and is currently being used to certify other implementations of tp4. the laboratory has also developed and employed tools to analyze the specification for possible problems. the existence of this laboratory and the results obtained to date led the committee to conclude that there is no substantial risk associated with the tp4 protocol specification. in contrast tcp has only recently received a formal specification. to the committee's knowledge most existing tcp implementations predate the formal tcp specification and have not been derived from the formal specification. in the committee's opinion the formal tcp specification is likely to have more bugs or ambiguities than the tp4 specification. at the present time nbs has developed the only formal specification for iso tp4. iso is currently developing standards for formal cation techniques that are similar to those used by nbs. when these specifications are complete iso will update the tp4 specification to include a formal description. in translating the current informal iso specification into the formal specification there is a risk that the iso specification may be changed such that it is no longer consistent with the current nbs specification. the national bureau of standards is playing a key role in developing the iso formal specification techniques and formal specification. it plans to generate automatically an mentation of the iso formal specification and verify it against the nbs specification using the nbs test tools. in the committee's opinion this makes the risk of unintentional changes in the iso specification quite low. one possible risk remains. the iso specification for tp4 that was approved is an informal document subject to the ambiguities of informal protocol specifications. the formalization may remove ambiguities that have gone undetected and that were the basis of its approval. it is conceivable that once these ambiguities are exposed, the current consensus for tp4 may dissolve. the committee considers this risk to be very low. the areas of ambiguity in protocol specifications are typically only of concern to protocol implementors. the current protocol implementors through much of the world are typically using the nbs formal tions as a basis of their implementations of tp4 and have access to the nbs test tools for certifying their implementations. in the event of a possible conflict, the majority of implementors could be expected to port resolution of ambiguities in favor of the current nbs formal cation, making it unlikely that iso would approve an alternate resolution. 22 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.errors·in·protocol ·implementation several factors influence the likelihood of errors in a protocol implementation. these include the complexity of the protocol, quality of the protocol specification, the experience of the implementors, and the availability of test tools. based on the availability of the nbs test tools and formal protocol specification for tp4, the committee did not see any significant risk of errors in implementing tp4. performance issues the largest risk in implementing tp4 concerns the performance of the implementations. this risk is not inherent in the protocol as specified, but is present in new implementations of any transport protocol. ence has shown that performance can often be improved by a factor of two or more by careful attention to implementation details and careful mance measurement and tuning. the committee considered it likely that some initial implementations of tp4 will have significantly lower mance than the current mature implementations of tcp. evidence to support this conclusion may be found in data supplied by the 000 which show a wide range of performance of tcp implementations. some members of the committee expressed the belief that over the long term, tp4 will afford better performance due to widespread commercial support. vendors will be highly motivated to optimize performance of their tp4 implementations, since a large number of users will benchmark implementation performance. many individuals will become familiar with implementations of tp4 and with configuring and operating networks based on tp4. initially, this expertise will be found in organizations oping tp4 implementations and installation. the committee believes that the largest performance risks are short term. the performance of existing 000 highlevel protocols may be affected by subtle differences between tp4 and tcp interfaces. level dod implementations and protocols may require retuning to attain some highlevel efficiency using tp4. another shortterm risk is potential lack of experience in configuring and operating tp4based networks. the committee believes that a program of testing and opment would minimize these risks, ensuring that the current highlevel dod protocols run effectively on tp4based networks. there is a possibility that the equivalent, but different, protocol mechanisms and interfaces in tp4 may manifest some undesirable behavior that is not expected and which cannot easily be removed by tuning. in this event iso may find it necessary to make some modifications to tp4. it is unlikely that such problems will be serious enough to prevent an early transition to tp4. if such problems are discovered, it is expected that they can be handled through the normal standards process of periodic enhancement. a number of proprietary commercial networking protocols are similar in operation to tp4 and do not have serious performance problems. any enhancements that may be desirable can probably be added to tp4 in a compatible fashion, permitting interoperation of enhanced and unenhanced implementations. 23 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table: comparison of dod and iso ip packet formats dod iso (not in correct order) protocol version: 4 bits header length (in 32bit words): 4 bits type of service: 8 bits (includes 3bit precedence) total length: 16 bits id: 16 bits don't fragment flag more fragments flag fragment offset: 13 bits time to live (sec): 8 bits protocol number: 8 bits header checksum: 16 bits (provided by subnet layer) (in icmp) ............. source address: 32 bits dest. address: 32 bits . . . . . . . . . . . . . options: nop, security, source route, record route, stream id, time stamp . . . . . . . . . . . . . data version: 8 bits [header] length (in bytes): 8 bits quality of service**: 8 bits precedence**: 8 bits segment length: 16 bits data unit id*: 16 bits segmentation permitted flag more segments flag segment offset*: 16 bits lifetime (.5 sec): 8 bits header checksum: 16 bits network layer protocol id: 8 bits [generate] error flag type: 5 bits total length*: 16 bits . ........... . source address length: 8 bits source address: var. dest. address length: 8 bits dest. address: var ł . . . . . . . . . . . . . options: padding, security source route, record route, quality of service, precedence, error reason (only for error type) ............. data ........................................................................ * only present if segmentation is in use ** in options 24 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iv. status of dod and iso protocol implementations and specifications department of defense the dod internetting protocol was first introduced in 1974 and later split into separate tcp and ip specifications. from 1974 until 1978, when they were adopted as dod standards, the protocols underwent a number of major revisions. these revisions were largely a result of extensive experience gained by researchers working on the darpa internet project. the darpa "request for c011111ent" and "internet experimental note" cal report series document the conclusions of numerous protocolrelated studies and discussions. successive specifications of tcp and other internet protocols are also given by reports in these series. most of these specifications were informally presented and were accompanied by discussions that affected design choices. the1most recent tcp documents introduce a more formal style of presentation. l the first experimental tcp implementations were completed in 1974 at stanford university and bolt beranek and newman, inc., for the pdp11/elf and dec10/tenex systems, respectively. today implementation exists for numerous computer systems. while many of these were implemented at and are supported by university and other research groups, several are available as commercial products. testing of tcp was done on the arpanet, 12 other dod networks (satellite net, packet radio), and a variety of local networks. for several years a number of darpa contractors used tcp in parallel with the old arpanet transport protocol (ncp). in addition, for about six months preceding the january 1, 1983, arpanet cutover from ncp to tcp, these hosts were joined by additional tcponly hosts (for a total of approximately thirty). this extensive testing prior to the cutover to tcp enabled the networks involved to maintain operational capability throughout lltransport control protocol, dod milstd1778, august 1983. 12the arpanet is a data communications network established in 1969 by the dod's advanced research projects agency to interconnect the computer resources at selected research centers at substantially lower costs than systems then available. the arpanet is a fully operational 80node network that interconnects over 200 host computers in the united states, the united kingdom, and arpa became the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) in 1973. 25 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transition and to achieve normal service levels in a few months. the tcpbased dod networks includes hundreds of hosts (over 300 on don alone) and serves thousands of users. traffic on just the arpanet component is now approximately 500 million packets per month. tcp is also extensively used on local area networks including ethernet and pronet, as well as on csnet, the computer science research network (telenet hosts). in addition to tcp, the dod protocol architecture includes internet layer protocols for communication between hosts and (icmp) and between gateways (ggp). experience indicates that the design of robust and powerful that internet numerous networks and provide ability is a complex challenge. dod is developing new gateway protocols that could be adapted to work with either dod's or iso's ip. the higherlevel protocols currently used on don for electronic mail (simple mail transfer protocol), file transfer (file transfer protocol), and remote login (telnet) are tcpspecific. their specifications are stable, and numerous implementations exist. the dod has indicated its intent to adopt iso higherlevel protocols when they are specified and implementations are available. the committee has concluded that the dod transport and internet tocols are well tested and robust. it is unlikely that major problems with their design or specifications will be uncovered. no comprehensive facility or procedures for testing new implementations of tcp now exist, although efforts in this area are being started at defense communications agency (dca). international standards organization standardization and development of the iso ip and iso tp4 are ceeding in a relatively independent fashion. currently, tp4 is further along in the standardization process. the local area network tions environment has created an immediate need for tp4 functions; ever, communications within a single local area network (lan) do not need an internet capability. a "null" ip has been defined to enable tp4 to be used on a single lan without the necessity of a complete ip. it is quite likely that some early tp4 products will implement this null ip, leaving implementation of the complete ip for future product development. in the following discussion, tp4 and ip will be treated separately due to this potential independence. tp4 status and plans the iso tp4 became a draft international standard in september 1983. the final stages in standardization are primarily procedural. the tee expects products that implement tp4 to be widely available in the market within about two years. it normally takes twelve to eighteen months for implementations and testing prior to product announcement. some vendors apparently began implementation and testing the protocol 26 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.soon after it became a draft proposal in june 1982, because the protocol was essentially frozen at that time. at present, intel and able computer have announced the availability of products that implement tp4 for use over lans. the committee does not know, however, whether these products have been delivered or rated into systems. in addition, more than twenty companies have cated their support of tp4 and their intention to incorporate tp4 into future products, without announcing specific products or availability dates. most companies do not make specific product announcements until relatively late in the product development process. in december 1982 six vendors and network users interested in early development of tp4 products requested nbs to hold a series of workshops on the operation of tp4 in a lan environment. to date, four workshops have been held, with more than thirty companies in attendance. the first workshop set a goal of demonstrating multivendor networking at a major u.s. national computer conference. the second workshop, held in april 1983, determined that demonstrations would include a file transfer cation and would be developed on two local area network technologies rently standardized by the institute of electrical and electronics neers (ieee). these technologies are the carrier sense multiple access with collision detection, which is standardized by ieee committee 802.3, and the token bus, which is standardized by ieee committee 803.4. the workshop selected the national computer conference in july 1984 for the demonstrations. vendors committed to the demonstration developed and tested tp4 plementations using the nbs test tools. the workshops defined a schedule that called for individual testing through april 1984 with multivendor testing commencing thereafter. while the vendors that participated in the demonstration have emphasized that participation in the demonstration is not a commitment to product development, a number of large customers have indicated that there will be an immediate market demand for tp4 plementation as soon after the demonstration as practical. the tee considers it highly likely that many commercial vendors will announce commitments to deliver tp4 products shortly after the demonstration. internetwork protocol status and plans the iso internetwork protocal (ip) became a draft international dard (dis) in may 1984.13 the dis was out for ballot for the previous eight months. attaining dis status freezes the technical approach, permitting implementations to begin. l3jso draft proposal, information systems ·data communications protocol for providing connec ionless network services, op 8473, may 1984. 27 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the iso ip specification is only one of several specifications needed to completely specify the network a number of other specifications are needed, including a gatewaytohost error protocol, a networkwide addressing plan, and a gatewaytogateway protocol for managing routing information. a complete specification is needed before an internetwork, consisting of gateways and hosts, can be deployed. most of the complexity of the network layer, however, is confined to the gateways. a complete standardization of the network layer is not required to develop and deploy host systems. the international standards organization is currently developing posals for conveying error information between hosts and gateways. it is expected that responses to the draft proposal by iso members will include proposals to provide these functions. the committee does not consider this a controversial area and expects that these capabilities will be included in the iso standard by the time it reaches draft international status. addressing is a more complex issue. the addressing structure of a computer internetwork depends on complex tradeoffs between implementation complexity, flexibility, network cost, and network robustness. addressing structure in a large network can influence the range of possible policy decisions available for routing network traffic. the tradeoffs for a military environment may be significantly different from those of a mercial environment. the iso has considered these factors in its existing ip. a flexible addressing scheme is provided, permitting implementation of a variety of addressing structures. host computers need not be cerned with the internal structure of addresses. the committee considers that the ipaddressing scheme has sufficient flexibility that host mentations can be constructed that will support the full range of ing philosophies allowed by iso, including those needed by doo. routing algorithms, like addressing, are complex and often sial. for this reason iso has not yet attempted standardization of routing algorithms. a routing algorithm is a key part of a gateway protocol. a single network must implement a common routing algorithm. in the absence of an iso routing algorithm, a network must be based on either proprietary routing algorithms or on other standards. the committee has studied the current iso ip. and the current addressing structure. it believes that it will be possible to map the current dod ipaddressing structure and routing algorithm into the iso network layer. in practice this means that the gatewaytohost protocols and addressing formats will fully comply with the iso standards, while gateways will need to include additional dod capabilities. (this is addressed in recommendations, section ix.) this approach will enable dod to procure commercial host implementations, while retaining the need for procuring dodspecific gateways. the committee believes these hybrid dodiso gateways can be readily developed by modifying existing dod implementations. since the majority of systems in a network are hosts and not gateways, the committee considers this approach worthwhile. 28 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to the committee's knowledge no vendor has yet announced plans to support the iso internetwork protocol. this is not surprising, since the iso ip attained draft proposal status only recently. the committee has considered the possibility that the iso ip may not attain the same wide level of market demand and vendor support anticipated by tp4. since host support of ip is necessary for dod to migrate to iso protocols, the committee has considered this question in some depth. while it is possible to operate tp4 directly over a lan or directly over an x.25based, widearea network, some form of internetwork ity or alternative approach is needed to interconnect systems attached to multiple lans via wide area networks {wans). in the current iso open tems architecture, this function is to be provided by the network there are two possible network services, connectionless and tion oriented. the iso architecture permits both of these services, leavinq it to the market place to determine which approach is to be selected. the dod believes that the connectionless approach best suits their needs. developing a connectionoriented network that operates over a mixed lan and wan environment is considerably more difficult than developing a connectionless one. existing lans are inherently connectionless and existing {x.25) wans are inherently connection oriented. a protocol to provide internetwork service between these lans must arrive at a common subnetwork capability. it is a relatively simple matter to adapt a nectionoriented to a connectionless service since it can be done by noring unneeded functions of the connectionoriented service. adapting a connectionless subnetwork to the needs of a connectionoriented network service is much more difficult. many of the functions provided by tp4 would be needed in the network layer to build such a service. some work is currently going on in european computer manufacturer's association (ecma) to interconnect wans and lans in a connectionoriented fashion. there is considerable controversy surrounding several proposals, since some participants in the standards process do not believe the sals conform to the iso reference model for open systems interconnection. this, plus their complexity, makes it unlikely that a connectionoriented network standard will gain support in iso in the immediate future. there is an immediate need for users to build networks consisting of interconnected lans and wans. such networks are currently in place using vendor proprietary architectures. market pressures to build multivendor lan and wan networks make it quite likely that vendors will adopt the mediate solution and implement the connectionless iso ip. the committee believes that dod can enhance the early availability of iso ip by cing its intention to use it. commercial availability of ip is an tant part of a migration strategy, as described in the section on mendations. the committee believes that vendors would be responsive to dod requests for ip, since ip is quite simple to implement in comparison with tp4 and since they foresee the need to operate in mixed lanwan environments. 29 transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.v. markets the committee reviewed the market demand and its potential with spect to both tcp and tp4 to provide an indication of the likelihood and rapidity with which competition and its benefits will develop. the mittee concludes that the market demand for tcp protocols will be small outside the united states. the demand for tp4, on the other hand, is expected to be worldwide. in this report we use the term market demand to indicate the potential or actual demand for products using the protocols under discussion. a large market is characterized by a broad demand from all sectors of the marketplace: consumers, businesses, and governments. the broadest demand is an international demand in all sectors. we distinguish the demand for products from the supply that usually develops as a result of the demand. it is assumed here that a broad market demand will result in a broad range of products,competitive in price, quality, function, and performance. the demand for products implementing computer communication protocols is discussed in relation to the requirements placed on the potential tomer. specifically, the customer may be required to acquire products that meet one or the other of the standards under discussion or may have no obligation to use either of the two. that is, customers will fall into one of the following classes with respect to these standards: 1. dod standards required. 2. international or national standards required. 3. no requirement with respect to standaras. although customers in the third class may be.under no formal tion to use standards, they may still prefer a standard solution for several possible real or perceived benefits. they may, for example, obtain a broader selection of products using the standard solution or may obtain a more competitive price. they may also require a specific munication protocol in order to share information with products that are required by fiat to implement certain standard protocols. this need for compatible protocols to communicate is a powerful driving force toward communication standards. department of defense networks market status and plans the major networks of the defense data network include the following: 31transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.military network (milnet)operational and growing. advanced research projects agency network (arpanet)operational and growing. wwmccs intercomputer network (win)to be upgraded. dod intelligence information system (oooiis)to be upgraded. strategic air command digital information network (sacoin)to be upgraded. movement information network (minet)to be established in 1984. sensitive compartmented information (sci) netto be established in 1985. top secret (ts) netto be established in 1985. secret netto be established in 1986. initially, each of these networks has its own backbone. the networks will be integrated into a common defense data network in a series of phases starting in 1984 with the integration of milnet and minet. it is planned that by 1988 they will all be integrated but communities of est will operate at different security classifications interconnected with internet private line interfaces (iplis). when appropriate technology becomes available in the late 1980s, the network will have the capability for multilevel security, including endtoend encryption, and will achieve interoperability between all users. the following observations are relevant to the tcp and tp4 issue: the dod currently has two major networks, milnet and arpanet, currently comprising the don. about sixty subnets and hundreds of hosts are internetted and most use tcp. this year a european network, minet, will be activated and grated into the don. it uses tcp. in the second half of 1983, fifteen additional subscribers have been added to milnet and current planning estimates hundreds more additional subscribers in 1984 and 1985. for the many don users that are, or shortly will be, nected over common backbones, there are groups of users that need interoperability within the group. these groups are mined by the military department they are part of as well as by functions such as logistics, maintenance, training, and many others. the air force and the army are both committed to the use of tcp for some of their networks or subnetworks (including local area 32transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks) and active acquisition programs are underway, or will be initiated, during the next twelve to eighteen months. the don program office has procured, or shortly will devices to facilitate terminal and host access to don hosts and terminals. these devices employ tcp. nato has discussed protocol standards and has selected iso as an approach, subject to its being adapted to meet military ments, if such adaptation is necessary. there is no definitive planning underway, however, to develop a nato computer network. the mail bridge that will allow traffic to pass between the sified segment and the unclassified segment will use tcp and is scheduled for a 1987 initial operational capability (ioc). in general, the backbone in the various networks provides tions at below tcp and tp4. as a result a backbone (such as milnet) could support users of either protocol set. the users of one set could not, however, interoperate with the users of another unless additional steps are taken. in summary, there is a large tcp community operational today and the community is growing rapidly. in addition, there are, or shortly will be, procurements that plan to use tcp. the rate of growth cannot be precisely estimated in part because of uncertainties in demand and ability of trunks and cryptographic equipment. on the other hand, connection of several major networks will not take place until 1987 or later; and for those elements that are interconnected, there are many qroups of users that primarily require interoperability with each other. system descriptions milnet is a network for handling the unclassified operational data of the dod. it was created after the decision in 1982 to cancel the autodin ii system by dividing the arpanet into two nets, milnet and arpa research net. the majority of the capacity of arpanet was assigned to milnet, and the number of subscribers is growing rapidly. the network backbone does not require the use of tcp but its use is generajly mandated for bers. to achieve tcp functions, the don will procure some interface devices and thereby take the burden off some subscribers. arpanet supports most of the research organizations sponsored by darpa. it generally uses tcp but some users continue to use ncp. minet is a european network scheduled for initial operational ability (ioc) in 1984 to handle unclassified operational traffic, mostly logistical, and tie into the milnet. it will have 8 nodes, 8 tacs, and 3 hosts to process electronic mail. these hosts and others to be added to the net will use tcp and the file transfer protocol (ftp). 33transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the department of defense intelligence information system currently uses a homegrown protocol. sometime after 1984 its plans are to upgrade it to tcp. it will be a 3node, 3host net with plans to upgrade it to 20 to 30 nodes and about 50 hosts. the net is run at a highsecurity level (sci) for communicating compartmented data. the sci network sists of those users of sci who are outside of oodiis. sacoin is an upgrade of the digital communications system of the strategic air command. the ioc is planned for about 1985. at present, tcp is not planned initially as a protocol. sacdin will operate with multilevel security up to top secret sensitive information. win is the wwmccs information network. it is currently operational and uses ncp as a transport protocol. there is a major effort underway to modernize the wwmccs, including upgrading or replacing current computers, providing local area networks at major centers throughout the world, and providing common software packages for utilities and some applications. the upgrading of the transport protocols is part of this effort. dules are still uncertain but there is a target of 1986 for the protocol upgrading. top secret is a network that will support top secret users other than win and sacoin. secret net is a network that will operate at the secret level. it should be very useful for a large community that does not routinely need top secret or compartmented information. this is a community primarily outside the command and intelligence communities and includes missions such as logistics, procurement, and research and development. 000 will start the system as soon as there is sufficient cryptographic equipment; by 1986 they hope to have a 90node network with several hundred subscribers. the army plans to establish a headquarters net tying together major headquarters with an ioc of 1986. it will use tcp. the air force has established a program office to help in the ment of local area networks at major air force installations. these could be internetted using the don and thereby also gain access to other nodes. tcp has been mandated. initial procurements mail bridge will provide gateways between arpa research net and other elements of the don. these would use tcp and are scheduled for ioc in 1987. during 1984 the don is procuring two capabilities that will facilitate use of the network and higherlevel protocols. the first capability will be provided shortly by network access trollers (nac). the nacs provide three elements all based on tcp: 1. terminal access controllers (tacs) allow a cluster of terminals to access hosts on the don. many are in operation today as a 34transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.legacy of the arpanet developments. new ones will be tively procured. 2. terminal emulation processes (tep) allow the connection of a highcapacity host to the don through a number of terminallike lines. 3. host frontend processors (hfp) allow highcapacity host tion to the don through use of a network front end that loads much processing capacity from the host. the second capability will be provided by software the don is rently procuring for up to seventeen families of specific combinations of hosts and their commercially available operating systems. the software packages will include 1822 or x.25, tcp, and utility protocols for minal access, mail, and file transfer. initial operational capability is planned for late 1985. integration minet will be connected to milnet in 1984. this will be an fied network. win, oooiis, secret, and sacoin will be integrated as a classified network in 1987 at the earliest. since they all operate at different security levels, they will be able to use the same don backbone but will be cryptologically isolated. integration and interoperability of all the networks will not be sible until the late 1980s at the earliest, since this will require cessful implementation of an advanced technology for endtoend logical networking and the development of techniques for multilevel securit.v in individual and netted computer systems. the use of gateways as elements to integrate networks is under sideration. gateways are currently operational to interconnect milnet with (1) arpanet (six gateways primarily used to exchange mail between authorized users), (2) minet (one gateway for use prior to integration of the two networks into one), and (3) eight developmentally oriented works. there are many more gateways internettin·g arpanet with other research nets. most of these gateways use the arpadeveloped gateway protocol. it is now realized that this protocol is deficient for widespread use and arpa has been investigating alternatives. the earliest requirement for additional gateways in the operational elements of the don will be to internet local area networks into global networks of the don. a new "stub" protocol has been developed that might meet this need. the don is reviewing its requirements for available gateways and approaches. 35transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international and national standard market demand for tp4 in the united states and most countries of the world, national dards organizations adopt international data communication standards. in the united states the standards for the transport protocols are established by the american national standards institute (ansi}. the same standards for the federal sector are established by the nbs with an exception for dod's military needs which may be established by mil dards. market demand for the latter was previously discussed. outside the dod there are numerous government agencies and tions such as the federal aviation agency, internal revenue service, the federal bureau of investigation, and the federal reserve banks which have, or will have, networks that fall under the guidance of the nbs and will probably use the nbsspecified standard protocols when the nbs standard is issued. already the federal reserve is procuring its computer working products using the x.25 protocol. national support of international standards the earliest evidence of demand for tp4 products is in countries that qive strong support for iso standards. most countries outside of the united states give the international standards much stronger mental support than the united states does for a variety of reasons. first, in most cases these governments own the postal and tion monopolies. freauently, the responsibility for these organizations is at a ministerial level in the government. furthermore, many of the modern countries have concluded that the information industry is a national resource and one of the growth industries of the future. national standards that are neutral, in the sense that no manufacturer has a head start, give the companies in these countries the additional margin they feel is necessary to compete in the worldwide market. it is also recognized by many that a worldwide market is much better than a market demand fragmented by national geographic and political ations. finally, the ptts have traditionally provided information vices eauivalent to those for which some of the iso computer tion protocols are designed. the best example is teletext, which is an upgraded version of the telex system used widely. outside the united states. conseauently, government networks in many countries use the tional iso standards or the national standards derived from the tional standards. bid reauests for government networks in france and germany, for example, have required support for iso protocols for over a year even thouqh the standards are not yet fully approved. these bids ask the respondent only to state support for the protocols. no doubt, as the iso protocols become stable, these countries will require the cols for their networks. these government networks will further influence the implementation of networks not actually required to use the tional and national standards. 36transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.market segments not required to use tcp or tp4 most of the demand for communication protocols comes from potential customers who are under no government fiat to use either tcp or tp4 protocols in their networks or network products. many of these will use existing supplierspecified protocols. such protocols have been embedded in products for over ten years and are well tested both formally and through field experience in thousands of networks. continuing demand for these protocols will not contribute to the relative demand for either tcp or tp4. there are widely recognized advantages in using international standard protocols for computer communications. first, there is tremendous value in exchanging information with other information users. as the standard protocols become widely used, the value of the information accessible through networks usinq these protocols is normally greater than the value of information accessible through less widely used networks protocols. this is the reason that industry groups such as airlines, banks, and insurance companies band together to set up common networks. similarly, it is recognized that there are economies of scale for widely used working protocols both in the sense that equipment can be obtained at lower cost and in the sense that the manufacturer's improvements in formance, function, and cost will be repaid by market demand. in tion, many network protocol users wish to have the option to procure equipment from a wide variety of vendors. sometimes international dards encourage this environment. finally, international organizations would prefer to have common procurement of equipment and software for worldwide operations. thus international standards are preferred for operational as well as logistic considerations. in the united states much of the demand for tp4 will develop in the industries that exchange information regularly with entities of the federal government. if the federal reserve were to use the tp4 standard for exchanging information with member banks, for example, there would be pressure on the banks to use tp4. similarly, if dou suppliers wish to have easy access to dod employees using a system based on tcp, they would need to use tcp. also many of the universityoriented networks use the arpanet protocols to exchanqe information with other university arpanet users. the committee concludes that the demand for tp4 in the united states will significantly outweigh the demand for tcp independent of dod's tion of tp4. if dod adopts the iso tp4 immediately or if dod adopts tp4 after a demonstration, the u.s. market demand for tcp protocols will disappear as the current networks are converted to tp4. if dod chooses to use the dod tcp indefinitely, clearly the dod and arpanet demand for tcp will continue. a similar set of market forces operates outside the united states except that the foreign governments are more strongly in favor of national and national standards and have smaller investments in dard equipment. thus there are even more industries drawn to the dards in order to share information. this is illustrated by the extremely 37transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strong support for iso efforts. the european computer manufacturers ciation has been active in the tp4 standardization effort. nato appears committed to tp4 implementations, and there is likely to be intense petition in this arena. lacking the federal government support of two different protocol suites, there is a stronger force to adopt a single international standard in most countries. there are other countries with a similar problem, however. germany is beginning to install systems based on its unique national standard but has committed to convert eventually to iso protocols. the committee concludes that there will be little market demand for the tcp protocols outside the united states. the strong international demand will be for iso protocols, including tp4. 38transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vi. development of standard commercial versus special commercial products dod has expressed a desire to use offtheshelf commercial products because they are expected to be less costly. it is expected that mance of commercial products will be optimized to increase ness. user cost will be lower because of a large commercial customer base over which to amortize costs for development, continuous ments, and maintenance. furthermore, the dod may benefit from having more vendors compete for their business. this section examines the way vendors select standard products for development and the implications in cost, continuing supports, and improvements. product development versus system integration it is assumed in this discussion that offtheshelf commercial ducts can be used through system integration to construct system tions. most vendors supply both standard products and system integration services. some vendors supply only the integration functions, using other vendors' products. system integration adds value to the product and in some cases results in modifications of the product to meet system ments. when standard products are used, the responsibility for continuing maintenance and improvements almost can be passed to the product developer. thus in this discussion we assume that offtheshelf cial products are standard products supplied by vendors to implement one or more transportlevel protocols for the dod. criteria for selection of standard products the product vendor's choice to develop a standard product is governed by market requirements, economic opportunities, and other design ations. in the case of data transmission products, market requirements include competition, connection to the installed base of products, market growth, and satisfaction of the standards requirements of customers. often the vendor will develop a product that supports several cols as options. usually only one or two protocols will be selected for primary support, and all other options are considered for secondary port. the primary protocols selected for implementation are based upon the largest potential market for the vendor. these protocols become the vendor's standard products. standard products are announced for sale and supported on a continuing basis. implementations of secondary protocols are often adaptations of the implementations of standard protocols and may 39transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be suboptimal with respect to performance and continuing vendor support. often secondary implementations are created when an rfp is issued and the vendor who wishes to respond to the rfp must create a special product to do so. this committee believes that, in future standard data transmission products will be either tp4 or vendorunique protocols and tcp will be a special product. standard versus special product within the osi architectural model, seven layers are defined, each of which will have protocols defined for interconnection of systems. these protocols are controlled by standards. tp4 is an example of a protocol for the transport layer. these protocols will be implemented on many dor systems that have different systems architecture, different operating system architectures, and, therefore, differences in the specifics of the layer interface. the vendor systems will be designed to optimize the cific environments that each vendor has determined are most important to satisfy the major market objective for that vendor's particular computer architectures. this determines the vendor's standard system and ture. support of special requirements will frequently be designed as modifications to a standard system, using translators and other techniques to bridge the differences in layer interface definitions, operating tems structure, and protocols. most support activity, optimization of performance and resource usage will be directed at the standard system architecture selected by the supplier. specialproduct process specialproduct development is initiated to meet customer tions. the specifications, schedule, and cost assume that special ducts are released using an existing version of the software system ating system, language, communications, and data manager}. support for the special product is conditioned on a support contract. the special product is tested and released with that system. this provides the fastest availability of the product, since the schedule will only include the time to develop the product and test it with the selected system. it is likely that by the time a product and its software system are ered, a newer version of the software system containing code corrections and added functions and other new products will have been released. tional cost to the customer is required if the vendor is to modify the special product to operate on this new version of software. this occurs frequently in a rapidly developing technology. if the special product is not modified, operational and maintenance expenses may increase. standardproduct process a standard product is developed to meet the market requirements of a market area. the development of a standard product generally has a target date that is used as a basis for scheduling system development, tion, and testing into a planned software system release. the product then is included in the test and integration plan for the system release and integration into a systems test procedure to assure operation with 40transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the other parts of the software system. the standard product then becomes a part of the software system, and as new releases of the system are made, the product is tested as a part of the integrated system to assure that it still operates with the revised, new system. the product may also be enhanced to satisfy new requirements or resolve problems of the earlier version. the product then will operate with the latest software system release. the integration process complicates the development process. the increased complexity may result in a longer development schedule or may require more resources than special products require since (1} the cycle may involve a longer product requirement definition, (2} additional ning and integration testing may be needed to coordinate the product design with other system activities, and (3} there is the possibility of up to twelve months' delay in scheduling a software system release, which for most vendors generally occurs at 6to 12 month intervals. the duct may be maintained with a corrective code released in intermediate system fabrication and integrated into the following software release. different categories of support may be available and these categories may vary by product. the support categories may range from no support to full unlimited warranty. conclusion the committee concludes that there are significant benefits for the department of defense in using standard commercial products that meet the department's operational needs: costs to the dod for development, production, and maintenance are significantly lower because (1} vendors spread the cost over a much larger user base, (2} commercial vendors have to be efficient in their operations in view of the competition in the market, and (3} vendors look for ways to upgrade their product to meet competition. the department may get additional useful products because vendors integrate the protocol function into their corporate software and hardware product lines. thus the dod may be able eventually to use standard commercial software application products that are built on top of, and thereby take advantage of, the transport protocols. the dod will thereby have a wider selection of standard commercial application products to choose from. by depending on industry to manage the development, maintenance, and upgrade of products, the dod can use its scarce management and technical resources on activities unique to its mission. 41transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vii. responsiveness of international standards process to change the international standards process has proven its ability to respond quickly to new requirements and protocol problems uncovered during dardization. the united states, through organizations such as the nbs, the ansi, and ieee has a leadership role in this process. the committee concludes that the process can be responsive to dod's needs. the dod will benefit from active participation in the international protocol standardization efforts. this will ensure that the dod's evolving computer communications needs will be met in future commercial ducts. also the dod will have access to a broad spectrum of protocol experts and have access to those developing future commercial products. these benefits will far outweigh the costs of participation. there will probably be very few highpriority instances where dod will require immediate changes to its operational commercial software. these may relate to security or survivability. in order to accommodate these changes in the short run, the dod will need agreements with its commercial suppliers for quick fixes to be made while the standard is being changed. · 43transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii. options for dod and nbs the committee believes that the department of defense is committed to adopting commercial standards when they are suitable and available and, therefore, will adopt the iso standards eventually as the military dard for transportlevel communication protocol. further, the dod izes the benefits in cost and reliability of obtaining its data tions equipment from vendors who offer it as standard products. of the three options identified by the committee, the first two are ways for the dod to realize these benefits while the third option would withhold the benefits from the dod indefinitely. the primary difference between option 1 and option 2 is in the timing of the transition from tcp to tp4. this timing difference has tions in risk, cost, and manageability of the transition. (this is cussed in chapter x in greater detail.) option 1 the first option is for the dod to immediately modify its current transport policy statement to specify tp4 as a costandard along with tcp. in addition, the dod would develop a military specification for tp4 that would also cover dod requirements for discretionary options allowed under the nbs protocol specifications. requests for proposals (rfps) for new networks or major upgrades of existing networks would specify tp4 as the preferred protocol. contracts for tp4 systems would be awarded only to contractors providing commercial products, except for unique cases. existing networks that use tcp and new networks firmly committed to the use of tcpbased systems could continue to acquire implementations of tcp. the dod should carefully review each case, however, to see whether it would be advantageous to delay or modify some of these acquisitions in order to use commercial tp4 products. for each community of users it should be decided when it is operationally or economically most geous to replace its current or planned systems in order to conform to iso standards without excessively compromising continued operations. united states government test facilities would be developed to enable validation of tp4 products. the department of defense would either require that products be validated using these test facilities or be certified by the vendor. the test facilities could also be used to 45transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolate multivendor protocol compatibility problems. the existing nbs validation tools should be used as the base for the dod test facilities. because under this option networks based on both tcp and tp4 would coexist for some time, several capabilities that facilitate ity among networks would need to be developed. the department of defense generally will not find them commercially available. examples are among networks or specialized hosts that provide services such as electronic mail. the department would need to initiate or modify ment programs to provide these capabilities, and a test and demonstration network would be required. option 2 under option 2 the department of defense would immediately announce its intention to adopt tp4 as a transport protocol costandard with tcp after a satisfactory demonstration of its suitability for use in military networks. a final commitment would be deferred until the demonstration has been evaluated and tp4 is commercially available. the demonstration should take at most eighteen months and should volve development of tp4 implementations and their installation. this option differs from option 1 primarily in postponing the adoption of a tp4 standard and, consequently, the issuance of rfps based on tp4 until successful completion of a demonstration. the department should, however, proceed with those provisions of option 1 that may be completed in lel with the demonstration. early issuance of a tp4 military tion, development of validation procedures, and implementation of means for interoperability would be particularly important in this regard. option 3 under the third option the dod would continue using tcp as the cepted transport standard and defer any decision on the use of tp4 finitely. the department would be expected to stay well informed of the development and use of the new protocol in the commercial and al arena and, with the national bureau of standards, work on means to transfer data between the two protocol systems. testing and evaluation of tp4 standards by nbs would continue. the dod might eventually modate both protocol systems in an evolutionary conversion to tp4. 46transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ix. cost comparison of options there are so many variables affecting cost, it is impossible to pare precisely the cost for each option over time. the estimates in this section are, therefore, mostly qualitative. they are based on the wide experience of several committee members in commercial networking.14 cost comparisons among the three options are difficult for two sons: 1. there are an unlimited number of scenarios that can be considered for the growth of dod's data communication networks in the next fifteen to twenty years, involving questions such as (a) how many different implementations will there be? (b) what economies of scale can be achieved? (c) how much software will be shared tween different implementations? (d) how much will the standards change for greater effectiveness or to accommodate higherlayer standards? and (e) what will happen to manpower costs in this highskill area? 2. it is difficult to isolate the costs attributable to developing, implementing, and maintaining the protocols at issue. this is especially true if we assume dod continues to use its own unique protocols. for both inhouse and contractor efforts, the costs associated with tcp are folded into many other efforts. if dod moves to commercial protocols, the marginal costs may be more visible. 14the committee has had some access to a study recently conducted by the defense communication agency that compares the costs of commercially maintained versus governmentmaintained operating systems for the honeywell computers used in wwmccs. although the wwmccs example has many fewer dimensions and systems than are covered by this analysis, the committee urges the dod to review this study as a good example of potential savings from commercially vended software. (wwmccsładp system software economic analysis. j. stephens and others, joint data systems support center, defense communications agency, technical report, in draft.) 47transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a major motivation expressed by the dod for using commercial protocols is that the commercial protocols are significantly cheaper. if this is the case, then many in the dod would like to know the savings over the next ten to twenty years if dod adopts tp4. this is not a question we will try to answer in this report, but the concept of opportunity costs is significant. if dod can successfully move to commercial standards, then it will eventually be able to use dod's scarce management and nical resources to strengthen its efforts in other areas of information communications and processing that are more unique to the dod. given the finite pool of such resources available to the dod, the value of tnis transfer may be significantly greater than the dollars saved by adopting the international standards. the following assumptions have been used in trying to estimate the cost factors if dod moves toward adopting tp4 using either option 1 or 2: no major subsystem of the don (which includes milnet, oodiis, wwmccs, and so forth) would use both protocols at the same time except possibly for a brief transition period. in only a few selected cases would a capability be required to handle both protocols. these cases could include select hosts that use both, special servers (most likely mail servers) that could provide functions between several communities of interest using both protocols, or translating between networks. within the don both sets of protocols would be used for a period of five to ten years starting eighteen months after the dod approves the use of tp4 in a new system. in virtually all cases, the phaseover from tcp to tp4 in a subs.vstem of the don would be performed at a time when there is a major upgrade of subsystem elements that include tcp as a part. in other words, the transition is not merely a substitution of transport or internet software except in cases where the ware currently being used is from a vendor who has started to offer tp4 as a commercial product. where this is not the case, the transition includes the substitution of new hardware whose vendor provides tp4 commercially. cost factors and model four major factors must be considered in evaluating the costs of the three options: 1. how much lower will be the cost of commercial, standardproduct protocols compared to those developed and acquired by the dod? 2. if dod decides to adopt tp4, how quickly can it start using it in new systems, and how quickly will it phase tcp out of older systems? 48transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3) what will be the onetime cost of management and test before dod is prepared to start using tp4? 4} what will be the marginal costs of maintaining the two standards over the 5to 10 year transition period? savings using commercial software commercial software providing tp4 will tend to be cheaper than provided tcp because commercial onetime and recurring costs {especially the former) can be apportioned over a larger consumer base, and the mercial supplier will tend to be more efficient. as in most cases where one compares the cost of one product provided by two vendors, there will be situations where a dod vendor providing tcp can do it more cheaply than a commercial vendor providing tp4. these occurrences will be rare but they illustrate the difficulty of developing detailed quantitative models that compare the costs. factors relating to competing suppliers go far beyond the transport protocols themselves and distort such models. the first argument relating to the size of the consumer base has many factors. for the time period under consideration, dod represents about 3 percent of the commercial u.s. computer base. it would follow that dod should pay much less in development and support costs for the commercial products. but there are other factors. the number of commercial pliers is larger than the number of dod suppliers by a factor of 510. the dod's need for transport and internet protocols will be greater than the average commercial user in the time period under consideration. if commercial vendors break out the costs of developing these protocol tures earlier than planned, dod will pick up a larger share of the tab. this could be by a factor of 2 or more. a good deal of the onetime velopment and production costs of tcp have already been spent by the dod or partly written off by dod vendors. this factor would be extremely ficult to estimate, but we do not think it is very significant since the major costs in implementation relate to processes downtheline from ting a clanguage version. these downtheline processes must be repeated in great part as families of hardware and software are upgraded with tem and technology improvements to meet dod directives for standard tcp products. there are also factors that cut in the other direction; if the dod is only 3 percent of the u.s. commercial user market, it is an even smaller fraction of the international user market. this latter market is growing; its need for iso protocols will be relatively higher than the u.s. market, and market share for u.s. manufacturers, including foreign subsidiaries, is large and holding its own. the situation is equally complex when it comes to comparing the ciency of commercial vendors with dod vendors when it relates to ing, installing, and maintaining transport and internet protocols. the elements that favor increased efficiency of the commercial supplier include the following: the commercial marketplace is much larger, less regulated, and is forced, therefore, to seek greater efficiency and innovation. 49transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport and internet protocols represent functions that act very closely with operating systems, the largest portion of which are commercial. the major sources of expertise for ing with these operating systems are in the commercial place, primarily with the vendors who supply the hardware as well as with vendors who specialize in related products. the commercial sector is in the business of managing the play between operating systems, protocols, related software and hardware products, new technology and architecture, and the relationship between all these and the market. if dod adopts tp4, it will be delegating many of these management functions to a marketplace that will generally make better and faster sions. for every dollar that the dod might invest in tcp, how much would it cost to gain comparable capability with tp4 procured as vendor standard products? the many factors involved make a precise estimate impossible. we believe, however, that tp4 can be procured at substantial savings and with virtually no economic risk if the market develops as we believe it will, with many vendors offering it as a commercial product by mid1986. on the average, we judge the savings to be 30 to 80 percent including initial installation, field support, and maintenance. how soon will tp4 be used? the sooner that dod decides to use tp4, the greater will be dod's savings. these savings can offset the adverse cost factors discussed in the next two sections: the cost to decide to use tp4 and the adaed cost for the period when two standards (tcp and tp4) are in use. currently, tcp is generally used in milnet, minet, and arpanet. as previously stated in the assumptions, even if dod decides to move sively toward tp4, there are no evident, strong economic or operational reasons for converting these users to the new standards until a major grade of the usersł communications and processing subsystems is planned. also in the next twelve to eighteen months new uses of these nets are planned that will expand existing subnets and these new users would use tcp in order to be interoperable with the current users in their community of interest. in some cases the planning for new subnets for new communities of users is well along. dodiis is a primary example. some of these subnets should very likely proceed with tcp, but others appear to be prime targets for tp4 if dod is to move in the direction of adopting tp4. the wwmccs and its win are probably qood examples of the latter. planning and implementation for all of these subsystems must move ahead, however, and if dod does not make a firm commitment to tp4 by mid1985, the number of systems that will move ahead with tcp will probably constitute almost half of the growth of the don in the next five years. in other words, delay of a cision to move to tp4 until 1986 would mean that most of the don subnets 50transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that will exist in the late 1980s will be based on tcp, whereas a decision for tp4 a year earlier could significantly reduce this number. cost of decision to use tp4 the costs of the decision to use tp4 include the onetime management and test costs that dod decides are needed before a tp4 commitment and policy can be approved. under option 1 these costs are small. under option 2 they are significantly higher, although the amount will depend on the extent and duration of the testing needed. under option 3 there will be no management and test costs. marginal costs of maintaining two standards if dod moves toward the gradual introduction of tp4, both standards will have to be maintained for five to ten years. the additional costs of maintaining two standards include the following: management costs of dealing with two standards. costs for developing and maintaining capabilities for limited intercommunication between systems using the different transport and internet protocols. these include costs for gateways, capability hosts, and special servers such as mail. parallel validation capability. the dod is implementing a dation capability for dod tcp. this is similar to the currently operational nbs facility for tp4 testing. if dod selects option 1, there is a question whether this dod facility should be pleted for tcp (because the number of new implementations of tcp would be small several years from now). if dod selects option 2, the facility is probably desirable. costs for maintaining research and development (r&d) programs to improve the standards. a part of the darpa and dca research and development programs in information technology is directed at system issues related to tcp. this includes work on internet issues, gateways, and higherlevel protocols. the committee has not reviewed the research program for details and cost; however, a commitment to move toward iso standards should affect the proqram. costs would increase to the extent that the program would be involved with interactions with both protocols. there would be some decreased requirements for r&d in light of tial dependence on commercial r&d to improve the standards. in the next several years, however, the committee concludes that dual standards would, on balance, somewhat increase r&d costs because of the dod's unique operational requirements. these costs are roughly the same for options 1 and 2 and depend on how dod manages the transition. under an austere transition, which does not provide extensive interoperability between tp4 and tcpbased systems and 51transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.minimizes costs in other areas, the overall costs could be low in son with potential savings. evaluation of options by cost in terms of the previously discussed factors, savings can develop in two by using tp4 instead of tcp in new systems and by replacement of tcp with tp4 in existing systems when this can be done smoothly and efficiently. the earlier that tp4 is introduced, the greater these savings. in contrast costs will be incurred in two ways: in onetime planning to use tp4 and in continuing costs of operating two standards. the following is a summary of the cost evaluation of the three options in the near term: option 3 is least expensive. it achieves no commercial savings but has no costs for onetime planning and maintenance of dual standards. option 1 is at most only slightly more expensive than option 3 since onetime planning costs {which are much lower than for option 2) and tenance costs can be significantly offset with commercial savings in the following several years. option 2 is most expensive since it does not realize significant setting commercial savings. in the longer term {beyond the next several years) commercial savings for options 1 and 2 should overtake costs of transition, and both these options should cost the same. there is a concern on the part of some members of the committee whether the higher nearterm costs of option 2 are adequately offset by the option's longterm savings to warrant the transition. 52transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x. evaluation of options we present a summary of the strengths and weaknesses of each option, followed by a detailed evaluation for each set of criteria. summary option l's primary benefit is that it would allow the 000 to obtain the benefits of standard commercial products in the communication protocol area at an early date. these benefits include smaller development, curement, and support costs; more timely updates; and a wider product availability. by immediately committing to tp4 as a costandard for new systems, option 1 minimizes the number of systems that have to be verted eventually from tcp. the ability to manage the transition is better than with option 2 since the number of systems changed would be smaller and the time duration of mixed tcp and tp4, operation would be shorter. interoperability with external systems (nato, government, and commercial), which presumably will use tp4, would also be brought about more quickly. option 1 involves greater risk, however, since it commits to a new approach without a demonstration of its viability. as with option 1, a primary benefit of following option 2 would be obtaining the use of standard commercial products. unit procurement costs probably would be lower than with option 1 since the commercial market for tp4 will have expanded somewhat by the time 000 would begin to buy tp4 products. risk is smaller compared to option 1 since testing and stration of the suitability for military use will have preceded the mitment to the iso protocols. transition and support costs would be higher than for option 1, however, because more networks and systems would already have been implemented with tcp. also this is perhaps the most difficult option to manage since the largest number of system sions and the longest interval of mixed tcp and tp4 operations would occur. in addition, interoperability with external networks through dardization would be the principal benefit of exercising option 3 would be the elimination of transition cost and the risk of faulty system behavior and/or it would allow the most rapid achievement of full internal ity among 000 systems. manageability should be good, since only one set of protocols would be in use (one with which the 000 already has much experience) and the 000 would be in complete control of system evolution. procurement costs for tcp systems would remain high compared to standard iso protocol products, however, and availability of implementations for 53transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new systems and releases would remain limited. external interoperability with nondod systems would be limited and inefficient. in summary, option 1 provides the most rapid path toward the use of commercial products and interoperability with external systems. option 2 reduces the risk but involves somewhat greater delay and expense. option 3 provides a quicker route to 1nteroperab1lity within the defense ment and at the least risk, but at a higher lifecycle cost and bility with nato and other external systems. defense department objectives versus options the committee has identified a set of dod objectives for transport protocols, discussed in section ii of this report. in this section we discuss the potential of each of the three options for achieving those objectives. the objectives have been grouped into five major categories that serve as criteria for evaluation of options. functional and performance objectives there are certain functional and performance objectives that standard dod transport protocols must satisfy. key objectives include security capabilities, the ability to establish message precedence in crisis ations, and survivability of continuing operations when failures occur and portions of the network become inoperable. this implies continuous ability of the primary data transmission network and the ability to figure the networks to operate after some of its nodes are lost. as previously stated, the two protocols are functionally equivalent. tcp and tp4 have equivalent reliability characteristics and are able to detect and recover from failures. the committee also concludes that robustness, availability, and performance in crises are equivalent using either protocol. the committee concludes that all three options equally satisfy the functional objectives that dod requires. since the performance characteristics of tcp versus tp4 will be a function primarily of the particular implementations, the committee cludes that the two protocols are sufficiently alike that there are no significant differences in performance of a tcp or a tp4 implementation of equal quality when each is optimized for a given environment. if option 1 is selected, early implementations may result in mal performance. option 2 specifies that there be a demonstration work established that will provide time for adjustment, testing, and gaining experience. option 3 would result in no reduction in performance of current networks. the maturity of tcp has resulted in many implementations that have demonstrated good performance. this experience provides a knowledge base for future implementations of either tcp or tp4. in either case, however, initial implementations of tcp or tp4 may be optimal and require additional development to optimize performance. 54transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.maximizing interoperability a highpriority dod objective is interoperability among its internal networks and among internal networks and nondod, external networks, cluding nato. interoperability allows users of a network to have access to applications on the same or other networks. option 3 would allow the dod to increase internal interoperability most rapidly by continuing to mandate use of tcp for all new systems. interoperability with external systems, however, the vast majority of which are expected to use iso standard protocols, will remain limited. the more quickly dod moves to use tp4, the more rapidly external interoperability will improve. in the short run internal ity will be reduced due to the existence of both tcp and tp4 protocols by different subnets. this problem is greater with option 2 then option 1 since the number of systems and the length of time both protocols are in use is greater. in both options the problem can be reduced by ing special servers and translating gateways to provide limited ability where needed among subnets using different protocols. minimizing procurement, development, and support costs a dod qoal is to assure availability of commercialgrade transport systems from vendors and minimize development, procurement, and continuing support costs. both option 1 and, after demonstration, option 2 result in dod adopting the tp4 standard that has the endorsement of both national (ansi) and international (iso) standards organizations. further, this protocol has been endorsed for use by nato, the european computer turer's association, the computer and business equipment manufacturer's association (cbema), and the nbs institute of computer sciences and nology for the information processinq community of the federal government. the result of the endorsements will be widespread use of the standard protocol in worldwide networks and a large number of vendors supplying commercial grade products supporting tp4. as previously noted, many vendors have already stated they plan to develop tp4based products and many are already doing this inhouse. thus a large market and large dor base will assure the availability of commercial grade tp4 products. a large market and supply of commercialgrade products will give dod a large competitive base from which to select its data transmission tems. the effect will be to reduce dod acquisition cost because large markets allow vendors to amortize development and support cost over a larqe base. this favors adoption of either of the options that results in dod using tp4 as its standard. with the availability of commercialgrade products, vendors will take the responsibility for continuing maintenance and enhancements of the product. transmission products are tightly coupled to the operating tems on the host computer systems in which they operate. with vendor support of the products, evolution of both the host computer operating 55transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.system and transmission system will occur in synchronization. this again favors the adoption by dod of either the option 1 or option 2 that results in tp4. in these options much of the support cost is covered by the dors and spread over the large market base. this reduces the development and maintenance cost passed on to the dod. the committee does not believe that a large market beyond the dod will develop for tcp because worldwide markets for products will be based on the iso standards. consequently, if the dod chooses option 3, only the doddedicated vendors would supply tcp as standard products resulting in a smaller market and supply for tcp products and limited availability of tcp products. if dod remains with tcp, many commercial vendors will be forced to develop and support both the commercial standard products (tp4) and standard special products (tcp) to in both markets. in many cases only the large marketbased products such as tp4 will be considered dard and tcp products will be considered special products. the effect is higher development and support cost to the vendors which would be passed on to dod. thus the incentive for continuing enhancement to the special product, tcp, would be reduced. this responsibility would be passed to dod, also resulting in higher costs. ease of transition the dod is concerned with the ease and risk associated with transition from the current network architecture using tcp to its future network architecture. the objectives for dod are to reduce the interruption of data communication services supplied by its active networks; minimize the risk of using an immature, untried protocol; and maximize the use of the critical skills, knowledge, and experience of the engineers who develop the communications products. the maturity of tcp and the momentum that exists in the dod community for implementing future systems using tcp would favor option 3. selection of option 3 would minimize interruption of service and minimize risk. with this option there would be no transition; the dod would remain with its current policy. there would be no conversion costs and the only risks for dod would be associated with poor implementations of new tcpbased products. the committee believes that much of the technical risk is associated with implementations. therefore, given the relative state of their fications and implementations as discussed earlier, the committee feels that the risks are comparable for implementing new products for either tcp or tp4. since dod is acquiring many new networks the implementation risk of either tcp or tp4 will be equal. if dod chooses option 1, it will confidence in the tp4 fications and in the vendor's implementations through its immediate mitment for tp4 use in new military networks. dod will, in effect, be 56transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making a commitment similar to that of vendors who are planning this tocol for their standard products. since most new networks would not use a transport protocol other than tp4, this minimizes the number of works and therefore the cost of converting and maintaining tcp networks to tp4. since the standard tp4 products from vendors are not available dod endorsement of tp4 may have the effect of accelerating vendor opment of standard products. these products are expected to be generally available by 1986. thus option 1 can be consistent with the turers' expected product plans. option 1 provides, therefore, the least conversion cost but with higher risk for dod conversion. if dod chooses option 2, then the risk that tp4 will not meet doo needs is reduced since there is no commitment to use this protocol until a successful demonstration is completed. in the interim, many networks will have been committed using tcp, resulting in higher conversion costs than with option 1. in summary, option 2 provides a lower risk approach for dod to convert to tp4, but will encounter the higher conversion cost. there is a great deal of experience with tcp and thus there is an engineering community that is highly knowledgeable about it. as ly noted, however, if dod remains with tcp, some dod vendors will be forced to support multiple protocol products. the functional equivalence and similarities between tcp and tp4 permit an easy transition for the experienced engineer to move from tcp to tp4. option 2 allows more time for this transition to occur, and thereby minimizes the risk associated with a complete switch to tp4. in addition to the transport protocols, a transition from tcp to tp4 also involves the conversion of applications. the committee has concluded that the services provided by tcp and tp4 are comparable and applications software can be moved from tcp to tp4 without loss of functionality. viously, option 3 requires no conversion to existing applications on rent implementations. option 2 will result in more applications cing to tcp than option 1, thus potentially increasing conversion costs. in the future dod could minimize the cost of conversion by standardizing the services provided by the transport layer to the applications. manageability and responsiveness to dod requirements the final set of objectives is concerned with the degree of difficulty that dod will experience in managing its installed networks and future networks. as communications requirements evolve, dod must have the ability to alter specifications so they will satisfy new requirements. finally, dod requires facilities for validation of protocol tions as they are added to their networks. since option 3 is to maintain the status quo, no additional management difficulty is anticipated. 57transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.both option 1 and option 2 will cause some additional management ficulties since they require that the current momentum for adopting tcp to be redirected toward tp4 without loss of intensity. in addition to this change, dod must manage both tcp and tp4 networks. this will add to its management difficulties. option 2 will result in greater management difficulties than option 1 due to the larger number of tcp systems that must eventually be converted and the larger time period over which both protocols must be supported. there are benefits from each option. if option 3 is selected, dod and its vendors have sole responsibility for determining what changes are needed, implementing the change, validating the change and the ongoing maintenance of the standard. if either option 1 or option 2 is chosen, then dod may encounter difficulty in persuading the standards groups to adopt its proposals; however, dod would gain the experience and knowledge of the industry standardsmaking bodies. the industry standards bodies should be receptive to good technical arguments for correction of errors or apparent major deficiencies in the protocol. the standards bodies that maintain the standard should become a technical resource for dod to develop its military specifications. since tp4 will be a commercial standard, those vendors who adhere to the standard will insure that validation facilities are in place. the national bureau of standards has a test facility for tp4. no such lity exists for tcp. if option 1 or option 2 is chosen, dod can use this facility to validate vendor implementations. dod should work with nbs to develop a similar facility for tcp. this is particularly important for new implementations of tcp. dod should continue working with and through nbs in getting needed protocol revisions introduced into the appropriate standards bodies. in summary, option 3 results in no new management difficulties while option 2 causes the greatest difficulties. option 1 allows dod to move toward commercialized standard products with the smallest addition of management tasks. effect of proposed options on market share option 1 would quickly reduce the market held by tcp products as tp4 products begin to take hold in the marketplace. in addition, it would hance the ability of u.s. manufacturers to compete in the world networks market based on iso standards because they would not have to engage in parallel development nor support two sets of protocols for very long. option 2 could have a comparable but less pronounced effect in the place and it would be delayed. because of the very probable rapid deployment of tcpbased systems in dod networks while the tp4 is still in the demonstration phase, however, many more networks than in option 1 would probably end up using tcp. this would tend to reduce the u.s. turers' competitive edge in the world market because their need to develop and maintain both tcp products as well as tp4 products would dilute their skill resources. the same thing would happen with option 3. although 58transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.none of the options would affect the world market for tp4 greatly, option 3 would result in a residual market for tcp products in the dod and lated networks. products made specifically for this market would continue to exist, but with functions limited to this specific market, the products would lack some of the advantages of largescale production and product ment. 59transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xi. recommendations we first present our basic recommendation and then provide detailed recommendations on aspects that reauire amplification. these are followed by additional considerations in several important areas relating to the transition plans. many of our recommendations are closely related to each other, and care should be taken not to consider any single recommendation in isolation. basic recommendation the committee unanimously recommends that dod should adopt the iso tp4 (and ip) as dod costandards with its tcp (and ip) and move toward eventual exclusive use of tp4. transition to use of the iso standards, however, must be managed to maintain operational capabilities and mize risks. the timing of the transition to use of these protocols is, therefore, a major concern, and the committee was divided on the best schedule to recommend. a majority of the committee favored immediate adoption of the iso protocols as costandards with tcp, giving major procurements in 198485 the option of using these standards (option 1). a minority favored deferring adoption of the iso protocols by the dod until after a stration of commercial auality implementations supporting military cations (option 2). this difference is reflected in detailed tions 24 below. the reasons for the two viewpoints are based on ferences within the committee on the extent of the risk associated with adopting a protocol, tp4, that has not been implemented on operational networks. detailed recommendations in the following recommendations the committee provides details about actions that should be taken to implement the basic recommendations. most of the recommendations involve actions that require the dod to take the lead role, with occasional support from the nbs institute for computer sciences and technology. some recommendations are directed more toward nbs. other government agencies and parties interested in using dod tocols or in their future evolution may also find these recommendations applicable. 61transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(1). dod should rapidly identify łopen areasł of the iso tp4 fications where various options for implementation are allowed and define a required subset for use in dod systems (a milspec version of the standards, for example). in doing this, the dod should work with the nbs with the goal of developing a federal standard, that has relatively few options for implementation, facilitates maximum federal interoperability, and makes it clear to vendors which functions are required in their commercial products. (2). dod should aggressively develop and implement a plan for tion of tp4 as a costandard with tcp and for migration toward its eventual exclusive use. the plan should include provision for rapid completion of a milspec (detailed recommendation 1), either validation or demonstration facilities (detailed recommendation 3), timing for procurement of systems with the new protocols (detailed recommendation 4), development of equipment and procedures to support a period of joint operation with both tcp and tp4 protocols in use, and guidelines for eventual conversion of tcp systems to the new protocols. whatever timing is chosen for the introduction of iso protocols, an extended period must be expected when both tcp and tp4 are in use in different systems. hence equipment and procedures must be developed to provide limited communication between systems using the two protocol sets. this will include dual protocol operation for some relay hosts, service hosts, and terminal concentrators. a secondary purpose of the test system described in detailed recommendation 3 should be to aid in development of this transition support equipment. both a general transition strategy and specific transition plans for each existing system should be developed. the switchover from old to new protocols will take place at different times as appropriate for each tem during an overall transition period of many years. (3). as soon as possible, the dod should develop a protocol test ity. if option 1 is followed, this facility would serve primarily to validate implementations of both old and new protocol sets. if option 2 is followed, the facility would initially focus on demonstrating the suitability of the new protocols for use in a military environment as rapidly as possible and then provide for testing of commercially supplied protocol implementations. for validation purposes, the nbs protocoltesting facility developed for iso protocols should serve as a good basis, but extensions to deal with any dodspecific option for the iso protocols, performance, and dod protocols would be necessary. dod is now beginning such a program. 62transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for a more complete demonstration, commercialquality implementations of the iso protocols must be obtained and shown to support military cations in an operational subnetwork such as such as arpanet or dodiis. in both cases the facility should also be used for development and stration of the transition support equipment mentioned in detailed mendation 2. (4). procurements of new networks and major upgrades of existing networks should favor use of iso tp4 as rapidly as possible. if option 1 is followed, rfps may specify the new protocols immediately. if option 2 is followed, this must await successful completion of the demonstration discussed in recommendation 3. procurements for existing networks using tcp may continue to require tcpbased equipment until an appropriate conversion point is reached (see detailed recommendation the purpose of this recommendation is to minimize spending on new tcp implementations and their subsequent conversion to tp4 where possible, while recognizing that some additions to tcpbased systems will also be needed. if option 2 is followed, immediate requirements for new systems may force new implementations of tcp in these cases also because the demonstration is not completed at the time rfps must be issued. (5). as part of a transition plan, a transport service interface to higherlevel protocols more like that of tp4 should be developed for tcp and tested with existing higherlayer protocols. this should serve as a rapid test of whether existing dod protocols can make effective use of the somewhat different style of service that tp4 provides. it should also allow higherlevel protocols to be modified to make use of tp4 in parallel with the implementation of tp4 itself, making the ultimate transition to tp4 more rapid and certain of success. finally, it may allow use of a single version of the level protocols to be used on both tcp and tp4 equipment. (6). dod should continue using existing dodspecific, higherlevel protocols for operational purposes (telnet, ftp, and simple mail transfer protocol, for example) but minimize effort on their further development and plan to adopt suitable iso protocols as they are developed. research on protocols providing new services (multimedia mail, compressed video, and voice storeandforward, for example) should continue. the committee is pleased to find that dod is already pursuing this course of action. (7). the nbs institute for computer sciences and technology should tain close liaison with dod to ensure that dod needs for new protocols and modifications to existing standards are effectively represented to appropriate standards bodies. this should include research areas such as multimedia mail where there is significant commercial as well as military interest. 63transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee is pleased to find that this is already being done through contracts from dod for !cst to represent its interests in standardization activities. further cooperation (in demonstrating and testing protocols, for example) could occur. (8). the nbs and dod should collaborate from the outset in the development of new protocols for use as federal standards. this will ensure early agreement on functions, features, and services of the protocols under development. the nbs should present the developing work early to the iso standardization activities to expedite convergence on internationally acceptable standards. such collaboration could help ensure that future protocol standards will be developed in a single, coordinated process that results in a single standard accommodating both dod, other federal agencies, and commercial needs. (9). dod and nbs should develop additions to protocol specifications to support preemption of limited resources by highprecedence users. such capabilities are needed during highload situations such as might develop during wartime or other crisis situations. they are not yet part of either the tcp or tp4 specifications or existing implementations. this should be an example of the sort of collaboration mentioned in detailed recommendations 7 and 8. this is important to avoid possible incompatibilities between ferent implementations of the same specification as discussed in section iii. it is likely that vendors would welcome guidance on how to deal with open areas of the specifications, and early action by dod could result in their mandated subset becoming the de facto standard for most commercial implementations as well, with consequent benefits to dod. this is a good area for cooperation between dod and nbs. additional considerations transition plan this section describes the major elements of a transition plan from use of tcp to use of tp4 in dod systems. the plan will vary depending on the option chosen. both option 1 and option 2 share a number of common elements that are discussed first, including development of a milspec, protocoltesting facilities, and transition support equipment. if option 2 is followed, a demonstration of tp4 must also be undertaken. milspec. as noted in recommendation 1, several open areas and options in the iso tp4 must be specified in order to have complete and compatible protocol implementations. completion of this specification by the dod should be a top priority 64transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protocoltesting facilities. as noted in recommendation 3, test facilities for protocol implementations are essential. under option 1, this facility should serve primarily to validate implementations of both old and new protocol sets. if option 2 is followed, the facility should initially focus on demonstrating the suitability of the new protocols for use in a military environment as rapidly as possible, and provide for testing of commercially supplied protocol implementations. for validation purposes, the nbs protocoltesting facility developed for iso protocols should serve as a good basis, but extensions to deal with any dodspecific options for the iso protocols, performance, and 000 protocols would be necessary. the 000 has stated that such a program has been started. transition equipment. in any transition plan it must be assumed that thearge body of systems with existing tcp implementations will take a substantial period of time to switch completely to the use of the iso protocols. some networks will include many different communities sharing a common communications backbone. members of one community communicate primarily among themselves, but occasionally outside their community. while members of one community are likely to change over as a group, different communities will change to use the new protocols at different times. hence an interim period must be anticipated when some systems are using the old protocols and others, the new protocols. the transition plan must provide some means of allowing interaction between old and new systems where required during this period. toward this end, a number of relay hosts may need to be developed that support both old and new protocols. these will allow automaticstaged forwarding of electronic mail between old and new systems and manually set up file transfer or remote terminal access via the performance through these relays will not be as good as with direct connections, but the relays should provide an adequate level of service for occasional interactions among different communities of the internet system. when more frequent interaction is anticipated and better service is needed, major service hosts should support both old and new protocol sets concurrently so they can provide service directly without requiring the use of relays. such service hosts include widely used timesharing machines, file servers, and special servers such as network information centers, network operations centers, and administrator machines ing mailboxes of network administrators, for example). some dual col servers may also act as relays where the load of both functions can be supported. terminal concentrators for general use must also support both protocol sets so that connections to both old and new hosts can be made directly. 65transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gateways must support both old and new ips so hosts using either one may send internet traffic. this requirement could be relaxed in the case of entire networks that will switch over simultaneously and hence will only need one type of ip traffic. gateways should not have to translate between old and new ipsit will be assumed that both source and destination hosts are using the same protocols or going through an explicit intermediate host. this latter point requires some elaboration. if one type of ip packet arrives at a destination host or that only handles the other type, it must be discarded. it would be good if, in addition, a suitable icmp error packet could be returned in the unsupported protocol so it would be meaningful to the source. to avoid this situation the internethost name table maintained by the network information center should indicate which protocol(s) each host supports. then when a source host looks up the address of a destination, it will also determine which type protocol to use or if a is required. demonstration plan if option 2 is followed, a major demonstration of the iso protocols in a military environment must be undertaken. any such demonstration should proceed by stages beginning with the implementation of tp4 in one network.15 then the demonstration would be extended to include netting (still with dod ip) to validate the suitability of tp4 as a replacement for tcp. the demonstration would then be further extended to employ the iso ip in place of dod ip. standalone tp4 network demonstration. the first stage of any transition plan must be to establish a demonstration network or work using tp4 in place of tcp under existing higherlevel protocols. this step will require selection of a suitable network (or subnetwork), procurement of tp4 implementations for hosts and terminal access trollers on that network, and modification of higherlevel protocols to use tp4. the demonstration should include sufficient use of real applications to test the protocols in an operational environment. to limit the amount of change attempted at one time, the dod ip be retained and used under tp4. alternatively, if iso ip development status seems to warrant it, iso ip may be installed along with tp4. lsfor the remainder of this chapter, the use of tcp and tp4 to include their respective ips will no longer hold. the four entitiestransmission control protocol (tcp) and its internet protocol (dod ip) and the transport protocol (tp4) and its internetwork protocol (iso ip)will be treated individually. 66transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the latter case, all tp4 hosts would be on the same network so that ip will only be used between hosts and no will be involved and no gateway modifications will be needed. the hosts involved could be dedicated to the demonstration and hence only support tp4 and only be able to interact with other demonstration network hosts or be concurrently supporting tcp and dod ip for operational traffic to other łnormalł hosts. in the latter case, no forwarding or relaying of traffic by hosts between normal and iso logical networks would be allowed or performed (the demonstration network would be logically closed). standalone tp4 internet demonstration. the next step would be to expand the demonstration to include more than one network (at least logically) and hence involve gateways. if only tp4 is involved, this is a simple extension to test tp4 over longer internet paths with more variable performance. if iso ip is also being tested at the same time, modification of the gateways involved will also be required as indicated in the next section. standalone iso ip demonstration. once tp4 has been tested, introduction of the iso ip to replace dod ip may commence. in addition to simply replacing one ip with the other in hosts and this will require modification of the gateways to perform icmp and ggp on top of the iso ip. these gateways could either be dedicated to the demonstration and hence have only iso ip, or could be concurrently supporting normal tional traffic via dod ip. in the latter case, once again, no forwarding of traffic between iso demonstration internet and normal systems would be allowed. at the conclusion of these three steps, the iso tp4 and ip could be deemed to have demonstrated their basic functional suitability in a military environment. the transition support equipment described above should have been developed in parallel, providing the capability to smoothly and successfully switch operational systems using the old protocols to use of the new protocols. switchover of user systems once the above preparations have been made and the demonstration completed, if option 2 is being followed, the switchover of user systems can commence. each network or community within a network should be able to switch at its convenience and maintain the ability to interact with other systems. the user systems will not be required to support tional use of both protocol sets simultaneously at any time unless they wish to do so for their own reliability purposes. 67transport protocols for department of defense data networks: report to the department of defense and the national bureau of standardscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.switchover of user systems also requires a personneltraining effort. while earlier steps involved a relatively small number of specialists and support staff at major sites, this step will affect all user sites, and their network support staff must be trained in the new procedures. once switchover of all systems to the new protocol set is complete, support for the old protocols by tacs, service hosts, and gateways can be removed. lessons learned from the arpanet ncpłtołtcp transition the following points summarize some important lessons learned during the arpanet transition from ncp to tcp.l6 conversion of tacs and service hosts to support both protocols before the transition of user hosts starts is essential. relay capabilities were heavily used for mail, but used little for other purposes. the network information center was not ready to support the new protocols and this caused problems in distributing the host name table. there were performance problems that required ful analysis and parameter tuning after the transition. these were unavoidable because no service host had been stressed prior to the switchover, with a full user load over a long time period using the new protocols. 16for additional information, see arpanet request for comments: ncp/tcp transition plan, j. postel, (menlo park, california: sri international telecommunications sciences center, november 1981). 68