detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/20300research on speaker verification: report of working group 5328 pages | 8.5 x 10 | paperbackisbn 9780309340786 | doi 10.17226/20300committee on hearing, bioacoustics, and biomechanics; office of naval research;national research councilresearch on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on speaker verification: report of working group 53copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.