detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/2122private lives and public policies: confidentiality andaccessibility of government statistics288 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309047432 | doi 10.17226/2122george t. duncan, thomas b. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, editors; panel onconfidentiality and data access, national research councilprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.private lives andpublic policiesconfidentiality and accessibility of governmentstatisticsgeorge t. duncan, thomas b. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf,editorspanel on confidentiality and data accesscommittee on national statisticscommission on behavioral and social sciences and educationnational research counciland thesocial science research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1993iprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington,  d.c. 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.funding for this project was provided by the national science foundation, the bureau of thecensus of the u.s. department of commerce, the bureau of labor statistics of the u.s. departmentof labor, the internal revenue service statistics of income division of the u.s. department oftreasury, the national institute on aging of the u.s. department of health and human services,the national center for education statistics of the u.s. department of education, and, through theirgeneral contributions to the work of the committee on national statistics, several other federalagencies.library of congress cataloginginpublication datapanel on confidentiality and data access (u.s.)private lives and public policies : confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics / panel on confidentiality and data access [of the] committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education, national researchcouncil and the social science research council.p. cm.includes bibliographical references and index.isbn 03090474391. privacy, right ofšunited states. 2. public recordsšunited statesšaccess control. 3.united statesšstatistical services. i. national research council (u.s.). committee on nationalstatistics. ii. social science research council (u.s.) iii. title.jc596.2.u5p36 1993323.44'8dc20 9331312cipcopyright 1993 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panel on confidentiality and data accessgeorge t. duncan (chair) h. john heinz iii school of public policy andmanagement, carnegie mellon universityjames t. bonnen, department of agricultural economics, michigan stateuniversityjoe s. cecil, research division, federal judicial centermartin h. david, department of economics, university of wisconsinruth r. faden, department of health policy and management, the johnshopkins universitydavid h. flaherty, social science centre, the university of westernontario, london, ontario, canadaf. thomas juster, survey research center, university of michigangary t. marx, department of sociology, university of colorado at boulderwilliam m. mason, department of sociology, university of california, losangelesdonald b. rubin, department of statistics, harvard universityeleanor singer, center for the social sciences, columbia universitywilliam h. williams, department of mathematics and statistics, huntercollegevirginia a. de wolf, study director thomas b. jabine, consultant wlodzimierz okrasa, staff liaison, social science research councilrobert w. pearson, staff liaison, social science research councildavid l. szanton, staff liaison, social science research councilmichele l. conrad, senior project assistant iiiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.social science research councilmembers, board and committee on problemsand policy 1993œ1994robert m. coen (chair, board), department of economics, northwesternuniversitypaul b. baltes, max planck institute for human development andeducation, berlin, germanyrobert bates, department of government, harvard universitylawrence d. bobo, department of sociology, university of california, losangeleswilliam cronon, department of history, university of wisconsinalbert fishlow, international and area studies, university of california,berkeleybarbara heyns, department of sociology, new york universitynagayo homma, american studies, tokyo woman's christian universityelizabeth jelin, centro de estudios de estado y sociedad (cedes),buenos aires, argentinajoel sherzer, department of anthropology, university of texas, austinburton h. singer (chair, committee on problems and policy), departmentof epidemiology and public health, yale universitymarta tienda, population research center, university of chicagokenneth w. wachter, department of demography, university ofcalifornia, berkeleydavid ward, interim chancellor and provost, university of wisconsinannette b. weiner, department of anthropology, new york universitybrackette f. williams, african american studies program, universityof arizonarobert b. zajonc, maison des sciences de l'homme, paris, francedavid featherman, president ivprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statistics 19921993burton h. singer (chair), department of epidemiology and public health,yale universitynorman m. bradburn (vice chair), national opinion research center,university of chicagomartin h. david, department of economics, university of wisconsinnoreen goldman, office of population research, princeton universitylouis gordon, department of mathematics, university of southerncaliforniajohn f. geweke, department of economics, university of minnesota,minneapolisjoel b. greenhouse, department of statistics, carnegie mellon universityeric hanushek, department of economics, university of rochesterrobert m. hauser, department of sociology, university of wisconsinjanet l. norwood, the urban institute, washington, d.c.dorothy p. rice, department of social and behavioral sciences, school ofnursing, university of california, san franciscojohn e. rolph, the rand corporation, santa monica, californiakeith rust, westat, inc., rockville, marylanddaniel l. solomon, department of statistics, north carolina stateuniversitymiron l. straf, director vprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthe panel on confidentiality and data access is grateful to the manyorganizations and individuals who contributed to its work.support for the study was provided by the national science foundation, thebureau of the census of the u.s. department of commerce, the bureau of laborstatistics of the u.s. department of labor, the internal revenue servicestatistics of income division of the u.s. department of treasury, the nationalinstitute on aging of the u.s. department of health and human services, thenational center for education statistics of the u.s. department of education,and, through their general contributions to the work of the committee onnational statistics, several other federal agencies. we also thank the nationalhighway traffic safety administration of the u.s. department of tansportationfor granting time, through the intergovernmental personnel act, for virginia a.de wolf to serve as the panel's study director.we thank the many federal government officials who gave generously oftheir time to attend panel meetings, provide documentation necessary for thepanel's work, and answer our many questions: they provided an invaluable senseof the structure and needs of the federal statistical system. we also appreciate thehelp of researchers, privacy advocates, and others who providedacknowledgmentsviiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.useful insights into nongovernment perspectives on data confidentiality andaccessibility issues.we are grateful to the committee on national statistics (cnstat) and thesocial science research council (ssrc) for their efforts in developing andcollaborating on this study. without the guidance and encouragement of cnstatdirector miron straf, ssrc president david featherman, and former ssrc staffassociate robert pearson, the work of this panel would not have been possible.we also thank david szanton and wlodzimierz okrasa, who ably maintainedssrc's active role in the study after the departure of robert pearson.we thank the participants and chairs of two workshops that preceded thepanel's formation for their contribution to our work. we thank richard suzmanand other staff of the national institute on aging, as well as staff of the censusbureau and the national center for health statistics for their support of theworkshop on the longitudinal retirement history, held in september 1987. wethank charles dickens, former head of the surveys and analysis section, andother staff of the national science foundation for their support of the workshopon confidentiality of and access to doctorate records, held in november 1988.we also thank the u.s. department of education, the national endowment forthe humanities, the national institutes of health of the u.s. department ofhealth and human services, the u.s. department of agriculture, the u.s.department of energy, the office of scientific and engineering personnel of thenational research council, and their staffs for their cooperation in makingpossible the workshop on confidentiality of and access to doctorate records.both of the workshops identified important issues for the panel.we also thank the participants and chair of the workshop on confidentialityof and access to national center for education statistics data, and we thank thenational center for education statistics for its support of the workshop. we thankthe participants of the conference on disclosure limitation approaches and dataaccess. both of these panel sponsored activities outlined issues for the panel'sconsideration.jean shirhall helped to strengthen the presentation of our report through herskillful editing; we thank her for her efforts. we are indebted to eugeniagrohman, associate director for reports, commission on behavioral and socialsciences and education, for her role in guiding our report through the review andpublication process.we especially thank the panel's staff. they not only functionedacknowledgmentsviiiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as a harmonious team in drawing out the best in the panel members, but alsocontributed individually in noteworthy ways. virginia a. de wolf, study director,was especially helpful in contributing her organizational talents and energies tothe conference, meetings, and workshop that the panel sponsored. thomas b.jabine, consultant, contributed his expository skill, experience with statisticalagencies, and uncommon wisdom. robert h. mugge, consultant, helped with theanalysis of background materials submitted by statistical agencies and prepared auseful background paper on informed consent and notification statements used byfederal statistical agencies. michele l. conrad, senior project assistant, thepanel's communication center, ensured that the project functioned both efficientlyand effectively.finally, i thank the panel members, who gave generously of their time andwisdom to the deliberations of the panel and the production of this report. it hasbeen rewarding to work with such a distinguished group of people.george t. duncan, chairpanel on confidentiality and data accessacknowledgmentsixprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsxprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 principles and problems 15 the tension between private lives and public policies, 15 study goals and scope, 17 how does the federal statistical system function?, 20 key definitions, 22 what principles should guide statistical agencies?, 25 the special role of federal statistical agencies, 29 date access in a democratic society, 31 problems in ensuring confidentiality and data access, 33 structure of the report, 42 notes, 432 the framework of study 45 evolution of the federal statistical system, 45 earlier studies of privacy, confidentiality, and data access, 49 what has changed to warrant a new study?, 51 responsibilities of federal statistical agencies, 56 notes, 58contentsxiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3 data subjects 61 introduction, 61 informed consent and notification, 63 research related to confidentiality and data access, 80 public information activities of statistical agencies and organizations, 864 data users 91 basic concepts related to data access, 92 expectations of data users, 93 legal and ethical responsibilities of data users, 1005 legislation 109 general regulation of federal statistical and research records, 111 agencyspecific legislation, 117 findings and recommendations, 132 notes, 1396 technical and administrative procedures 141 introduction, 141 restricted data: statistical techniques to protect confidentiality, 143 restricted access: administrative procedures to protect confidentiality, 157 notes, 1787 statistical data on organizations 181 introduction, 181 the energy information administration vs. the department ofjustice: a further erosion of functional separation, 185 inability to share business lists: an embarrassment to the federal statistical system, 190 waivers: whose information is it?, 196 user access: getting a better return on investments in economic statistics, 199contentsxiiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 managing confidentiality and data access functions 203 management of confidentiality and data access questions in thefederal statistical system, 204 alternative models for managing confidentiality and dataaccess questions: a look at other countries, 210 u.s. proposals for an independent privacy protection board, 214 findings and recommendations, 215 recommendations 219 references 229 appendices a study procedures 243b biographical sketches 259 index 266contentsxiiiprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxivprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summarythe panel on confidentiality and data access was charged by thecommittee on national statistics and the social science research council withdeveloping recommendations that could aid federal statistical agencies in theirstewardship of data for policy decisions and research. three areas were ofparamount concern in the panel's deliberations: protecting the interests of datasubjects through procedures that ensure privacy and confidentiality, enhancingpublic confidence in the integrity of statistical and research data, and facilitatingthe responsible dissemination of data to users.study goals and scopedeciding on the exact scope of our investigation was not easy, for thefederal statistical system is complex and far reaching, and its boundaries are notclearly defined. more than 70 federal agencies have a role in collecting data fromindividuals, households, farms, businesses, and governmental bodies anddisseminating those data for a variety of statistical purposes. federal statisticalactivities include the development and dissemination of large, generalpurposedata sets based on censuses, surveys, and administrative records. they alsoinclude the collection and analysis of personal data in experimental research withhuman subjects. a few federalexecutive summary1private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical agencies conduct general or multipurpose programs (e.g., the bureau ofthe census), but many others conduct specialized programs or activities (e.g., thebureau of labor statistics and the national center for education statistics). inaddition, some basically programmatic agencies conduct some statisticalactivities (e.g., the federal aviation administration and the internal revenueservice). finally, the data subjects and units of analysis for statistical programsinclude persons and organizations, but when the concepts of privacy andconfidentiality are applied to organizations, they have quite different meaningsthan they do when applied to persons.given the complexity of the federal statistical system, designing an idealconfiguration to address confidentiality and data access issues throughout thesystem, or even in any one federal statistical agency, was too daunting for thispanel. instead, we sought to contribute to a long tradition in the statisticalcommunity of periodically reconsidering current institutional structures andpractices. fundamentally, we seek to spur this ongoing process by articulatingand applying three tenets of an ethic of information in a free society: democraticaccountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. webelieve this attention to underlying principles can have a more beneficial andlasting impact than would an attempt to provide detailed recommendations formicromanagement of agency procedures for confidentiality and data access.although we recognize the inherent tension between data protection anddata access we do not advocate a specific tradeoff between the two. thedynamics of such a tradeoff would be complicated and heavily influenced by themissions and operational environments of individual agencies, so that a singlesolution would not work for every agency. nevertheless, we see someopportunities to enhance data access without decreasing data protection, andsome opportunities to increase data protection without diminishing data access.guiding principlesthe panel's analysis and recommendations are based on an ethic ofinformation formed of the three principles referred to above: democraticaccountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. theethical guidance these principles provide for the structure and practice ofstatistical agencies is often reinforcing, but not always harmonious.executive summary2private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democratic accountabilityfunctionally, democratic accountability recognizes the responsibilities ofthose who serve on behalf of others. it requires that the public have access tocomprehensive information on the effectiveness of government policies.government statistical agencies play a pivotal role in ensuring democraticaccountability by obtaining, protecting, and disseminating the data that allow theaccurate assessment of the influence of government policies on the public's wellbeing. furthermore, they themselves are accountable to the public for two keyfunctions in this process: (1) protecting the interests of data subjects throughprocedures that ensure appropriate standards of privacy and confidentiality and(2) facilitating the responsible dissemination of data to users.constitutional empowermentconstitutional empowerment refers to the capability of citizens to makeinformed decisions about political, economic, and social questions. in the unitedstates, constitutional theory emphasizes that ultimate power should reside in thepeople. in order to advance the common welfare, certain specific powers aredelegated to a representative government (article x, u.s. constitution).constitutional practice emphasizes restraints on executive excess and broadaccess to the political process through the direct election of representatives aswell as through separation and balance of power.individual autonomyindividual autonomy refers to the capacity of members of society to functionas individuals, uncoerced and with privacy. protection of individual autonomy is afundamental attribute of a democracy. if excessive surveillance is used to builddata bases, if data are unwittingly dispersed, or if those who capture data foradministrative purposes make that information available in personally identifiableform, individual autonomy is compromised.key findings and recommendationsmost of the panel's findings and recommendations can be grouped into fivecategories, each of which represents a key aspect of the tradeoffs betweenconfidentiality and data access. in this sectionexecutive summary3private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.we provide a brief summary of the major problems associated with each categoryand identify the broad principles underlying the solutions we suggest in therecommendations. we also refer to additional recommendations in the body ofthe report that augment the recommendations presented here. at the end of thesection we present three crosscutting recommendations bearing on the generalmanagement of confidentiality and data access functions in federal statisticalagencies. (the numbering of the recommendations below follows that of the fullreport.)statutory protection against mandatorydisclosure of individually identifiable datafor federal statistical agencies, pertinent statutes determine who can haveaccess to individually identifiable information collected for statistical andresearch purposes, the conditions of access, and the penalties for unlawful use anddisclosure of the information. statutes also determine who can have access toadministrative records for statistical and research purposes.two kinds of legislation provide the framework for federal policies andpractices with respect to confidentiality and data access: governmentwide andagencyspecific legislation. in the former category, the privacy act of 1974 (p.l.93œ579) is most important, and the freedom of information act of 1966 (p.l.89œ487) and the paperwork reduction act of 1980 (p.l. 96œ511) are alsorelevant. in the latter category, several federal statistical agencies have laws thatfurther specify the confidentiality and data access policies they must follow (e.g.,the bureau of the census and the national center for health statistics). theprocedures of some agencies, however, are not backed by statutory provisions.instead, they must rely on persuasion, commonlaw tradition, and other means toprotect identifiable statistical records from mandatory disclosure fornonstatistical uses. but there is no guarantee that such means will always besuccessful.the basic distinction between statistical and administrative data isimportant. to carry out their basic functions, government agencies collectenormous amounts of data, most of which are used directly for variousadministrative purposes. those data collected exclusively for statistical andresearch purposes form a tiny fraction of the total. data collected foradministrative purposes are often useful and appropriate for statistical purposes,as when patterns of food stamp applications are used to trace the effectsexecutive summary4private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of program changes. in contrast, data collected for research and statisticalpurposes are inappropriate for administrative uses.these ideas are summarized in the concept of functional separation: datacollected for research or statistical purposes should not be made available foradministrative action about a particular data subject. this concept was enunciatedin a recommendation of the privacy protection study commission (1977a:574):that the congress provide by statute that no record or information containedtherein collected or maintained for a research or statistical purpose underfederal authority or with federal funds may be used in individually identifiableform to make any decision or take any action directly affecting the individual towhom the record pertains, except within the context of the research plan orprotocol, or with the specific authorization of such individual.in part to ensure that statistical data are not used for administrativepurposes, agencies give data providers pledges of confidentiality, both explicitand implicit. unless those pledges are backed by legal authority, however, theyprovide an inadequate shield against administrative uses.recommendation 5.1 [parts a and b] statistical records across all federalagencies should be governed by a consistent set of statutes and regulationsmeeting standards for the maintenance of such records, including the followingfeatures of fair statistical information practices:(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle offunctional separation as defined by the privacy protection studycommission(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data.recommendation 7.2 legislation that authorizes and requires protection ofthe confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for allfederal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federalstatistical agencies that may be created.the panel believes that the principle of functional separation should applyequally to data on persons and data on organizations (recommendation 7.1). inaddition, the panel recognizes that there may have to be some exceptions to theprinciple of functional separation, but it stresses that data providers participatingin statisticalexecutive summary5private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.surveys and censuses must be told of any planned or potential nonstatistical usesof the data they provide (see recommendation 3.2 below).barriers to data sharing within governmentsome of the laws that govern the confidentiality of statistical data prohibitor severely limit interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes. laws thatcontrol access to administrative records, such as reports of earnings covered bysocial security, restrict their use for statistical purposes. these barriers to datasharing for statistical purposes have led to costly duplication of effort andexcessive burden on individuals and organizations who are asked to supplyinformation. they have also made it difficult or impossible to develop data setsneeded for policy analysis on topics of major interest to the public.not all barriers to data sharing are necessarily statutory, however. withinagencies, organizational inertia and excessive concern for bureaucratic turf canalso impede data sharing.recommendation 4.1 greater opportunities should be available for sharingof explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies forstatistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records canbe properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations aboutindividual data subjects. greater access should be permitted to key statistical andadministrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and otherstatistical uses. additional data sharing should only be undertaken in thoseinstances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel'srecommendations for informed consent or notification (see recommendation 3.2below).in part (f) of recommendation 5.1 (parts (a) and (b) appear above), thepanel further recommends that ''a provision that permits data sharing forstatistical purposes under controlled conditions" be included in the "consistent setof statutes and regulations" governing the maintenance of federal statisticalrecords. the panel also believes interagency sharing of data for statisticalpurposes should include the sharing of lists of businesses by federal and stateagencies (recommendation 7.4).executive summary6private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to data by nongovernment userssome data users complain that federal statistical agencies are not alwaysadequately responsive to their requests for access to data. others appear to bedissuaded from attempting to use federal statistical data because of perceptions ofdifficulty of access.because of legitimate concerns about the possibility of disclosure ofindividual information, statistical agencies have limited the amount of detaileddata provided to nongovernment users in tabulations and publicuse microdatafiles. this lack of detail restricts the ability of users to do analyses that couldcontribute to the understanding of significant economic, social, and healthproblems. some agencies have developed mechanisms for providing access tomore detailed information on a restricted basis (e.g., onsite access at an agencyoffice, licensing agreements, remote online access for registered users, datarelease in encrypted cdrom format), but current arrangements do not meet alllegitimate needs.recommendation 6.4 statistical agencies should continue widespreadrelease, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detailthan currently provided.recommendation 4.2 federal statistical agencies should seek to improve theaccess of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and thedevelopment and greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of testedadministrative procedures.the panel believes that, through a combination of legislation andadministrative procedures, this can be done without sacrificing confidentialityprotections for data subjects and data providers.recommendation 5.3 there should be legal sanctions for all users, bothexternal users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain theconfidentiality of data.under appropriate safeguards, statistical agencies should experiment withinnovative ways of providing restricted access to data (recommendation 6.6). inaddition, federal statistical agencies that collect data on organizations shouldmake a special effort to make that data more accessible to users(recommendation 7.7).the panel notes that it is difficult to define the problems thatexecutive summary7private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inhibit data access without better access to information on the numbers and typesof user requests that are being denied for confidentiality reasons. thus, federalstatistical agencies should establish systematic procedures for capturing andreviewing such information (recommendation 4.3).privacy concerns and decliningcooperation in surveysmany citizens believe increasingly and with some justification that theirprivacy is being eroded by organizations that develop and control the use of largedata bases that contain detailed information about them. they see the linkage ofdata from different sources as a particular threat. for these and other reasons,statistical agencies are finding it more difficult to persuade persons andorganizations to participate in statistical surveys, whether voluntary ormandatory.ethics and law demand that data providers be told about the conditionsunder which they are asked to supply information that will be used for statisticaland research purposes. if participation is voluntary, data collectors must let dataproviders know this and give them enough information to make an informeddecision about whether to provide the information requested.recommendation 3.2 basic information given to all data providers requestedto participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all privacy actrequirements. similar information is recommended for data onorganizations, except that the requirement to inform providers aboutroutine uses (as defined by the privacy act) is not applicable.(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,including the expected time required to provide the data (arequirement of the office of management and budget) and, ifapplicable, the nature of sensitive topics included in the survey andplans for possible followup interviews of some or all respondents.(c) no false or misleading statements. for example, a statement thatimplies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.(d) information about any planned or potential nonstatistical uses of theinformation to be provided. thereexecutive summary8private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should be a clear statement of the level of confidentiality protectionthat can be legally ensured.(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages forstatistical or research purposes. for persons, this notification willusually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject'ssocial security number.(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of thedata for statistical or research purposes.(g) information about the length of time for which the information willbe retained in identifiable form.the goal should be to give each data provider as much information as isnecessary to make his or her consent as informed as he or she wishes it to be. amultistaged procedure is recommended: those who want more informationshould have the opportunity to obtain it directly from the interviewer or by othermeans (recommendation 3.1).in addition, statistical agencies need to "know their respondents." how dothey interpret concepts like privacy, confidentiality, disclosure, data sharing, andstatistical purposes? do they understand the informed consent and notificationstatements they are given? what information about themselves do they considerto be most sensitive? how are their decisions on survey participation influencedby different formats and modes of presentation? how do their reactions vary byraceethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status?recommendation 3.4 statistical agencies should undertake and supportcontinuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitorthe views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, responseburden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, andrelated issues.the panel believes that the risks of major or deliberate violations of privacyor confidentiality are extremely low in the federal statistical system. the risks aresomewhat higher for federal administrative records, and probably highest of allfor private sector record systems. because the public does not always distinguishamong these different types of records, there is a danger that violations notinvolving statistical data bases can engender publicexecutive summary9private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indignation and have damaging spillover effects on federal statistical programs.thus, the panel further recommends that federal statistical agencies developsystematic public information activities, be prepared to deal quickly and candidlywith actual or perceived violations of pledges of confidentiality, and as part of thecommunication process, work closely with appropriate advocacy groups(recommendations 3.5œ3.7).statistical procedures to protectconfidentialitytechnological advances in computers and communications offeropportunities and threats: opportunities to process, access, and analyze large datasets more efficiently and threats of unauthorized access to individuallyidentifiable data. statistical disclosure limitation procedures (e.g., cellsuppression, random error, topcoding) are used to transform data to limit the riskof disclosure. use of such a procedure is called masking the data, because it isintended to hide personal characteristics of data subjects. some statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques are designed for data accessed as tables, andsome are designed for data accessed as records of individual data subjects(microdata).many federal statistical agencies have standards, guidelines, or formalreview mechanisms that are designed to ensure that (1) adequate analyses ofdisclosure risk are performed and (2) appropriate statistical disclosure limitationtechniques are applied prior to release of tables and publicuse microdata files.those standards and guidelines, however, vary widely in their specificity: somecontain only one or two simple rules; others are much more detailed. thisvariation across agencies in the comprehensiveness of disclosure review has littlejustification in terms of agency mission. further, unfulfilled opportunities existfor agencies to work together and learn from one another, perhaps poolingresources to investigate the strengths and weaknesses of various statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques.every federal statistical agency should develop standards and procedures forthe application of effective statistical disclosure limitation techniques to all formsof data dissemination, taking advantage of relevant features of standards andprocedures that have worked well for other agencies. particular care should betaken in the review of proposals for the release of new publicuse microdata files.in choosing among different disclosure limitation techniques, agencies shouldtake account of the level of protectionexecutive summary10private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.provided and the effects on the ability of users to draw valid inferences.based on its findings, the panel endorses the federal committee onstatistical methodology's recommendation that "all federal agencies releasingstatistical information, whether in tabular or microdata form, should formulateand apply policies and procedures designed to avoid unacceptabledisclosures" (report on statistical disclosure  and disclosureavoidancetechniques, statistical policy working paper 2, 1978:41œ42, recommendationb1). since this panel convened, the federal statistical agencies have initiatedsome activities consonant with the above recommendation. in particular, in 1991the office of management and budget's statistical policy office took the lead inorganizing an interagency committee to coordinate research on statisticaldisclosure analysis.recommendation 6.1 the office of management and budget's statisticalpolicy office should continue to coordinate research work on statisticaldisclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadlyamong statistical agencies. major statistical agencies should actively encourageand participate in scholarly statistical research in this area. other agencies shouldkeep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques.statistical disclosure limitation methods can hide or distort relations amongstudy variables and result in analyses that are incomplete or misleading. further,data masked by some disclosure limitation methods can only be analyzedaccurately by researchers who are highly sophisticated methodologically.recommendation 6.2 statistical agencies should determine the impact onstatistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. they should be surethat the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typicalresearchers. if the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statisticalsoftware, the agency should make appropriate consulting and softwareavailable.the panel believes that no one procedure can be developed for all statisticalagencies. furthermore, confidentiality laws governingexecutive summary11private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.particular agencies differ, as do the types of data collected and the needs of datausers. thus, the panel also endorses the following recommendations contained instatistical policy working paper 2:in formulating disclosureavoidance policies, agencies should give particularattention to the sensitivity of different data items–. agencies should avoidframing regulations and policies which define unacceptable statistical disclosurein unnecessarily broad or absolute terms. agencies should apply a test ofreasonableness, i.e., releases should be made in such a way that it is reasonablycertain that no information about a specific individual will be disclosed in amanner that can harm that individual (p. 42, part of recommendation b1).given the potential difficulties that certain statistical disclosure limitationtechniques can cause for analysts, it is important that federal statistical agenciesinvolve data users in selecting such procedures. in the past, agency staffs haveoften been the sole determiners of which statistical disclosure limitationtechniques are to be used prior to releasing tables and microdata files.recommendation 6.3 each statistical agency should actively involve datausers from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques aredeveloped and applied to data.crosscutting recommendationsthree recommendations of the panel refer to the general management of theconfidentiality and data access functions of federal statistical agencies.recommendation 8.1 each federal statistical agency should review itsstaffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, withparticular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities forthese functions and the background and experience needed for persons whoexercise these responsibilities.recommendation 8.2 statistical agencies should take steps to provide stafftraining in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,confidentiality laws and policies, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, andrelated topics.executive summary12private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 8.5 the panel supports the general concept of anindependent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhancedprotection for all federal data about persons and responsible data disseminationfor research and statistical purposes. any such advisory body should promotethe principle of functional separation and have professional staff with expertisein privacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research usesof federal data.executive summary13private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary14private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1principles and problemsprivacy is the most comprehensive of all rights and the right most  cherished by citizens of afree nation.justice louis brandeis olmstead v. united states, 1928a people who mean to be their own governors, must arm themselves  with the power towhich knowledge gives.james madison, 1822the tension between private lives and publicpoliciesprivate lives are requisite for a free society. to an extent unparalleled in thenation's history, however, private lives are being encroached on by organizationsseeking and disseminating information. in their stewardship of data collection anddata dissemination, federal statistical agencies have had a longstanding concernfor the privacy rights of their data providers, but they now face mountingdemands for privacy in the wake of such external developments as telemarketingthrough random digit dialing and computerized capture of data on everydayactivities, like supermarket purchases by credit card.in a free society, public policies come about through the actions of thepeople. those public policies influence individual lives at every stagešfinancingof prenatal care, state aid to school districts, job training and placement, lawenforcement, and determining retirement benefits. data provided by federalstatistical agencies, such as the bureau of justice statistics, the bureau of laborstatistics, the national center for education statistics, and the national centerfor health statistics, are the factual base needed for informed public discussionabout the direction and implementation of those policies. further, public policiesencompassprinciples and problems15private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not only government programs but all those activities that influence the generalwelfare, whether initiated by government, business, labor, or notforprofitorganizations. thus, the effective functioning of a free society requires broaddissemination of statistical information.juxtaposing the brandeis and madison quotations above reveals a basictension in the stewardship of federal statistical agencies. such agencies seek, onthe one hand, to ensure private lives for the citizenry. on the other hand, theyseek to provide the data on which public policies are based. yet, because ofconcerns about data confidentiality, there is a large unmet need for greater accessto data. data users, whether in federal agencies (including policy research units),state or local governments, academe, trade associations, businesses, marketresearch organizations, political interest groups, or the media, have persistentlyasked for increased access to data.how can federal statistical agencies serve data users better by providingmore access to useful data and at the same time serve data providers by betterensuring privacy and confidentiality? what principles must guide their actions?what are the key problems? because facts are the lifeblood of a free society,answers to these questions concern many peoplešnot just governmentstatisticians. in particular, they are of concern to data users and data providers.answers to fundamental questions of confidentiality and data access affectmany data users. included in this category are researchers (e.g., universityresearchers investigating the affordability of housing), policy analysts (e.g., staffof an educational policy group assessing the influence of federal student loans ondegree completion rates), and legislators and congressional staff (e.g., membersof the joint committee on taxation who are modeling the effects of proposedchanges in the tax code).answers to questions of confidentiality and data access also affect manydata providers. included in this category are individuals (e.g., those inhouseholds throughout the country who respond to decennial censuses),institutions (e.g., nursing homes that provide data to the national center forhealth statistics), and enterprises (e.g., car manufacturers that respond to theenergy information administration's manufacturing energy consumptionsurvey).in addition, many other individuals and groups are concerned with data useand data supply. included in this category are legislators (e.g., members of thehouse committee on government operations); lawyers (e.g., attorneys trying tobuild a class actionprinciples and problems16private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.case for medicaid clients turned out of nursing homes or representing a clientwhose research files on a project funded by the national institutes of health havebeen subpoenaed); journalists (e.g., a reporter writing about freedom ofinformation or privacy issues involving aids); and business executives, whosimultaneously are asked for data on their operations and are seeking informationon their business environment.finally, advocacy groups represent various positions on these issues. groupssuch as computer professionals for social responsibility are concerned withcomputerrelated privacy issues. and professional organizations such as theassociation for public data users are concerned with issues like access to healthdata on minority populations.study goals and scopethe federal statistical system is complex and far reaching. it encompassesmore than 70 federal agencies having a role in collecting data from individuals,households, farms, businesses, and governmental bodies and disseminating datafor statistical purposes. those statistical purposes include description, evaluation,and research. although it may collect data from individual respondents,administrative records, or organizations, a statistical agency does not do so inorder to take administrative, regulatory, or enforcement action toward a particularindividual or organization.1 indeed, it is not concerned with identifying therespondent with particular information, but rather with describing and inferringpatterns, trends, and relationships for groups of respondents (national researchcouncil, 1992b).the panel on confidentiality and data access was charged by thecommittee on national statistics and the social science research council withdeveloping recommendations that could aid federal statistical agencies in theirstewardship of data for policy decisions and research. three areas were ofparamount concern in our deliberations: protecting the interests of data subjectsthrough procedures that ensure privacy and confidentiality, enhancing publicconfidence in the integrity of statistical and research data, and facilitating theresponsible dissemination of data to users.deciding on the exact scope of our investigation was not easy, for theboundaries of federal statistical activities are not clearly defined. federalstatistical activities include the development and dissemination of large, generalpurpose data sets based on censuses, surveys, and administrative records. theyalso includeprinciples and problems17private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the collection and analysis of personal data in experimental research with humansubjects. a few federal statistical agencies conduct general or multipurposeprograms, but many others conduct specialized statistical programs or activities.in addition, some basically programmatic agencies, like the federal aviationadministration, the health care financing administration, and the internalrevenue service, conduct some statistical activities. moreover, many federallysupported statistical activities are carried out by contractors and grantees, andsome statistical activities depend heavily on federalstate cooperativearrangements of longstanding. finally, the data subjects and units of analysis forstatistical programs include persons and organizations, but when the concepts ofprivacy and confidentiality are applied to organizations, they have quite differentmeanings than they do when applied to persons.to make our task manageable, we decided to concentrate our attention onmajor federal statistical programs and to look beyond them only to the extent thatseemed necessary to provide adequate coverage of confidentiality and data accessquestions related to those programs. in addition, given the basic nature of theissues and our backgrounds and experience (see appendix b), we were morecomfortable dealing with our charge as it applied to personal, rather thanorganizational, data. nevertheless, input from statistical agencies and events thatoccurred during our deliberations made it clear that there are major issues relatingto data for organizations that cannot be ignored. accordingly, we lay out aframework for the treatment of data on organizations in chapter 7. we also referto organizations in other chapters, especially chapter 5, which deals withlegislation. we believe that confidentiality and data access questions fororganizations warrant more attention than they have received in the past and morethan we have been able to give. we hope that the federal statistical agencies andothers will pursue them through systematic studies.given the complexity of the federal statistical system, designing an idealconfiguration to address confidentiality and data access issues throughout thesystem, or even in any one federal statistical agency, is too daunting for thispanel. instead, we seek to contribute to a long tradition in the statisticalcommunity of periodically reconsidering current institutional structure andpractice. fundamentally, we seek to spur this ongoing process by articulating andapplying three tenets of an ethic of information in a free society: democraticaccountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. thesetenets are consistent with theprinciples and problems18private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethos of american society and are the basis for trustworthy operation of federalstatistical agencies. we believe that this attention to underlying principle canhave a more beneficial and lasting impact than would an attempt to providedetailed recommendations for micromanagement of agency confidentiality anddata access procedures.although we recognize the inherent tension between data protection anddata access, we do not advocate a specific tradeoff between the two. thedynamics of such a tradeoff would be complicated and heavily influenced by themissions and operational environments of individual agencies, so that a singlesolution would not work for every agency. nevertheless, we see someopportunities to enhance data access without decreasing data protection, andsome opportunities to increase data protection without diminishing data access.accordingly, society faces win/no loss situations, arguably because currentinstitutional arrangements are inadequate. to develop this theme and inductivelybuild a better understanding of the broad principles, we use as illustrationsparticular circumstances that individual agencies currently confront.many topics that fall under the rubric of societal concerns for effective,efficient, and ethical collection and use of information are largely outside thescope of this report. we are mindful of the burgeoning information industry in theprivate sector, including marketing firms and consumer credit bureaus. while wehave concerns about this industry's impact on individual privacy, those concernsare outside the scope of this report. nor do we address the paperwork and privacyburden imposed by government in administering its programs.directly within the scope of this report is the functioning of the federalstatistical system as it grapples with confidentiality and data access issues.specifically, we have a concern for how a federal statistical agency relates to itsthree diverse and overlapping constituencies: data providers, government itself,and data users.we direct this report to all concerned with confidentiality and data accessissues. we hope that the ideas and recommendations we put forth will stimulateconsideration of these critical issues by all concerned and make each interestedparty more aware of the legitimate concerns of the other parties. further, we hopethat this report will stimulate discussion of confidentiality and data access issuesacross levels of government and across geographical boundaries.principles and problems19private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how does the federal statistical systemfunction?the federal statistical system is a largely decentralized agglomeration ofagencies. each agency functions under the guidance of officials in a governmentdepartment, as the bureau of the census does in the department of commerceand the national center for education statistics does in the department ofeducation. the agencies operate with various legal authorizations to compile,analyze, and disseminate statistical data. according to the office of federalstatistical policy and standards (1978:413),the ultimate purpose of all federal statistical collection activities is to developstatistical material for use by government agencies, policymakers, and thepublic. the ultimate test of the federal statistical system is the availability ofrelevant information; therefore, the question of data access must continuallyreceive a high level of attention.identifying seven of the larger federal statistical agencies illustrates the reachof the system's activities: bureau of the census bureau of justice statistics bureau of labor statistics energy information administration national agricultural statistics service national center for education statistics national center for health statisticssome of these agencies have purposes that are not purely statistical. theenergy information administration (eia), for instance, is in some cases requiredto provide identifiable data in support of regulatory and program needs of thedepartment of energy.each of the existing federal statistical agencies was founded in response toneeds for data bearing on critical areas of public policy. a recent addition is thebureau of transportation statistics, which was established by congress in 1991to compile and analyze data related to such issues as the environmental impact ofmass transit, the factors affecting choice of transportation mode, and the nature ofvehicular accidents. congressional support has been voiced for the establishmentof specialized statistical agencies in other crucial policy areas, as well.in collecting data, as noted, the agencies of the federal statistical systemobtain data from individual respondents (e.g., the u.s. fish and wildlife service'ssurvey of fishing, hunting, andprinciples and problems20private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wildlife related recreation elicits data from outdoor enthusiasts on theirrecreational activities), households (e.g., the census bureau conducts theconsumer expenditures survey for the bureau of labor statistics), organizations(e.g., the national agricultural statistics service collects information from farmoperators on some 120 crops and 45 varieties of livestock), and governmentalsubunits (e.g., the census bureau collects data from state and localgovernments).in disseminating data, federal statistical agencies provide information to arange of clients. within the government, clients include researchers within thesame department (e.g., the national agricultural statistics service provides datato the economic research service in the department of agriculture), otherfederal agencies (e.g., the internal revenue service's statistics of incomedivision furnishes data to the bureau of economic analysis in the department ofcommerce), state and local governments (e.g., the national center for educationstatistics supplies data to the commonwealth of pennsylvania's department ofeducation), business firms (e.g., the national center for health statistics makesdata available to the kaiser permanente health maintenance organization),congress (e.g., the bureau of economic analysis calculates the gross domesticproduct, which informs the congressional budget office), and the executiveoffice of the president (e.g., the census bureau gives information on job seekingby the unemployed to the council of economic advisers). outside thegovernment, clients include the media (e.g., the new york times, september 23,1990:section 3, p. 11, reported on investment in farms using department ofagriculture figures), individual members of the public (e.g., the 1990 world almanac, which sold over 54 million copies, is replete with governmentstatistics), and academic researchers (e.g., babcock and engberg, 1990, usebureau of labor statistics data as a reference point for their survey of local labormarket conditions).with limited authority and resources, the office of management andbudget, through its statistical policy office, provides longrange planning forstatistical programs and coordinates statistical policy within the federalgovernment. the statistical policy office does not have direct administrativeresponsibility for federal statistical agencies, however.principles and problems21private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.key definitionsa lack of general agreement on terminology has caused some confusion indiscussions of the issues involved in data protection and data access. the panelfound the following definitions for certain key terms to be helpful. they are usedconsistently in this report.data subjects and data providersdata subjects are persons, households, or organizations for which data areobtained and presented in statistical form. the data subjects are not always thedata providers, however. one person in a household may respond to a surveyquestionnaire that asks for information about all members of that household. dataproviders are often called respondents. when respondents provide informationfor data subjects other than themselves, they are called proxy respondents.informational privacyprivacy has multiple definitions depending on what aspect of this broadconcept is being stressed. we take the following as our working definition:informational privacy encompasses an individual's freedom from excessiveintrusion in the quest for information and an individual's ability to choose theextent and circumstances under which his or her beliefs, behaviors, opinions, andattitudes will be shared with or withheld from others.confidentiality and data protectionconfidentiality refers broadly to a quality or condition accorded toinformation as an obligation not to transmit that information to an unauthorizedparty (national research council, 1991:289). this has implications that rangeover religious confessionals, national security, private business ''whistleblowing,"and disclosures of crimes. our concern is, more narrowly, with the promises,explicit or implicit, made to a data provider by a data gatherer regarding theextent to which the data provided will allow others to gain specific informationabout the data provider or data subject. confidentiality has meaning only whenthe promises made to a data provider can be delivered, that is, the dataprinciples and problems22private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gatherer must have the will, technical ability, and moral and legal authority toprotect the data.our definition of confidential data is consistent with the position of thepresident's commission on federal statistics (1971:222):[confidential should mean that dissemination] of data in a manner that wouldallow public identification of the respondent or would in any way be harmful tohim is prohibited and that the data are immune from legal process.data protection refers to the set of privacymotivated policies andprocedures that ensure minimal intrusion by data collection and maintenance ofdata confidentiality. the term is generally used in the context of protectingpersonal information (flaherty, 1989). unlike privacy, however, which is anindividual right, confidentiality is not restricted to data on individuals and is oftenextended to data on organizations.informed consent and notificationinformed consent and notification are related, but distinct, ethical and legalconcepts. from our perspective, informed consent refers to a person's agreementto allow personal data to be provided for research and statistical purposes.agreement is based on full exposure of the facts the person needs to make thedecision intelligently, including any risks involved and alternatives to providingthe data (derived from black et al., 1990:779). informed consent describes acondition appropriate only when data providers have a clear choice. they mustnot be, nor perceive themselves to be, subject to penalties for failure to providethe data sought.notification also involves a condition of data provision under full exposureof pertinent facts. unlike with informed consent, however, the elements of choiceand agreement are absent. notification is the more appropriate concept when dataprovision for stated purposes is mandatory, as it is in the decennial census ofpopulation.disclosuredisclosure relates to inappropriate attribution of information to a datasubject, whether an individual or an organization. disclosure occurs when a datasubject is identified from a released file (identity disclosure), sensitiveinformation about a data subjectprinciples and problems23private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is revealed through the released file (attribute disclosure), or the released datamake it possible to determine the value of some characteristic of an individualmore accurately than otherwise would have been possible (inferentialdisclosure).inferential disclosure is the most general of the types of disclosure. thedefinition above was suggested by dalenius (1977) and supported by statisticalpolicy working paper 2 (federal committee on statistical methodology,1978:41). underlying that support was the belief that it offers the best basis for(1) identifying all potential disclosures in connection with proposed releases, (2)deciding which of the potential disclosures are unacceptable, and (3) usingappropriate techniques to prevent unacceptable disclosures.administrative and statistical dataone purpose of data collection concerns a course of action that affects aparticular person or business. the purpose can be regulatory, administrative,legislative, or judicial. examples include tax audits of a person, couple, orcorporation; a criminal investigation into a report of arson; license renewal for aliquor store; and determination of welfare benefits. we refer to these purposesgenerically as administrative.another purpose of collecting data is to generate an aggregate description of agroup of persons or businesses. no direct action is taken for or against a specificindividual or business, although as a result of the information, policy changesbased on such information could result in benefits or costs to persons orbusinesses. examples include development of a formula for determining whichtax returns should be audited, investigating geographical patterns of arson in alarge city, and researching the relationship between the incidence of liquor lawviolations by stores and store characteristics or how the duration of welfarebenefits varies with the educational level of the recipient. we refer to thesepurposes generically as statistical. consistent with the distinction betweenadministrative and statistical data, the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93œ579) defines astatistical record to bea record in a system of records maintained for statistical research or reportingpurposes only and not used in whole or in part in making any determinationabout an identifiable individual, except as provided by section 8 [whichauthorizes certain kinds of data access, including for research activities by thebureau of the census] of title 13.principles and problems24private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what principles should guide statisticalagencies?as creations of government, statistical agencies mirror, with varyingshadings, the ethos of their society. for the united states, and a growing list ofother countries, this ethos embraces a freedom that recognizes pluralism, publicdecision making based on representative democracy, and a marketorientedeconomy. statistical agencies reflect those themes through a remarkably intricateconfiguration of institutional structure and practice.as noted above, the principles of democratic accountability, constitutionalempowerment, and individual autonomy maintain the ethos of american societyand provide valuable ethical guidance for the structure and practice of federalstatistical agencies. recognizing that the guidance they provide is oftenreinforcing but is not always harmonious, we examine each principle in turn.when we apply the principles in subsequent chapters, we either explore waysthat they can be reconciled or note that difficult tradeoffs must be made.democratic accountabilityfunctionally, accountability recognizes the responsibilities of those whoserve on behalf of others. with position and involvement in manifold areas oflife, government in a democracy should serve the publicšcollectively,individually, and in assorted assemblagesšand be accountable to it. as johnlocke (1690/1988:426œ427) said in his two treatises of government,who shall be judge whether the prince or legislative act contrary to theirtrust – the people shall be judge; for who shall be judge whether his trusteeor deputy acts well, and according to the trust reposed in him, but he whodeputes him.in implementation, accountability requires that the public obtaincomprehensive information on the effectiveness of government policies. prewitt(1985) addresses this relationship between government and citizens as"democratic accountability." federal statistical agencies play a pivotal role inensuring democratic accountabilityšthey obtain, protect, and disseminate thedata that allow accurate assessment of the influence of public policies onindividual wellbeing. further, they themselves are accountable to the public fortwo key functions in this process: (1) protecting the interests of data subjectsthrough procedures that ensure appropriateprinciples and problems25private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.standards of privacy and confidentiality and (2) facilitating the responsibledissemination of data to users, including those to whom democratic governmentis accountablešthe country's citizens.constitutional empowermentconstitutional empowerment, as a cornerstone of an information ethic, is thecapability of citizens to make informed decisions about political, economic, andsocial questions. in the united states, constitutional theory emphasizes thatultimate power resides in the people. for reasons of advancing the commonwelfare, certain specific powers are delegated to a representative government.however, "the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution, norprohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to thepeople" (amendment x, u.s. constitution). constitutional practice emphasizesrestraints on executive excess and broad access to the political process throughthe direct election of representatives, as well as through separation and balance ofpower.knowledge is a prerequisite to the ethical exercise of power. as supremecourt justice felix frankfurter (1930:127) observed,we now realize that democracy is not remotely an automatic device for goodgovernment–. we now know that it is dependent on knowledge and wisdombeyond all other forms of government–. [democracy] seeks to prevail when thecomplexities of life make a demand upon knowledge and understanding nevermade before.the principle of constitutional empowerment is increasingly important todayas federal statistical agencies struggle to obtain and protect data needed for afactual understanding of a fastchanging, complex world. "electoral power per seis the mechanical guarantee of the system, but the substantive guarantee is givenby the conditions under which the citizen gets the information" (sartori,1962/1972:74).as the office of technology assessment (1989:1) notes in statistical  needsfor a changing u.s. economy,good public policy demands good information. there may be disagreementabout the wisdom of different federal programs but there is little dispute overthe need for adequate data to inform the debate. the information generated bythe $2 billion spent this year by federal agencies on statistical programs is a keyprinciples and problems26private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resource for government policymakers as well as for private investors, publicinterest groups, academic researchers, and labor organizations–. governmentstatistics play a key role in evaluating and implementing legislation and are oftenused as indexes in private contracts.individually, empowerment of the citizenry through access to data canheighten fairness. moreover, it can lessen inefficiencies ascribable to imbalancesin information. a sugar beet farmer, for example, without knowledge of currentmarket prices is vulnerable when negotiating a contract with a knowledgeablesugar beet processor. collectively, empowerment through access to data cancreate benefits to parties acting cooperatively. in salary negotiations between aschool board and teachers union, for example, both sides might turn to acommon, legitimated base of statistical information about population andproperty tax assessment trends to help resolve negotiations. in order to functionproperly, both a political democracy and a market economy require that votersand consumers make informed choices.as part of their basic mandate, federal statistical agencies are instructed toprovide data that can be used to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness ofgovernment programs. in 1967, congress affirmed the principles ofconstitutional empowerment and democratic accountability by passing thefreedom of information act to serve democratic values by (1) creating a morefully informed public debate on important issues and (2) counteracting politicalcorruption.individual autonomyindividual autonomy refers to the capacity of the individual to function insociety as an individual, uncoerced and cloaked by privacy. protection ofindividual autonomy is a fundamental attribute of a democracy. individualautonomy is compromised by the excessive surveillance sometimes used to builddata bases (flaherty, 1989), unwitting dispersion of data, and a willingness bythose who collect the data for administrative purposes to make them readilyavailable in personally identifiable form. illustrating this latter issue is thefollowing, reported by desky (1991:1):for five cents a name, the maryland motor vehicles administration (mva)will sell the names of 3.3 million licensed drivers to vendors who request them,with a minimum nonrefundable deposit of $500. all information on a driver'slicense includingprinciples and problems27private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.height, weight, gender, address and driving record from the previous three yearsis being sold by the state.while some may argue that governmental bodies appropriately useadministrative records as a source of revenue, most federal statistical agencies areacutely aware of the importance of maintaining respect for an individual'sautonomy. the national center for health statistics, for example, has legislativeauthority to protect its records under the public health service act (42 u.s.c.242m), which provides thatno information obtained in the course of activities undertaken or supportedunder section 304, 305, 306, or 307 (the sections authorizing the programs ofnchs and of the national center for health services research) may be usedfor any purpose other than the purpose for which it was supplied unlessauthorized under regulations of the secretary; and (1) in the case of informationobtained in the course of health statistical activities under section 304 or 306(which authorize the program of nchs), such information may not be publishedor released in other form if the particular establishment or person supplying theinformation or described in it is identifiable unless such establishment or personhas consented (as determined under regulations of the secretary) to itspublication or release in other form.federal statistical agencies have ethical and pragmatic reasons to beconcerned about individual autonomy.2 from an ethical standpoint, agencies are obligated by the imperatives of our society to respectindividual dignity, agencies should protect the personal information that has been entrustedto them, and intrusive data collection by agencies can disturb an individual's chosensolitude.from a pragmatic standpoint, most persons who are surveyed are notrequired to provide data (the decennial census is the main exception). thus, ifstatistical agencies are perceived as failing to respect individual autonomy, thesupply of data providers may dry up. even in the case of legally compelledparticipation, without respect for individual autonomy, evasion and inaccuratereporting are likely to be rampant.3 martin (1974:265) stated this well:even when responses to requests for information are required by law, thesuccess of a statistical program depends in large measureprinciples and problems28private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the willing cooperation of respondents. respondents who understand thepurposes of the inquiry, who sympathize with the intended uses of theinformation, and who believe that providing the government with the requestedinformation will not harm them are much more likely to answer truthfully andwith a minimum of effort on the part of the data collection agency.one element in enlisting such cooperation is the assurance of harmlessness tothe respondent, and one of the most common methods of making such assurancein statistical data collection is the provision for keeping the replies confidential.agencies must have the trust of data providers.the special role of federal statistical agenciesfederal statistical agencies have vitally served the government's informationfunction and rightly should serve it in the future. as far back as 1888, forexample, the u.s. bureau of labor was providing statistical information on theconditions of working women. the bureau reported that 17,500 women averaged$5.24 in weekly earnings, and it drew the policy implication that "the figures tell asad story, and one is forced to ask how women can live on such earnings" (u.s.bureau of labor, 1889:70). today, the bureau of labor statistics provides suchpolicyrelevant information on earnings and employment without regard to itspolitical consequences.in this section we examine, first, four reasons why government should beinvolved with gathering statistical information and then four reasons why federalstatistical agencies are more appropriate than federal administrative agencies orprivate agencies to fulfill this function.the government collects data because, first, it has an obligation to informthe public on those matters that affect the welfare of the people individually andcollectively. this includes facilitating democratic accountability by providingsufficient information on government activities to ensure public knowledge of thegovernment's performance. it further includes providing the empoweringinformation that enables a citizen to have an impact on public policies.second, in some cases private financial incentives are insufficient tomotivate the collection of data that are essential to a democratic society. mostlarge, multipurpose national data bases, such as the decennial census and thenational income accounts, cost far more to collect than any private firm or groupof privateprinciples and problems29private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizations could ever recover from the market should they decide to fund suchan enterprise. thus, if the efforts are not publicly funded, such data bases wouldnot exist. the social value of the data far exceeds their private value.4third, economies of scale are often so large that even though it might bepossible to organize multiple sets of private data collectors to do the job, a singlepublic collection would cost significantly less, especially in the case of regularlyrepeated collections. further, economies of scale suggest that a largescaleprogram of data collection has synergies that cannot be obtained by a piecemealapproach. for example, cognitive studies of how respondents interpret variouswordings of survey questionnaires can be supported. such studies may beinformative for a range of current and future surveys.fourth, private information providers have a natural interest in protectingtheir investment, which may limit the spread of information.5 on the other hand,government can disseminate data at cost and ensure that the information isaccessible for the public good.for a variety of reasons, the alternatives to federal statistical agencies,whether private information organizations or federal administrative agencies(which do have an essential role in collecting data for regulatory enforcement),cannot be expected to provide the appropriate data. first, governmentadministrative agencies cannot be expected to fulfill completely the function ofproviding the information needed for democratic functioning. administrativeagencies have primarily operational tasks, whether militarily defending thecountry, putting criminals in jail, collecting taxes, or running an air traffic controlsystem. the administrative data such agencies collect can be of general value tosociety, however.second, among most data users, federal statistical agencies have establisheda reputation for integrity and independence. while certain private sector surveyfirms and information organizations have fine reputations among knowledgeablestatisticians, their reputation does not have the same breadth among the relevantpublic. often, private data collection is carried out by interested parties, who areunlikely to be objective, and if they are, the perception of possible bias reducesthe value of the data.third, some data are collected because they have direct value inimplementing government policy. this is true, for example, of the decennialcensus in allocating seats in the house of representatives among the states, of theconsumer price index in determining social security benefits, and of thenational center forprinciples and problems30private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health statistics infant mortality data in shaping programmatic effort towardprevention. when government policy is directly affected by certain data, thegovernment must assume responsibility for its quality. this suggests that thegovernment must have substantial control over the design and implementation ofthe data collection and primary analysis.finally, federal statistical agencies have historically done the job, and doneit well. because of the way data are produced, much useful and empoweringinformation is not fully provided by the workings of the private market. data oneducational achievements of elementary school students, for example, althoughoften collected through privately developed test instruments, have historicallybeen collected and disseminated through governmental mandate. federalstatistical agencies, such as in this case the national center for educationstatistics, play a key role in coordinating data gathering, maintaining qualitystandards, and disseminating information.data access in a democratic societyrecognized information needs in society are so great and budgets soconstraining that government analysts can do only a small fraction of the researchthat can beneficially be done with federally collected data. most of the researchmust be carried out by analysts for various concerned organizations and academicresearchers. moreover, to enhance the integrity of research findings, independentanalysts should have access to data, regardless of the organization that collectedit. as a critical element of the democratic process, this access can allowreanalysis by groups with different agendas; stimulate new inquiries on importantsocial, economic, and scientific questions; lead to improvements in the quality ofdata through suggestions for better measurement and data collection methods; andprovide information to improve government forecasts and resource allocations(see national research council, 1985). as noted, such open access is a necessarycondition for a society to function freely and effectively. the ideal result is arobust, resilient society in which individual and collective interests are servedthrough a competition for the truth. in contrast, monopolized access by "a centralstate planning board" suppresses freedom and hampers efficiency.the panel maintains that government dissemination of statistical data underappropriate confidentiality constraints is a public good. failure to provide datamay result in substantial lost opportunities.principles and problems31private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accountability in a democracy is threatened by restricting the collection ofgovernment statistics to only those sought by government policymakers and byrestricting access to government statistics to only government policymakers.wallman (1988:11) makes this point and notes a remark attributed to christopherdemuth, the office of management and budget (omb) administrator forinformation and regulatory affairs, by ann crittenden (new york times, july 11,1982, business section:4):in the past, agencies collected much greater detail than was needed fornational policymaking purposes. it is understood now that agencies justify theirdata collecting programs to omb in terms of the needs of the federal agenciesalone, not of states, local governments, or private firms.wallman further notes,in 1985 omb distributed for comments a draft circular (aœ130) that providedthat ''executive branch agencies are to collect only that information necessary forthe proper performance of agency functions and that has practical utility."after some unfavorable comment, the proposed circular was withdrawn; itwas only reissued in july 1993 with the publication of a revised omb circulara130 in the federal register (58(126):36068œ36086). this revised circular isbased on quite different principles than the 1985 draft circular. leading the 1993circular's section 7, "basic considerations and assumptions," are the followingpoints:a. the federal government is the largest single producer, collector,consumer, and disseminator of information in the united states.because of the extent of the government's information activities, andthe dependence of those activities upon public cooperation, themanagement of federal information resources is an issue ofcontinuing importance to all federal agencies, state and localgovernments, and the public.b. government information is a valuable national resource. it providesthe public with knowledge of the government, society, and economyšpast, present, and future. it is a means to ensure the accountabilityof government, to manage the government's operations, to maintainthe healthy performance of the economy, and is itself a commodity inthe marketplace.c. the free flow of information between the government and the publicis essential to a democratic society. it is also essential that thegovernment minimize the federal paperwork burden on the public,minimize the cost of its information activities, and maximize theusefulness of government information (p. 36071)–.principles and problems32private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the panel agrees with the thrust of these points in the 1993 omb circular.unquestionably, there can be no lively democratic policymakingšand sothere can be no constitutional empowermentšunless many individuals andinterest groups have access to information. according to dahl (1982:11), one ofthe most important characteristics distinguishing modern democracies is that"citizens have a right to seek out alternative sources of information. moreover,alternative sources of information exist and are protected by law." smith (1991:7)also notes that "limited public access to data not only gives intramural researchers amonopoly on the data, it also provides federal agencies an effective mechanism tocontrol areas of sensitivity."the panel, however, should not be misunderstood to be advocatingunrestricted access to personal data. to the contrary, we affirm the ethicalimperative of individual autonomy, which requires appropriate guarantees onprivacy and confidentiality. also, we recognize that useful data are more likely tobe provided by individuals and establishments under suitable guarantees ofconfidentiality.problems in ensuring confidentiality and dataaccessfederal statistical agencies confront a challenging environmentšapprehensive respondents, exasperated researchers, skeptical funders, andpressures for administrative uses of confidential statistical records. notsurprisingly in a decentralized statistical system, some of these problems arespecific to particular agencies and thus are outside the scope of this report.nonetheless, a number of problems cut across agencies. below, we identify anumber of general problems and point to chapters of the report where they areconsidered in depth.do statistical agencies have adequateauthority to protect data?at times, statistical agencies and respondents to statistical surveys have beenunder pressure to disclose data in identifiable form. for example, a 1961 courtorder required the st. regis paper company to deliver to the federal tradecommission its file copy of a completed census bureau form. "in a swiftreaction, congress amended the census law to protect copies of censusprinciples and problems33private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.documents retained in respondent's files from compulsory legal process" (officeof federal statistical policy and standards, 1978:256). as another example, thestatistical arm of the department of energy, the energy informationadministration, collects proprietary information on pricing and production frompetroleum companies. in 1990, the department of justice's antitrust divisionrequested individually identifiable data from the agency to investigate allegedprice gouging by oil companies in the aftermath of the iraqi invasion of kuwait.the agency refused, citing its policy and pledge to keep the data, which had beencollected for statistical purposes, confidential. in the ensuing disputationsbetween the agency and the department of justice, it became evident that theagency lacked unambiguous legal authority to sustain its confidentiality pledge.we explore this case in detail in chapter 7.in discussing data protection, we emphasize the fundamental distinctionbetween administrative data and statistical data. important differences existamong the types of data collected by the government, especially data collectedfor statistical and research purposes versus data collected for the administrationof government programs. administrative data often have inherent research value,and statistical uses are appropriate, provided confidentiality safeguards can bemaintained. data from medicare and medicaid records, for example, are properlyused in studying the pattern of medical procedures, such as coronary angioplasty,as they vary by region of the country, race, and gender. although in certainsituations access to statistical data may seem administratively convenient, mostadministrative uses would violate pledges of confidentiality. the simplestatement "your answers are confidential" on the cover of a census form ought tomean, for example, that information provided on household composition will notbe used to check eligibility for aid to families with dependent children. as wehave noted, federal statistical agencies have experienced pressure to provide datafor administrative purposes. withstanding such pressure can be especiallydifficult for federal statistical agencies (or programs with statistical functions)that are housed in units with important regulatory functions. (this point wasemphasized by the office of federal statistical policy and standards, 1978:258.)the central concept of providing legislative and procedural protection toensure that personal data collected about a data subject for a research orstatistical purpose are not used for an administrative or other decision about thatdata subject is generallyprinciples and problems34private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.called functional separation. it is not a new concept, having been recommended,for example, in a 1973 study by the secretary's advisory committee onautomated personal data systems (u.s. department of health, education andwelfare). the concept was enunciated by the privacy protection studycommission (1977a:574). stating the concept as a recommendation forlegislation by the u.s. congress, the commission proposedthat the congress provide by statute that no record or information containedtherein collected or maintained for a research or statistical purpose underfederal authority or with federal funds may be used in individually identifiableform to make any decision or take any action directly affecting the individual towhom the record pertains, except within the context of the research plan orprotocol, or with the specific authorization of such individual.we examine this concept throughout the report.can communication with the public beimproved?for federal statistical agencies to achieve full democratic accountability,they must be continuously cognizant of public perceptions regarding the centralissues of data protection and data access. this may require systematic studies ofpublic opinion, as has been done with various surveys of the public's generalperception of the census bureau.6 such studies could examine, for example, theextent to which the public continues to have a general distrust of centralizedgovernment records, a distrust of the kind that led to the privacy act of 1974.they could also assess the public's concern about the data collection anddissemination powers of the private sector information industry. and they couldexamine the extent to which various groups of the public distinguish betweenstatistical agencies and administrative agencies regarding issues of data protectionand data access.interpreting general survey results, however, is not easy; any generalpolitical alienation will drive down confidence and be reflected in responsesabout a specific area of government activity. more easily interpretable aresystematic studies of the data provider and data user communities that interactwith statistical agencies. a diversified portfolio of study techniques, includingtargeted surveys, data user and data provider conferences, reinterviews, focusgroups, and smallscale experiments may be most effective. in the interests ofaccountability and openness, the results of such studies should be made publiclyavailable.principles and problems35private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how can federal statistical agencies best communicate to the general public,the data provider communities, and the data user communities the importance ofthe statistical information they can provide? how can they best instill confidencein these diverse groups regarding the three key aspects of their data protectionpolicies: (1) their intention to minimize intrusions on privacy, (2) their intentionto minimize the time and efforts of data providers, and (3) their ability to maintainconfidentiality?given the principle of democratic accountability, how are the interests of thepublic best served? institutionally, congress addresses legislation that, for themost part, sets fairly general guidelines for agency policy and practice. at themore specific level of the development and implementation of agency policyregarding confidentiality and data access, mechanisms are beginning to emergefor ensuring input from representatives of the key affected groups. a variety ofsuch mechanisms are possible, including data user conferences, meetings withprivacy advocates regarding the conduct of key surveys, agency review boardswith outside representation, and a governmentwide data and access protectionboard.the topic of public perceptions and interests is addressed further in chapters2, 3, and 4. alternative mechanisms for ensuring input from the affected groupsare discussed in chapter 8.are data providers properly notified orinformed?most often, for data collected for administrative purposes, the data providereither is legally required to provide the datašas with tax return filingsšor mustprovide the data in order to receive some benefitšas with driver's licenseapplications. in broad terms, the ethics of what the agency should tell the dataprovider about the use of such administrative data are not controversial. the dataprovider should be notified about the need for such data and how providing thedata might affect him or heršand that one potential use is for statisticalpurposes. a more complicated ethical question is what options data providersshould have in denying various uses of the administrative data they provide.on the other hand, with the notable exception of the decennial census,response to most statistical surveys of persons and households is voluntary. lawand ethics require that consent for participation in voluntary statistical surveys beinformed. potential respondents should be told how their data will be used andwhat the consequences will be to them of participating or not participating in thesurvey. they should be given the opportunityprinciples and problems36private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to make a conscious decision whether to provide the data requested.there are many open questions about the nature of informed consentprocedures for voluntary surveys. do the current practices of the statisticalagencies conform fully with legal and ethical requirements? is appropriateinformation being given to respondents in language that they can readilyunderstand? should the same amount of detail be given to all potentialrespondents? what are suitable procedures for use in telephone and mail surveys?are the statistical agencies always able to honor the promise of confidentialityprotection they give to respondents? to what extent should respondents beallowed to waive standard protections in order to permit data sharing forstatistical purposes? we develop these issues in chapter 3.are current confidentiality and dataaccess laws adequate and appropriate?we discussed above the issue of whether statistical agencies have adequateauthority to protect the data they collect. here we introduce some other issues oflegislation. the laws that govern confidentiality of and access to federalstatistical data include some with general reach, like the freedom of informationact and the privacy act, but others vary widely from agency to agency. at oneend of the spectrum, title 13 of the u.s. code provides extremely tightconfidentiality provisions for the census bureau. at the other end, many agenciesoperate without any specific confidentiality legislation. critics charge that certainprovisions of current legislation not only fail to provide sufficient protection ofconfidential statistical data but create excessive barriers to data access. forexample, the office of federal statistical policy and standards (1978:262) notedobstacles to interagency data sharing and, in particular, the inability of agencies togain access to the census bureau's standard statistical establishment list forstatistical sampling purposes. there are also obstacles to access bynongovernment data users. comprehensive revision of the relevant laws risks afinal product worse than the status quo. further, legislation requires support if itis to be effective. congress and the president must be committed toconfidentiality protection and the public must understand its importance. on theother hand, the current approach of ad hoc legislative initiatives is not workingvery well either. thus, in chapter 5, we pose and address questions of variationamong statistical agencies in the protectionprinciples and problems37private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.offered identifiable statistical records, possible amendments of the 1974 privacyact, legislative language about "zero disclosure risk," and greater opportunitiesfor data sharing among federal statistical agencies for statistical purposes.how can nongovernment users be givenaccess to data while preservingconfidentiality?despite efforts by several agencies to improve access to data by researchersand policy analysts outside the government, nongovernment users' need fordetailed data is far from being fulfilled. often, such data contain information onindividual respondents over time, as it would for any study of how firms respondto environmental regulations, for example. specifically, consider assessing thelikely impact of a tax, levied in response to the threat of global warming, on theamount of carbon emitted from a plant. combined information from eia'smanufacturing energy consumption survey and the census bureau'slongitudinal research database (see mcguckin and pascoe, 1988) would showhow plants would react to the implied change in the relative price of energy.there are many aspects to such a policy question and to answer it wellresearchers would have to address it from various perspectives. weighed againstthis clear benefit, access poses serious data protection problems, and so theresearchers most likely to answer the question may not get access to the data theyneed.statistical agencies have developed some procedures for providing greateraccess to data to selected researchers under conditions that subject the researchersto enforceable penalties for violations of confidentiality standards. for example,the designation of researchers as special sworn employees has been standardpractice at the census bureau. this practice has clearly protected confidentialityin that special sworn employees have the same responsibilities as regularemployees, but it has also limited the type and amount of research that can bedone with the data. the access provided is of a temporary nature and must becarried out on site, under supervision, and only for purposes of the census bureauthat are designated under title 13 legislation. further, it puts at a disadvantageresearchers who are not currently in the washington, d.c., area or cannot easilyrelocate.recently, the national center for education statistics and the nationalscience foundation have developed, and are evaluating, approaches for licensingresearchers to have access to data forprinciples and problems38private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical purposes, with penalties for improper use. further, the census bureauhas been examining for some time the possibility of establishing facilities for dataaccess outside the washington, d.c., area, perhaps at its regional offices or at auniversity under a data protection agreement. most concretely, the bureau ofjustice statistics has provided data to form the national justice data archive atthe interuniversity consortium for political and social research, which islocated at the university of michigan. this archive functions under the legalauthority and confidentiality protection of the code of federal regulations (§ 28,pt. 22). the bureau of justice statistics provides a project monitor to the archive.these topics of data access are further developed in chapters 6 and 7.can individuallevel data be provided forpublic use?fritz scheuren (1989:20), as director of the statistics of income division ofthe internal revenue service, described this predicament of the data collector:statistical disclosureavoidance is an enormous problem. on the one hand,we want to make all the microdata [sets of individual records with identifiersremoved] we produce publicly available so researchers can benefit fully; on theother hand, we have to protect respondents (or taxpayers, in my case) fromhaving identifiable information inadvertently disclosed.while some progress has been made since scheuren's writing, thecomplexity of the task and the fundamental nature of the problem leavesubstantial work remaining. statistical agencies make difficult decisions on howbest to disseminate their products so that maximum value is obtained from themwhile protecting confidentiality. what kinds of data should be released with norestrictions? what kinds of statistical disclosure limitation techniques should beapplied to data before releasing them for unrestricted publicuse? willresearchers be led to incorrect inferences because of such techniques? what is areasonably small risk of disclosure of individually identifiable data? how shouldsuch decisions be made, and by whom? we develop this topic in chapter 6.principles and problems39private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can legitimate needs for data sharingwithin government be met?are young americans entering the labor market prepared for the competitivechallenge? government statistics can help answer only part of this criticalquestion. the national center for education statistics, in its nationaleducational longitudinal study of 1988, started with 25,000 eighth graders andgathered periodic measurements on their academic performance, school andsocial environments, and family background. the bureau of labor statisticssurveys youth employment. the bureau of justice statistics has some informationon those in prison. as hauser (1991:2) succinctly observes, however, "the overalleffect of fragmented responsibility and piecemeal coverage is that, once youthsleave high school, our statistical system treats them almost as if they had droppedoff the face of the earth." actually, some surveys by the national center foreducation statistics do track students after high school. for example, thenational longitudinal study of the class of 1972 tracked students as they madethe transition to their twenties. in general, however, there is a need for suitableinteragency coordination in meeting data needs and, possibly, for someinteragency data sharing.sharing of identifiable data for statistical purposes can have many potentialbenefits, including the enrichment of crosssectional and longitudinal data sets,evaluation and improvement of the quality of census and survey data,improvement of the timeliness and consistency of statistical reporting,development of more complete sampling frames, and improvement ofcomparability between data developed by different statistical agencies. asignificant amount of data sharing has occurred without incident, both betweenstatistical agencies and from administrative agencies to statistical agencies. formany years, for example, the census bureau has used tax records on individualsand businesses to enhance its demographic censuses and surveys and to evaluatethe quality of census and survey data. (additional detail on this point is providedin chapter 6.) similarly, identifiable patient records are routinely used undercontrolled conditions in medical and epidemiologic research.decisions on whether to link records require careful examination of severalfactors. will the linking be done under conditions that conform with all statutoryconfidentiality standards of the agencies involved and with pledges to dataproviders concerning the use of their information? is record linkage the onlyfeasibleprinciples and problems40private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.way to develop the desired statistical products? are the intended uses of theseproducts sufficiently important to justify introducing additional risks ofdisclosure? should agencies take into account potential reductions of (1) the timeand effort of data providers and (2) the costs of obtaining the desired data byother means? if they should, how would they do it? who will have access to thelinked data sets? who should decide?the statutes, regulations, and policies that affect decisions to share data andparticipate in record linking projects vary widely among agencies. statisticalagencies, like the census bureau, and custodians of administrative records, likethe internal revenue service, operate under strict statutory controls on disclosureof identifiable data. other agencies, like the national agricultural statisticsservice, have the authority to deny access for nonstatistical purposes but alsohave more flexibility to share data for statistical purposes. still other agenciesoperate primarily under general information statutes, like the privacy act of1974, and have little difficulty in finding ways to participate in record linkagesfor statistical and research purposes, if they choose to do so.the value of a survey data base can sometimes be substantially enhanced byadding data from administrative records for the persons in the data base (juster,1991). in carrying out a health and retirement survey, for example, researchersmight like to use earnings records from social security files. other valuableadministrative records include case files from public assistance programs, healthcare claims, and tax returns. such linkages are valuable for a number of reasons: existing administrative records may be more accurate than survey dataobtained from respondents, especially for detailed information that mustbe recalled for earlier years, like income data. surveys are made less burdensome and intrusive because certainquestions need not be asked. administrative records can provide a check on the quality of surveyresults, and vice versa.while record linkage may facilitate the basic tasks of a statistical agency, italso raises serious confidentiality concerns. ivan p. fellegi, chief statistician ofcanada, noted in a may 2, 1991, communication to the panel,the issue of "moral outrage" as a possibility is real, but i believe [it] appliesparticularly to record linkage (matching). for this reason we are particularlycareful about it.the topic of record linkage is developed further in chapters 4œ7.principles and problems41private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.structure of the reportin chapter 2 we briefly review the evolution of the federal statisticalsystem, the findings of earlier studies of confidentiality and data access, and thechanges that warrant a reexamination of the issues. to complete the contextualframework of our study, we also provide an overview of our assessment of theresponsibilities federal statistical agencies must be able to fulfill in their dealingswith the public, data providers and data subjects, data users, other statisticalagencies, and custodians of administrative records.in chapter 3 we address fair treatment of data providers, in particular the useof informed consent as an instrument for ethical communication by datacollectors. drawing on survey experiments, cognitive studies, and public opinionsurveys, we also examine certain research findings related to confidentiality anddata access.we examine in chapter 4 the legitimate expectations of data users, withinand outside government, for access to federal statistical data. we also explore theethical responsibilities of data users and advocate establishing their legalresponsibilities in agency or systemwide statutes.in chapter 5 we review legislation governing confidentiality and dataaccess, especially the privacy act of 1974, title 13 of the u.s. code, thehawkinsstafford amendments of 1988 for the national center for educationstatistics, and the public health services act as it affects the national center forhealth statistics. while recognizing a basis for diversity according to agencymission, we emphasize the value of all statistical agencies having a certainminimal standard of statutory authority to protect their data. the experience ofthe energy information administration and the bureau of labor statisticssuggests that some agencies would benefit from having more comprehensivestatutory protection of their statistical records.extensive dissemination of detailed information is necessary to ensure thatample value can be obtained from federal censuses and surveys. at the sametime, statistical agencies must fulfill pledges of confidentiality to data providers.thus, we examine in chapter 6 technical and administrative procedures forproviding information while ensuring that the risk of disclosure is at mostminimal.in chapter 7 we address confidentiality issues associated with statistical dataon organizations. using four case studies, we developprinciples and problems42private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a conceptual basis for similarities and differences in the treatment of data onorganizations compared with data on individuals and households.we address the management of confidentiality and data access functions inchapter 8, with particular attention to interagency coordination and the crossnational experience. we also explore issues of agency staffing and data protectionlegislation.our findings and recommendations are presented in chapters 3 through 8.a complete list of recommendations are the last chapter, and our studyprocedure is described in appendix a.7 biographical sketches of the panelmembers are provided in appendix b.throughout our deliberations we have been mindful that regardless of theefforts put forth, the tension between data protection and data access will not goaway. at best one can hope for a temporary consensus each time the communityof interested parties revisits this issue. ideally, as with isometric exercise,achieving correct dynamic tension in one round builds greater strength for thenext round.notes1. the environmental protection agency, for example, in collecting data on compliance with airpollution regulations for the purpose of flagging offenders is not functioning as a statistical agency.2. see marx (1988:219229, 1990) for general arguments about the value of privacy and anonymity.3. this concern is as valid for data on organizations as it is for data on individuals or households.4. to illustrate the lack of private financial incentives, studies on the health risks of smoking drawsome private support from the insurance industry, but that industry's financial incentives to developdata may pale compared with those of the tobacco industry. with a primary mandate to serve thepublic interest, the national center for health statistics, along with the national institutes of health,can generate the vital data that help inform the debate. as lave (1990:3334) notes,strongly held opinions are rarely sufficient to improve public health. for everypublic health professional who favoured antismoking and aids communicationcampaigns, there were several people opposed to these campaigns. the strengthof belief of the surgeongeneral, and the mustering of support of public healthprofessionals were necessary, but not sufficient, conditions for being able toconduct a campaign. the campaignsprinciples and problems43private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.could not have been mounted without mustering the data to show that theproblems were important, and that the proposed actions were likely to improvepublic health.5. for example, allison and cooper (1991) note a case in which institutional brokers estimate system(ibes) filed suit against a researcher who criticized their data and imposed conditions on academicresearchers that (1) require them to clear all potentioal publications with ibes so the latter can havethe opportunity "to identify factual errors or misunderstandings" and (2) require researchers usingibes data to refrain from providing access to others (including research assistants) without priorclearance.6. see, for example, bureau of the census (1982), louis harris and associates, inc. (1981, 1983),national research council (1979), the roper organization, inc. (1980).7. to facilitate its work, the panel commissioned several background papers on issues bearing onconfidentiality and data issues. the papers papers appear in a special issue of the journal of officialstatistics, 1993(2). see appendix a for a list of the papers.principles and problems44private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2the framework of studyyou can't have a democratic society without having a good data base.janet norwood, former commissioner, bureau of labor statistics, 1991in chapter 1, we laid out ethical principles for statistical agencies as theystruggle to broker society's insistence that citizens be allowed to lead private livesand that public policies be based on the dissemination of relevant personalinformation. in this chapter, we first put this struggle in historical context bytracing the evolution of the federal statistical system's response to issues ofconfidentiality and data access. because of their importance, these issues havebeen the subject of examination by various commissions, panels, andcommittees. thus, we next briefly review this earlier work and therecommendations made by some of the key groups. we then argue that recentchanges in the composition of society and in computer and communicationstechnology make reexamination of these issues a pressing concern. finally, weidentify and describe the responsibilities that federal statistical agencies have totheir various constituencies.evolution of the federal statistical systemthe federal statistical system has evolved apace with the country, and ateach step it has had to address confidentiality and data access issues. theconstitutional convention of 1787 called for a count of americans every 10years beginning in 1790. by the second decennial census, vicepresident thomasjefferson had successfully urged more detailed collection of data on people's agesso policies could be designed to raise longevity. the seventh federal census(1850) was greatly enlarged to report by individualsthe framework of study45private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rather than families. in addition, the practice of having local marshals collect andtabulate the results was stopped. instead, local census takers filled out the forms,which were then sent to the census office in washington, d.c., for uniformclassification and tabulation. some 640,000 pages of census schedules werebound in 800 volumes to provide, for the first time, a comprehensive statisticalpicture of the social and economic life of the nation. to organize the 1850census, the new superintendent of the census, professor of political economyjames d.b. de bow, teamed with lemuel shattuck, a founder in 1839 of theamerican statistical association.the first permanent census office was founded following adoption of thepermanent census act of march 1902. according to boorstin (1973:172), dr.s.n.d. north, the first head of the permanent census office, was ready to divideall modern history ''into two periods, the nonstatistical and the statistical; one theperiod of superstition, the other the period of ascertained facts expressed innumerical terms." further, north continued, "the science of statistics is the chiefinstrumentality through which the progress of civilization is now measured, andby which its development hereafter will be controlled." the census office ofs.n.d. north evolved into the modern u.s. bureau of the census, whoseresponsibilities go well beyond the decennial census.as the need for information has grown in such areas as labor, education, andhealth, the nation has created specialized statistical agencies to collect anddisseminate data. in other cases, states have assumed data collectionresponsibilities, especially in the area of vital statistics, such as birth, marriage,and death records. unlike its northern neighbor, with its statistics canada, theunited states has a decentralized statistical system, in which there are numerousfederal statistical agencies, each with separate enabling legislation and distinctdata provider and data user constituencies. because of this, substantial variationsexist in the way agencies and programs seek to protect confidentiality andprovide data access. some variations are justifiable given the agencies' differingmandates; however, some appear more an accident of history and reflect a lack ofcoordination and systemwide thinking. in either case, the existing decentralizedsystem provides a natural experiment for examining what works and what doesnot work for data protection and data access.over the past two centuries, federal statistical agencies have respondedcommendably to growing public concerns about protecting individual autonomy.courtland (1985) reviews this historicalthe framework of study46private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.progression for the census bureau. through the first six decennial censuses(1790œ1840), for the limited data to be collected on each household, each censustaker was "to cause a correct copy, signed by himself, of the schedule containingthe number of inhabitants within his division to be set up at two of the mostpublic places within the same, there to remain for the inspection of allconcerned." by the 1850 census, this practice of public posting had beenabandoned and census takers were making assurances of confidentiality. still,copies of the census returns were filed with state officials and county courts, apractice about which francis amasa walker, the superintendent of the 1870census, expressed concerns (quoted in courtlands, 1985:409):the whole expenditure has been worse than useless. it has been positivelymischievous. the knowledge on the part of the people that the original sheets ofthe census were to be deposited among the records of the counties to which theyrelate, has added almost incalculably to the resistance which the inquiries of thecensus have encountered. it is useless to attempt to maintain the confidentialcharacter of a census under such circumstances. the deposit of the returns at thecounty seat of every county constitutes a direct invitation to impertinent ormalicious examination–. at every step the work of the assistant marshal hasbeen made more difficult by the fear that the information would be – divulgedfor impertinent and malicious criticism. no one feature of the present method ofenumeration has done so much to excite and justify this fear as the provision ofthe law which requires that the original returns for each county shall bedeposited in the office of the county clerk.by 1890, census legislation required census workers to swear under oath notto disclose census data except to their superiors and eliminated the requirement tofile copies with the county court.during the nineteenth century there was steady growth in the collection oflabor, health, agriculture, and education statistics (see, e.g., duncan and shelton,1978). in the early twentieth century, a wealth of federal administrative databegan to be assembled with the passage of the sixteenth amendment to theconstitution in 1912, which enabled a federal income tax, and the income taxact of 1913, which implemented the income tax.1 statistics based on the datawere first published pursuant to the revenue act of 1916. by 1924 legislationhad loosened access to tax data to include public listing of taxpayers and theirincomes and access to tax returns by two congressional revenue committees. areaction to this openness led to the revenue act of 1926, which rescinded publicaccess to income data.the framework of study47private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.major growth in the federal statistical system began in the 1930s with theimplementation of an array of government programs to bring the country out ofthe great depression.2 growth in personnel, budget, and responsibilitiesaccelerated in the postwar period with the passage of the employment act of1946 and the accompanying establishment of the council of economic advisersand the joint economic committee of the congress. the need for social, as wellas economic, data was further highlighted by the civil rights movement and greatsociety programs of the 1960s.paralleling the growth in the scope of its responsibilities, the census bureauhas paid increasing attention to protecting confidentiality. starting in 1940, itceased the release of certain aggregate datašsuch as tables displaying counts ofthe number of data subjects in various categoriesšfrom its demographic censuspublications. data tables were not released that had small cell counts. in the1960s, the census bureau began to release some computer files of records aboutindividuals (i.e., publicuse microdata files), but under the oversight of thecensus bureau microdata review panel, it deletes or modifies potentiallyidentifying information in the files.confidentiality concerns have arisen not only in regard to the censusbureau, but, peaking some 20 years ago, more generally in regard to the federalgovernment. during the watergate period of the early 1970s, for example, thepublic and congress were alarmed by the disclosure to the white house of taxinformation on a number of political opponents. legislative remedies were thendeveloped. the privacy act of 1974 was enacted to provide greater control overthe government's use of personal records, and the tax reform act of 1976curtailed presidential authority to access tax records and to make them availableto other agencies and organizations for nontax uses.concern about the confidentiality of personal records hampered ordinarystatistical uses of federal data, for example, when the department of agriculturewas blocked in 1973 from using tax return information to construct a directory ofnames for use in its surveys of farmers. during the 1970s many ambitiousproposals, like the president's reorganization project for the federal statisticalsystem, were developed to coordinate the federal statistical effort, and theygenerally gave careful attention to confidentiality. as statistical policy workingpaper 2, report on statistical disclosure and disclosureavoidance techniques,indicated,the framework of study48private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most agencies that release statistical information are becoming increasinglysensitive to the disclosure issue, and – have adopted or are in the process ofadopting policies and procedures designed to avoid unacceptable disclosure(federal committee on statistical methodology, 1978:41).the decade of the 1980s is widely viewed as a period of retrenchment forthe federal statistical system; most of the agencies were on the defensive in aneffort to preserve programs and maintain budgets. the 1990s have begun withrenewed recognition of the importance of federal statistics and a commitment toimprove the quality of the system. for example, in 1991 the economic policycouncil working group of the council of economic advisers (1991), underchair michael boskin, proposed several initiatives to improve the quality ofeconomic statistics. quality improvement embraces renewed attention toconfidentiality and data access concerns. robert m. groves, while at the bureauof the census, identified "analysis of risk of disclosure of confidentialdata" (quoted in national research council, 1992a:23) as a key interdisciplinaryneed closely connected to quality improvement. the clinton administration nowhas an opportunity for further changes to improve the federal statistical system.earlier studies of privacy, confidentiality, anddata accesshistory suggests that privacy, confidentiality, and data access are ongoingconcerns. for the federal government, these issues have been addressed byseveral groups and organizations, especially during a period of intensive activityin the 1970s.3 the reports prepared by the various groups chronicle their ideas,many of which remain valid today. the scope of each study was different fromthat of this study, however. for example, the privacy protection studycommission (1977a, b, c) was concerned with all uses of personal records, notjust statistical records, and the office of federal statistical policy and standards(1978) examined all aspects of federal statistical programs, going far beyondconfidentiality and data access issues. below, we briefly review three of thestudies, which were chosen because they relate most closely to the our mission,and we recommend their reports to all who want to probe these subjects.additionally, we refer the reader to the discussions in boruch and cecil (1979)and flaherty (1979, 1989).the framework of study49private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.american statistical association ad hoccommittee on privacy andconfidentialityin 1975, lester r. frankel, then president of the american statisticalassociation, appointed the ad hoc committee on privacy and confidentiality todeal with information reporting, privacy, and confidentiality issues. after twoyears of work, the committee, chaired by joseph l. gastwirth, produced a finalreport, which made the following key recommendations regardingconfidentiality: confidentiality statutes providing full and overriding protection againstcompulsory disclosure of identifiable records from statistical datasystems derived either from surveys or from administrative recordsshould be enacted to cover each federal statistical agency and designatedunits of other agencies. disclosure for nonstatistical purposes of data about identifiableindividuals collected or derived from administrative records by federalagencies solely for statistical purposes should be prohibited bystatute–. the committee urges the congress to avoid the passage of legislationwhich has the effect of revoking proper guarantees of confidentialityalready given by agencies collecting data to be used solely for statisticaland research purposes. statutes which have already had this effectshould be amended to exempt data collected or compiled solely forstatistical and research purposes (american statistical association,1977:75œ76).privacy protection study commissioncommissioned by the privacy act of 1974, the privacy protection studycommission (1977a), chaired by david f. linowes, prepared a report onpersonal privacy in an information society. although the scope of its report ismuch broader than just research and statistical uses of data, the commissionemphasized that such activities (1) benefit society as a whole and (2) depend onvoluntary cooperation for accurate information. voluntary cooperation requiresassurances of confidentiality. it also emphasized that the rich lode ofadministrative data built up by the federal government had barely been tapped forresearch and statistical purposes. from our standpoint, a key recommendation ofthe commission in the area of confidentiality and data access was to establish aclear functional separation between the use of information for research andstatistical purposes and its use for administrative purposes. it furtherrecommended the establishment ofthe framework of study50private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an independent entity within the federal government to monitor and researchprivacyrelated issues and to issue interpretative rulings regarding implementationof the privacy act of 1974.office of federal statistical policy andstandardsin 1978 the office of federal statistical policy and standards (theequivalent at that time of omb's statistical policy office) issued a report called aframework for planning u.s. federal statistics  for the 1980's. some basicrecommendations made in the report regarding confidentiality and data accesswere as follows: all agencies involved in the collection of statistical or research datashould have mandated legislative protection for the confidentiality ofinformation collected or otherwise obtained to be used solely forstatistical or research purposes. this should apply to both commercialand personal data. the uses of statistical data must be restricted to prevent their use inidentifiable form for making determinations which would affect therights, benefits or privileges of the individuals. exchange of data among the "protected enclaves" [see below] should befeasible under controlled conditions. administrative data sets should be accessible to statisticians andresearchers in "protected enclaves" for some statistical uses unrelated tothe purposes of the original data collection (pp. 280œ281).the report also argued forenactment of a clear legal status as "protected enclaves" for selected statisticaland research agencies in the major departments, and for other clearly identifiedstatistical and research units within other agencies. the enclave must beinsulated from intervention and from unauthorized access to data. employeesmust be subject to strict ethical standards established with respect to datahandling and to penalties for voluntarily releasing identifiable data contrary tolaw (p. 281).such "protected enclaves" have not been established.what has changed to warrant a new study?since 1980 many changes in the social and technical environment haveaffected the federal statistical system. those changes have caused increasedconcern about the confidentiality of and access to statistical data and led to ourreexamination of thesethe framework of study51private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues. pertinent developments in the past decade include the following: advances in computer and communications technology, an expanding role for outside researchers in the use of federal data basesfor policy analysis, expanded use of matching (record linkage) for statistical andnonstatistical purposes, increases in the variety, number, and influence of organizations that havea stake in confidentiality and data access issues, increasing difficulties in persuading data providers to participate incensuses and surveys, initiation of cognitive research aimed at the improvement of informedconsent and notification procedures for surveys, and new developments in research on statistical disclosure limitation.below, we briefly describe each of these developments and indicate areas ofconcern for the federal statistical system.advances in computer and communicationstechnologyrapid advances in computer and communications technology have resultedin increased demands by data users for microdata (i.e., data on individualsubjects). in 1978, statistical policy working paper 2 (federal committee onstatistical methodology, 1978:41) noted the increased use of microdata files since1960 and affirmed, "this development has significantly increased the utility ofstatistical data bases created by federal agencies from censuses, surveys andadministrative records and promises to do so even more." beginning with theintroduction of personal computers in about 1981, the rapid proliferation ofcomputing power has radically altered the mainframe environment of the 1970s.the increase in computational capability, the rapid decline in the cost ofcomputer data storage, the development of more sophisticated data basesoftware, the improvement of data transmission capabilities, and the developmentof computerized data entryšall have made it possible to develop and access withease large data bases of personal records and thus made confidentiality issuesmore salient. and although sophisticated techniques for disclosure limitation cannow be applied, analytic tools also exist that make it easier for a potential datasnooper to identify individual records.the framework of study52private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.outside researchersthe role of outside researchers in the use of federal data bases for policyanalysis has been expanding. these outside researchers include those who workfor other agencies, congress, academic institutions, businesses, labororganizations, and various other organizations. this expanded role is appropriate.the task of analyzing the collected data in order to obtain maximum informationfrom them is enormous, and yet the statistical agencies necessarily face fiscal andinstitutional constraints that limit the amount of analysis they can perform.outside researchers possess substantial capability for data analysis becauseof their subjectmatter knowledge, computing capability, and professionalmotivation to obtain new insights from the data. further, their independentanalysis of federal data can provide not only new research and policyinterpretations, but also uses that the various government agencies had notenvisioned. at the same time, the demands of outside researchers for access tofederal data raise additional confidentiality concerns for federal statisticalagencies.record linkagein order to enhance their ability to answer complex policyrelevantquestions, researchers seek to match records in one statistical data base withrecords from the same data provider in another data base. by matching records,they can avoid having to ask data providers for information they have alreadygiven to another data gatherer. the existence of abundant and availablecomputing capability makes matching a more viable option than in prior decades.in general, record linkage can be an effective tool for statistical andadministrative purposes. in administrative procedures, records of federal studentloans, for example, can be linked to federal employment records in order toidentify federal employees who are delinquent in repaying their loans. instatistical studies, data on federal student loans can be linked to federalemployment records to research the value added in human capital of federal loanprograms.for ethical and pragmatic reasons, as we argue in chapter 1 and elsewhere inthis report, data collection for statistical purposes should be protected fromadministrative uses. thus, a survey of college graduates that purports to beexamining the valuethe framework of study53private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of various sources of college financial aid should not be used to locate those whoare delinquent on federal student loans. this concept of functional separation isfundamental to the integrity and effectiveness of a federal statistical agency.organizations concerned withconfidentiality and data accessibilityresponding to the demands of an informationrich age, the variety, number,and influence of organizations claiming a stake in confidentiality and data accessissues have mushroomed. as an illustration of the scope of this growth in just onearea, the second conference on computers, freedom, and privacy was held inmarch 1992, at george washington university, one year after the firstconference. sponsored by the association for computing machinery, the 1992conference had 12 cosponsors, ranging from the american civil liberties unionto the association of research libraries to the committee on communicationsand information policy of the institute for electrical and electronics engineersšusa. in addition it had 10 patrons, including bell atlantic and the computersecurity institute. given the evident range and depth of concern, federalstatistical agencies should be sensitive to the views of different stakeholders,accommodate their conflicting needs to the extent possible, and help to inform thepublic debate by making the various parties aware of each other's views.persuading data providersmany data collectors face mounting difficulties in persuading data providersto participate in censuses and surveys. there is a consensus that, generally,respondent cooperation with survey activities is declining. dalenius (1988)describes a willingness to provide "selfdisclosure" and a "surveymindedness"during the 1950s and the early 1960s that have since become weaker. althoughno u.s. examples of serious consequence have yet emerged, dalenius cites aeuropean example that suggests caution. according to dalenius, a 1986 debateover stockholm university's project metropolitan, a longitudinal study of some15,000 people born in 1953, may have doubled the nonresponse rate to statisticssweden's labor force survey. the key issue was the accumulation and linkage,from several administrative and statistical sources, of highly sensitive data forindividuals, without their apparentthe framework of study54private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.knowledge. although there was some notification of parents at the start of thestudy, the subjects themselves were not contacted when they reached the age atwhich they could make their own decisions (p. 5).cognitive researchin recognition of the personal, and often sensitive, nature of the informationthat surveys seek from individuals, federal statistical agencies have for manyyears conducted a variety of survey experiments. more recently, they haveconducted cognitive and public opinion research. in the late 1970s, three majorstudies of informed consent assurances were conducted with survey respondents.in a paper prepared for the panel, singer (1993) reviews these and other relatedstudies.the bureau of labor statistics, census bureau, and the national center forhealth statistics have recently set up small units to conduct cognitive research.within a larger mandate of improving the design of questionnaires, the units haveaddressed some issues related to confidentiality and data access. specifically,research studies have been conducted to gain a better understanding of howsurvey respondents react to personal questions under differing confidentialitypledges and informed consent and notification procedures. in addition, theinternal revenue service has sought to elicit respondents' views on the sharing ofpersonal data among selected agencies.several public opinion surveys have also addressed privacy issues. forexample, a 1990 louis harris survey addressed the information practices ofbusiness and government agencies (see equifax inc., 1990). the internal revenueservice has sponsored a series of surveys on such topics as the use of informationfrom mandatory data sets (like income tax returns) for statistical purposes notrelated to the purposes for which the data were collected (e.g., internal revenueservice, 1984, 1987). we explore the impact of the various research activities inchapter 3.new developments in research onstatistical disclosure limitationvarious researchers in statistical agencies and in universities have developedbetter theoretical frameworks for the construction of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques. new disclosure limitation techniques have been developedfor tabular data, publicusethe framework of study55private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.files of individual data, and data accessed from computer data bases. thesedevelopments, which are explored in chapter 6, are designed to make it possiblefor statistical agencies to permit data access under conditions that protectconfidentiality and maintain the utility of the data for legitimate users.responsibilities of federal statistical agenciesin chapter 1 we explored three guiding principles for federal statisticalagencies: democratic accountability, individual autonomy, and constitutionalempowerment. each of these principles strongly relates to the responsibilitiesagencies have to the public, data subjects and providers, data users, otherstatistical agencies, and the custodians of administrative records regardingconfidentiality and data access.responsibilities to the publicthe principle of democratic accountability highlights the responsibilities ofthe federal statistical agencies to the public. on confidentiality and data accessissues, agencies should establish and maintain a reputation for trustworthystewardship of data. as an example, in a free enterprise economic system,trustworthy stewardship ensures common availability of accurate economicinformation. a statistical agency should have sufficient independence to beinsulated from political interference so that it can provide facts to public policydebates, fairly and impartially. it should also respond promptly, efficiently, andeffectively to data needs in areas that are priorities on the public agenda. inparticular, it should provide data needed to evaluate the results of governmentactivity or lack of activity. further, it should maintain a sufficiently high publicprofile that its work is known to the public.responsibilities to data providers and datasubjectsstatistical agencies have responsibilities to data providers and data subjectsthat are congruous with the principle of individual autonomy. they shouldobserve fair statistical information practices. those practices include (1)protection of confidentiality, (2) nondisclosure of identifiable information foradministrative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes, (3) use of informed consentin voluntary surveys, and (4) notification of the conditions of participationthe framework of study56private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in mandatory surveys. history suggests that statistical agencies should anticipateand be prepared to contend with requests by government, the courts, and citizensfor individually identifiable data for nonstatistical purposes. yet, some federalstatistical agencies lack the legislative protection they need to ensure theconfidentiality they promise. additionally, congruous with the principle ofconstitutional empowerment, statistical agencies should respect the willingness ofdata providers to contribute to society by fairly representing the information theyprovide and by making it available for appropriate uses (national researchcouncil, 1992b:5).in the united states, beyond the decennial census, an individual'scooperation with federal surveys is largely voluntary. cooperation involves awillingness to provide data and a goodfaith effort to provide accurate data.cooperation is dependent on data providers sensing the value of providingaccurate data, having the time to respond, and believing that cooperation will notharm them. these perceptions may be influenced by the particular assurancesthey receive from the agency collecting the data (see boruch and cecil, 1979;national research council, 1979; singer, 1978, 1979; and singer et al., 1990).the panel believes that government has different ethical responsibilities todata providers who are individuals or households versus data providers that areorganizations. this view derives from the fundamental role of the individual insociety, so that what rights organizations derive come from the individuals theyrepresent and to whom they are accountable. a number of questions aboutappropriate confidentiality and data access policies for organizations cannot beanswered by immediate extrapolation from policies for individuals. whatconfidentiality protection should organizations enjoy? should taxexemptinstitutions, for example, merit less protection than privately held firms? forestablishments, is the basic concern access to proprietary and financial data bycompetitors and regulatory agencies?in exercising their responsibilities, federal statistical agencies need to beconfident that users of their data will not act irresponsibly toward the dataproviders. thus, they should subject users seeking access to mechanisms thatensure their accountability about confidentiality. they might well make usersbear the liability for violation of confidentiality requirements. if data providerscan demonstrate harm resulting from such violations, they should have accessiblelegal remedies.the framework of study57private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.responsibilities to data usersin accord with the principle of constitutional empowerment, statisticalagencies have responsibilities to a wide range of data users. they should strive tomaximize the delivery of timely, accurate, and complete information, subject toconstraints on confidentiality and budget.responsibilities to other statisticalagenciessharing of data with other statistical agencies can enhance efficiency and thequality of information that is available for research and policy purposes. datasharing is consistent with the principles of democratic accountability andconstitutional empowerment. in developing policies for data sharing there is aninsistent tension with the principle of individual autonomy, and agencies must bemindful of the expectations that data providers have of the uses to which theirdata might be put. additionally, as users of data collected by others, statisticalagencies are obligated to use those data responsibly. this issue is difficultbecause different agencies operate under different legislative authority to protectthe confidentiality of their data. thus, an agency with strong confidentialityprotection cannot be expected to be forthcoming with data to an agency that lackssuch confidentiality protection.responsibilities to custodians ofadministrative recordsin using administrative records, statistical agencies have an obligation tomaintain confidentiality. further, based on the notion that personal records shouldbe accurate and complete, agencies using such records ought to provide feedbackthat can improve the quality of administrative data bases.notes1. this discussion of statistical use of tax records is based on wilson and smith (1983).2. duncan and shelton (1978) provide a detailed account of the historical development of the federalstatistical system from 1926 to 1976. duncan and shelton (1992) provide commentary on somedevelopments in the federal statistical system from 1977 to 1992.3. these groups include the american statistical association ad hoc committee on privacy andconfidentiality (1977), commission onthe framework of study58private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal paperwork (1977a, b), federal committee on statistical methodology (various statisticalpolicy working papers, especially number 2, which was prepared by the subcommittee ondisclosureavoidance techniques, 1978), office of federal statistical policy and standards (1978),president's commission on federal statistics (1971), president's reorganization project for thefederal statistical system (1981), and privacy protection study commission (1977a, b, c).the framework of study59private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the framework of study60private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3data subjectsthe principle of informed consent is, in essence, an expression of  belief in the need fortruthful and respectful exchanges between  statisticians and human subjects.international statistical institute, 1986''telling the truth," therefore, is not solely a matter of moral  character; it is also a matterof correct appreciation of real situations  and of serious reflection upon them.dietrich bonhoeffer, 1965the proposition that confidentiality can be protected by entirely  prohibiting interagencytransfers of identifiable data unless explicit  consent is obtained would eliminate manyvaluable studies.office of federal statistical policy and standards, 1978introductiongovernment statistical programs cannot function without the cooperation ofdata subjects and data providers. experience in several western europeancountries during the past two decades has shown clearly that even a mandatorycensus of population is dependent on the willingness of most people to respondand, to the best of their ability, provide accurate information (butz, 1985a). evenwhen statistics are produced from administrative records, such as tax returns, anaroused public, through its elected representatives and advocacy groups, mayblock those statistical uses of the records that they consider objectionable.statistical agencies have legal and ethical responsibilities toward the datasubjects and data providers who are the sources of data used in their statisticalprograms. it is sometimes difficult for statistical agencies to decide just whatconstitutes ethical treatmentdata subjects61private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of data subjects and data providers, however. legislation, especially the privacyact of 1974, sets some minimum requirements. beyond that, much depends onthe circumstances under which data are obtained from providers. when data arecollected directly for statistical purposes, appropriate rules or guidelines maydiffer between mandatory censuses and surveys and those for which response isvoluntary. and the method of data collectionštelephone, facetoface interview,or mail questionnairešinfluences how the conditions of participation in a censusor survey are communicated to respondents.secondary uses of administrative records for statistical purposes raiseadditional questions. how much should data providers, for example filers of taxreturns, be told about statistical uses of their data and how much control shouldthey have over such uses? should they be notified of plans to use administrativerecords for research not directly related to the program for which the records aremaintained and perhaps even given a chance to deny the use of their informationfor such purposes?there are some important distinctions between individuals and organizationsas data subjects, and their concerns are likely to be quite different, as is thelegislation that governs the collection and use of information about them. withinthe broad category of organizations, for example, there is great diversity.reynolds (1993) distinguishes units of government, nonprofit organizations,businesses, and voluntary organizations, such as political parties and religiousbodies. this chapter focuses mainly on individuals as data subjects andproviders. however, many of the considerations that apply to relationshipsbetween statistical agencies and data providers apply equally to individuals andorganizations.this chapter explores the relationships of federal statistical agencies withdata subjects and providers. how do the former communicate with the latter? howeffective is the communication process? how can it be improved? in the sectionthat follows, we examine direct communication between agencies and individualdata subjects or providers through the use of informed consent and notificationprocedures. we also examine issues related to statistical uses of data sets basedon information that individuals are obliged to provide to the government in orderto obtain benefits or comply with legal requirements.next, we review research relevant to the processes of communicationbetween statistical agencies and their data providers. some experimental researchstudies have explored the effects of variationdata subjects62private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in informed consent procedures. recently, cognitive research techniques havebeen used in laboratory settings to study respondent understanding of informedconsent statements. in addition, a few public opinion surveys have exploredpeople's attitudes about various uses of the data that are collected from them bythe government for statistical and other purposes.finally, we examine the public information and educational activities ofstatistical agencies that focus on privacy and confidentiality issues. suchactivities are directed at the general public and at organizations that attempt torepresent the interests of data subjects and data providers.informed consent and notificationethics and law demand that data providers be told about the conditionsunder which they are asked to supply information that will be used for statisticaland research purposes. if participation is voluntary, data collectors must let dataproviders know this and give them enough information to make an informeddecision about whether to provide the information requested.throughout this report we make a distinction between informed consent andnotification. the former term is appropriate only when data providers have aclear choice and will not be subject to penalties for failure to participate. the termnotification is more appropriate for the decennial census of population, for whichparticipation is mandatory, and for statistical and research uses of administrativerecords, such as tax returns or applications for welfare benefits, where failure toprovide information needed for administrative purposes may expose individualsto penalties or lead to denial of benefits to which they would otherwise beentitled.historical development of informedconsent and notification proceduresclinical experiments with human subjects provided the setting for much ofthe early development of informed consent procedures. reynolds (1993) citesfour criteria that were found to be necessary for active informed consent: (1) arational adult is making the decision, (2) full information is provided, (3) thedecision is obtained without coercion, and (4) the subject is aware of theconsequences. some of these criteria might be regarded as less critical instatistical surveys. yet, as mugge (1993:346) points outdata subjects63private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in a paper prepared for the panel, "even in the most innocuous such survey asubject may suffer inconvenience, time loss, embarrassment, or psychologicaldistress in giving an interview, and one may also suffer harm through thedisclosure, the misuse, or even the planned use of the data to be provided."the privacy act of 1974prior to the passage of the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93œ579), there were nogeneral standards for informed consent and notification procedures in federallysponsored data collection activities. the information given to data providersvaried widely from agency to agency. the privacy act, under the general heading"agency requirements" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552 (a)(e)(3)), required that eachperson asked to supply information be informed of the following: the authority under which the information is requested, whether provision of the information is mandatory or voluntary, the principal purposes for which the information is intended to be used, the "routine uses" that may be made of the information (routine usesgenerally involve disclosure of individually identifiable information toother agencies or organizations and must be described in a recordsystems notice published in the federal register), and the effects on the person, if any, of not providing all or any part of therequested information.these requirements led to a much greater degree of uniformity in theinformed consent and notification procedures used by federal statistical agencies.legally, the privacy act requirements apply only to collection of data fromindividuals, but statistical agencies have also applied them, for the most part, tothe collection of data from organizations. from 1974 on, agencies began to paycloser attention to the content of their statements to data providers and, in manyinstances, gave them more information than they did prior to the passage of theprivacy act.the process of improvement was evolutionary rather than immediate,however. it would not be difficult to find some examples of informed consent andnotification statements used since 1974 that were incomplete or possiblymisleading or that failed to inform data providers of important potential statisticaluses of the data, such as the release of publicuse microdata sets (see,data subjects64private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.e.g., boruch and kehr, 1983). however, mugge's (1993) recent review of selectedconsent and notification procedures, conducted for the panel, found that federalstatistical agencies were doing a good job of complying with the requirements ofthe privacy act (see below).professional association guidelinesthe privacy act requirements were written in broad terms and did notanswer all possible questions about what information should be included ininformed consent and notification statements and how the information should becommunicated to data providers in different kinds of data collections. since thepassage of the act, the american statistical association (asa) and theinternational statistical institute (isi) have examined some of the issues and havedeveloped recommendations and guidelines.the asa's ad hoc committee on privacy and confidentiality issued areport with numerous recommendations in 1977. the committee did not make asharp distinction between informed consent and notification, but it did explore thequestion of what people should be told about planned and potential statistical andresearch uses of information supplied initially for administrative purposes. aparticularly controversial question for the committee was whether data providersin voluntary surveys should be given specific information about planned linkagesof their data with data from other sources, such as income tax returns. accordingto the committee's report (american statistical association, 1977:73), a majorityof the members believed that was not necessary:in informing respondents of the uses of the data, it is sufficient to state that thedata will be used for statistical purposes only, if such is the case. it is neitherfeasible nor necessary to spell out the possibly manifold ways, some of whichmay not be known in advance, in which the statistics may be employed.however, three members of the committee, including the chair, disagreedwith this finding. they believed that data subjects should be given specificinformation about all linkages, whether planned at the time of data collection orsubsequently.for surveys from which publicuse microdata sets were to be released, thecommittee suggested a statement of purpose such as the following: "the data willbe used only for statistical purposes, in which individual reports will not beidentifiable." asdata subjects65private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.jabine (1986) subsequently pointed out, however, such absolute statements mightnot be justified because there are no statistical disclosure limitation techniquesthat could guarantee zero risk of disclosure.in 1983, the asa's ad hoc committee on professional ethics published on atrial basis its ethical guidelines for statistical practice, which were formallyadopted by the asa board in december 1988 (see american statisticalassociation, 1983, 1989; see also ellenberg, 1983). two of the guidelines aredirectly relevant to informed consent in "collecting data for a statistical inquiry."the committee said that the data collectors should (american statisticalassociation, 1989:24)2.b.inform each potential respondent about the general nature and sponsorship ofthe inquiry, and the intended uses of the data;2.c.establish their intentions, where pertinent, to protect the confidentiality ofinformation collected from respondents; strive to ensure that these intentionsrealistically reflect their ability to do so; and clearly state pledges ofconfidentiality and their limitations to the respondents.the committee's ethical guidelines were aimed at statistical inquiries. thecommittee did not explore the question of notification about planned or possiblestatistical and research uses of information collected initially for administrativepurposes.at the international level, a declaration on professional ethics was adoptedby the international statistical institute in august 1985 and published in 1986.section 4 of the declaration, "obligations to subjects," is considerably moredetailed than the guidelines of the two asa committees with respect to thecontent of informed consent statements. noting that "no universal rules can beframed" (p. 235), the declaration suggests that data providers not be overwhelmedwith unwanted and incomprehensible details. on the other hand, it statesunequivocally that "information that would be likely to affect a subject'swillingness to participate should not be deliberately withheld'' (p. 235). thedeclaration lists 12 topics that might be included in an informed consentstatement and says that "in selecting from this list, the statistician should considernot only those items that he or she regards as material, but those which thepotential subject is likely to regard as such" (p. 236).other aspects of the treatment of informed consent and notification in theisi declaration are of special interest. first, it recognizesdata subjects66private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the difference between mandatory and voluntary data collections, saying that"statisticians should attempt to ensure that subjects appreciate the purpose of astatistical inquiry, even when the subject's participation is required by law" (p.236). second, the declaration approaches the question of statistical uses ofadministrative data from an unusual perspective, that of minimizing intrusions ondata providers:one way of avoiding inconvenience to potential subjects is to make more useof available data instead of embarking on a new inquiry. for instance, by makinggreater statistical use of administrative records, or by linking records,information about society may be produced that would otherwise have to becollected afresh. although some subjects may have objections to the data's beingused for a different purpose from that intended, they would not be adverselyaffected by such uses provided that their identities are protected and that thepurpose is statistical, not administrative (p. 235).the declaration also states that the guidelines are not meant to be limited topersons. a footnote to section 4 (p. 234) says, "this section of the declarationrefers to human subjects, including individuals, households and corporateentities."matching survey and administrative datathe practice of matching survey and administrative records for the sameindividuals has become increasingly common over the past three decades. suchlinkages are performed for statistical purposes, most commonly to enhance asurvey data base with additional information for the same persons (for anexample, see the description of the 1973 exact match study in chapter 6).advances in computer power, combined with widespread use of social securitynumbers as personal identifiers by units of government at all levels, haveincreased the economic and technical feasibility of matching individual recordsfrom different sources.during this same period, the trend has been toward the inclusion of moreexplicit information about planned linkages in informed consent or notificationstatements. if social security numbers are requested in survey interviews, itbecomes a virtual necessity, regardless of any legal or ethical imperatives, to telldata providers how they will be used. some survey respondents will surely wantto know why the numbers are needed.data subjects67private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.waiverssometimes a statistical agency may want to use data gathered for statisticalpurposes in ways that are not ordinarily permitted under their statutes or policies.such uses may or may not be contemplated when the data are obtained from dataproviders. if the uses are known at the time, the permission of data providers canbe requested as part of the informed consent procedures. if they are not knownwhen the data are being collected and the informed consent statement does notprovide for unanticipated research use of the data, some kind of recontact may benecessary later. we use the term waiver for this process because it involvesasking data providers to waive confidentiality or data access provisions thatwould normally apply to their data.in some instances, confidentiality statutes have been interpreted to deny dataproviders the right to waive the relevant provisions. we provide one examplehere that relates to data for persons. this example was provided in one of the casestudy workshops (see appendix a) that were organized by the committee onnational statistics and the social science research council to providebackground information for the panel.the longitudinal retirement history survey (lrhs) was conducted for thesocial security administration by the census bureau, under the authority of title13 of the u.s. code, using a sampling frame based partly on data from the 1960decennial census. from 1969 to 1979, interviews were conducted at twoyearintervals with a sample of persons who had been close to retirement age at thetime the survey started. social security earnings data from administrative sourceswere added to the data base containing the survey information for persons in thesample. in addition to published reports and analyses, a publicuse microdata filecontaining matched survey and administrative record data was released.in the late 1980s, the national institute on aging (nia) wanted to fund afollowup study in which surviving members of the lrhs sample would beinterviewed one or more times. additional administrative record data for them,from various sources, would be added to the data set; for those who had died, theyear and cause of death would be determined by means of a match to thenational death index.the nia, however, was willing to fund the study only if the resulting linkeddata files could be released to researchers working under nia grants. censusbureau policies for release ofdata subjects68private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microdata, which had been revised subsequent to the initial survey, precludedreleases of such linked data sets on the basis of the belief that there was asignificant risk of reidentification of individuals by the agency holding theadministrative data. a possible alternative was for the census bureau to approachthe persons in the sample to see if they would waive certain of the protectionsprovided to their data under title 13. such waivers would make it possible toconduct the followup survey under a different authority (e.g., the authority giventhe commerce department by title 15 of the u.s. code) that would allow theresulting linked data set to be released to researchers.the census bureau conducted a test of waiver procedures with a cohort ofthe national longitudinal survey sample (this group of persons had also beensurveyed under the authority of title 13). the test revealed that about twothirdsof the persons approached were willing to sign a waiver. subsequent to the test,however, office of management and budget (omb) lawyers ruled that censusbureau employees could not release such data, even though waivers had beenobtained. consequently, the nia abandoned its effort to fund followupinterviews and to add information from administrative record sources (foradditional details, see jabine, 1993a). the agency subsequently funded a newlongitudinal study, the health and retirement study, which is being conductedunder arrangements that will permit the release of microdata files containinglinked survey and administrative record data for persons who have providedwritten consent. however, an opportunity to enhance the utility of an existing anduniquely valuable data set had to be forgone.current policies and practicesmugge (1993) reviewed the informed consent or notification statements for15 data collection programs of federal statistical agencies, plus the statementincluded with individual income tax forms. he also reviewed three examples ofinformed consent procedures used in connection with the collection of socialsecurity numbers in statistical surveys. he checked each statement forconformance with privacy act requirements and the inclusion of a confidentialitypledge. he also reviewed the formats used and other features of interest.mugge concluded that the statements for the 15 statistical surveys werescrupulous in their compliance with privacy act requirements, when applicable.most of the requirements weredata subjects69private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.also met for economic surveys in the group, even though not called for by theact. however, he questioned the adequacy of the statement in the tax returnpackage, which tells filers that their information will be disclosed to other federalagencies and to state and local governments "as provided by law." the statementcontains little information about the kinds of disclosures that will be made, and itmakes no specific mention of statistical uses or linkages with other records.when a government agency asks individuals to disclose their social securitynumber, the privacy act requires that the agency "inform that individual whetherthat disclosure is mandatory or voluntary, by what statutory or other authoritysuch number is solicited, and what uses will be made of it" (p.l. 93œ579, sec. 7(b)). mugge found that these requirements were followed, in different ways, ineach of the three examples he reviewed. however, two of the three questionnairesdid not have provisions for distinguishing whether the absence of a socialsecurity number meant that the respondent refused to provide it, the respondentdid not know it, or the data subject did not have one. lacking this information, anagency that wanted to follow a policy of not linking data when the number wasrefused (recommended in jabine, 1986) would be able to attempt linkages onlyfor those cases for which social security numbers were reported by respondents.finally, mugge found that notification statements were delivered to surveyrespondents in several different ways, including a transmittal letter, a separateprivacy act notice, a questionandanswer sheet, a brochure describing variousaspects of the survey, separate instructions for completing the questionnaire, andon the face sheet of the questionnaire itself. in several instances a multitieredapproach was used; that is, the information was supplied at more that one stage,and a telephone number, frequently tollfree, was provided for use by respondentswanting more information.special techniques have been developed for telephone surveys, because it isnot always possible to meet the privacy act requirement that the notificationstatement be on the questionnaire form or on a paper to be retained by the dataprovider. lawyers at the department of health and human services haveapproved the procedure developed by the national center for health statistics ofhaving telephone interviewers sign a statement that they have read the fullnotification statement to the respondent or, for computerassisted surveys, enterinformation to that effect in the computer.evaluation studies, especially those in which census or surveydata subjects70private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.responses are matched with administrative records and vice versa, pose specialproblems for the use of informed consent procedures. for example, whatinformation about linkages should be given to participants in ethnographicstudies designed to investigate factors associated with undercoverage in thecensus of population or to respondents to a postcensal household survey ofcensus response behavior? what about a survey of voting behavior (voting tendsto be overreported in household interviews) in which the survey responses are tobe matched with voting records or the sample of respondents has been selectedfrom voting records? the dilemma in such instances is that full disclosure of thepurposes and procedures of the study may prejudice the accuracy and utility ofthe results. social scientists have wrestled with such questions (see, e.g.,beauchamp et al., 1982:pt. 3), but, insofar as we have been able to determine,federal statistical agencies that undertake or sponsor such studies do not have anygenerally accepted set of guidelines to refer to in developing their informedconsent procedures.mandatory data sets: controllinginformation about oneselfwe turn our attention now to one of the more difficult questions we faced, aswell as some of our predecessors: when individuals are required by law toprovide personal information to the government, to what degree should they beallowed to control uses of that information for purposes other than the immediateones for which they were required to furnish it?for voluntary surveys, maintaining control over one's own information isfairly straightforward if the agency collecting the data provides accurate,complete, and clear information about the voluntary nature of the survey and theuses that will be made of the data. if appropriate informed consent procedures areused and the agreed conditions of use are followed, data providers have fullcontrol over the information they supply. prospective data providers who do notlike the conditions associated with the survey may decline to participate. theymay sometimes be asked for their reasons, but they cannot be required to giveany.when provision of information is mandatory, however, data providers nolonger have full control over the uses that will be made of their information. formost persons, the consequences of failing to file a tax return or refusing toprovide information needed to establish eligibility for social security benefits aretoo unpleasantdata subjects71private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to consider. failing to respond to the decennial census may be less likely to haveserious repercussions; nevertheless, there is a strong possibility of being subjectedto pressure from a census field supervisor and there is a small possibility of beingprosecuted.even though society, through its legislators, has determined that reportingfor a particular purpose shall be mandatory, there is still the question of whetherindividuals should have any control over uses of the same information about themfor other purposes. our concern here focuses on cases in which those other usesare for statistical or research purposes. the tradeoffs we examine are betweenindividuals' interest in controlling use of their own information and the publicinterest in obtaining information that can be used to improve public policy andadvance science and knowledge of the society.the privacy act of 1974 included among its goals the following:(b) the purpose of this act is to provide certain safeguards for an individualagainst an invasion of personal privacy by requiring federal agencies, except asotherwise provided by law, to –(2) permit an individual to prevent records pertaining to him obtained by suchagencies for a particular purpose from being used or made available for anotherpurpose without his consent;–(5) permit exemptions from the requirements with respect to records providedin this act only in those cases where there is an important public policy need forsuch exemption as has been determined by specific statutory authority (p.l.93œ579).these general principles are clearly stated, but, as we explain in chapter 5,their interpretation in specific instances is seldom obvious. by and large,individuals do not have control over statistical uses of identifiable informationabout themselves that they or others supply to agencies like the internal revenueservice, the social security administration, or the health care financingadministration (the operating agency for medicare) for administrative purposes.to the extent that statistical uses of administrative data are permitted by statutesand regulations, the data subjects and providers are usually not asked for theirconsent, and as noted above, in some instances they are not even given anynotification of such uses.the issue of individuals' control over statistical and research uses of dataabout themselves in administrative record systems was addressed explicitly in adocument titled a framework for data subjects72private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.planning u.s. federal statistics for the 1980's, issued in 1978 by the office offederal statistical policy and standards (ofsps). the preface to the documentstated that it was not a statement of official agency policies; rather, it was"expected to serve as a background for decisions concerning individualprograms, so that these decisions can take place in the context of the entirestatistical effort of the federal government" (p. v).the ofsps document specifically rejected the proposition that individualconsent should be obtained for any interagency transfers of individuallyidentifiable administrative data for statistical and research purposes. "the price ofthat approach – is great, leading to biased data, increased public expenditure,and the failure or impossibility of some valuable statistical and researchstudies" (p. 259). the following recommendation, which has not beenimplemented, was made at the end of the chapter on "confidentiality ofstatistical and research data":4. administrative data sets should be accessible to statisticians andresearchers in "protected enclaves" for some statistical uses unrelated to thepurposes of the original data collection (p. 281).the concept of protected enclave used in the ofsps document is closelyrelated to that of functional separation as we defined the latter in chapter 1. thegoal in either instance is to prohibit nonstatistical uses of data obtained forstatistical purposes, regardless of their source.with respect to notification, ofsps recommended the use of "a statement atthe time of data collection about the general character of potential statisticaluses" (p. 281). it also recommended that the power to authorize interagencytransfers be lodged in a review agency such as ofsps (the equivalent at that timeof the omb statistical policy office) and that the review agency use a clear setof criteria to determine when such transfers were sufficiently in the publicinterest to justify them.as we explained earlier in this section in connection with waivers, lack ofinformational control can work in both directions. respondents to thelongitudinal retirement history survey were, in the final outcome, not allowedto waive any of the confidentiality protections that were given to theirinformation as required by the census bureau's title 13 authority.what balance should be struck between the data needs of society andindividuals' control over information about themselves that they are required toprovide to government agencies? thedata subjects73private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.following factors should be considered in searching for a reasonable answer: the degree to which statistical and research uses are related to  theadministrative purpose for which the data were obtained: one wouldexpect that very few people who receive social security benefits wouldhave any objection to their covered earnings and benefit data being usedto conduct statistical analyses of the characteristics of beneficiaries andthe relationships between earnings and benefits for different age cohortsand other population subgroups. given that society has agreed to havevarious programs of benefits, taxation, licensing, and regulation, mostpeople would agree that good information is needed to monitor andimprove those programs. the potential benefits to society of the proposed statistical and  researchuses: it can be argued that individuals' control over uses of theirinformation should extend to those activities that offer little promise ofimportant benefits to society, even if such uses can bring no harm to thedata subjects. the effectiveness of the confidentiality protections associated  with thestatistical and research uses of the data: do the intended uses requiretransfer of individually identifiable records to other agencies,organizations, or individuals? do they require matching with data for thesame persons from other data sets? if so, will the confidentiality of therecords be adequately protected? the definition of the population whose data are wanted for statistical and research uses: should a distinction be made between recordsgenerated for programs with wide general coverage and records forneedstested entitlement programs and other programs for speciallydefined groups? what about criminal records? the feasibility and cost of using informed consent procedures to  coversome types of statistical and research uses of administrative  records:some records, like social security files containing date of birth, sex, anduntil recently, raceethnicity, are being created at the time of the datasubject's birth, so that some kind of proxy procedure would be necessaryto obtain consent to any uses deemed to require it. would such consentremain in force during the individual's lifetime or would it be revocable?what would be the additional cost to custodians of such records oflabeling each record according to its current availability status forvoluntary research and statistical uses? alternative sources of data: if the records from mandatory data setscannot be used, are there other feasible methods fordata subjects74private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acquiring the data needed for statistical analyses and research? will it benecessary to ask some of the same individuals for information they havealready supplied for other purposes?whatever general principles may be developed for statistical and researchuses of mandatory data sets, their application in specific instances will require theestablishment of an orderly and fair process that takes into account the interestsof data subjects, users, and custodians. judgments will be necessary concerningthe importance to society of the proposed uses, whether they are relevant to theprogram for which the data were collected, the adequacy of confidentialityprotections, and whether there are reasonable alternative methods for obtainingthe information. in chapter 8 we discuss alternative mechanisms for making suchjudgments.findings and recommendationsrecommendation 3.1 federal statistical agencies should follow a flexible,multilayered approach to informing data providers of the conditions under whichthey are being asked to provide information.basic information should be given to all data providers. those who wantmore information should have the opportunity to obtain it directly frominterviewers or by other means, such as supplementary written statements ortollfree telephone inquiries to the agency. the goal should be to give each dataprovider as much information as is necessary to make his or her consent asinformed as he or she wishes it to be.recommendation 3.2 basic information given to all data providers requestedto participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all privacy actrequirements. similar information is recommended for data onorganizations, except that the requirement to inform providers aboutroutine uses (as defined by the privacy act) is not applicable.(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,including the expected time required to provide the data (arequirement of the office of management and budget) and, ifapplicable, the nature of sensitive topicsdata subjects75private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.included in the survey and plans for possible followup interviews ofsome or all respondents.(c) no false or misleading statements. for example, a statement thatimplies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.(d) information about any planned or potential nonstatistical uses of theinformation to be provided. there should be a clear statement of thelevel of confidentiality protection that can be legally ensured.(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages forstatistical or research purposes. for persons, this notification willusually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject'ssocial security number.(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of thedata for statistical or research purposes.(g) information about the length of time for which the information willbe retained in identifiable form.to meet the requirements of item (b), agencies must determine which of thedata they plan to collect may be considered sensitive by data providers. as theauthors of statistical policy working paper 2 concluded, there are no generalrules for establishing whether data are sensitive. that decision involvescommunity standards and generally must be made on a casebycase basis.however, financial datašlike income and assetsšand data on illegal or ethicallyquestionable behavior are typically understood to be sensitive.in preparing an informed consent or notification statement, a statisticalagency should carefully review the purposes and design of the data collectionactivity, especially when multiple contacts with respondents or linkages with datafrom other sources are planned or may prove to be desirable. agencies shouldseek expert opinions as to what kinds of data are currently or may in the future berelevant to the goals of the statistical or research activity. even experts, however,cannot foresee all future needs. item (f) is intended to allow for unanticipatedstatistical and research uses of the data that are not inconsistent with provisionsof the initial statements to data providers.with regard to item (g), some statistical records, such as those from thedecennial censuses of population, may be retained permanently in identifiableform. the subject of archiving of statistical records is covered in chapter 6.in general, similar information about statistical uses shoulddata subjects76private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be given to persons or organizations that are asked to provide information aboutthemselves for compliance or programmatic (administrative purposes, wheneverthere is a possibility that their data will also be used for statistical purposes. insuch instances, it is likely that the major concern of data providers will be withthe nonstatistical uses of their data, so that the basic notification statement shouldemphasize that aspect, rather than statistical uses. however, full information onstatistical uses should be available to data providers who want it.as discussed earlier in this section, the panel believes that there have beeninstances in which unnecessarily strict interpretation of some confidentialitystatutes has precluded the use of waiver procedures to enhance the utility ofpolicyrelevant data sets.recommendation 3.3 in keeping with the objective of giving individualscontrol over their own information whenever societal needs do not clearly takeprecedence, data subjects or data providers should be allowed to waive certainaspects of confidentiality protection that would usually be accorded to theinformation they provide. agencies should take special care to ensure that anysuch waivers are based on fully informed consent.the panel considered a broad set of options with respect to individuals'control over statistical and research uses of data they are required to provide foradministrative purposes. at one end of the spectrum, individual data subjectswould have total controlšthey would be allowed to opt out of any or all suchuses. at the other end, they would have no controlšany uses permitted by lawand considered appropriate by the custodians of the data would be acceptable.there are many intermediate options under which data subjects would retaincontrol over some uses but not others. also at issue were the questions of howmuch information should be given to data subjects about such uses and, if theyare to be given the opportunity to opt out in some instances, whether themechanism should require affirmative informed consent or simply notification oftheir right to opt out (passive consent).not surprisingly in view of past experience, the panel was unable to reach aconsensus on this issue. where individuals came out depended largely on theirpersonal views about how best to resolve the conflicts among the requirements ofthe three fundamental principles that were presented in chapter 1. in thisdata subjects77private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.instance, the tradeoffs are between democratic accountability and constitutionalempowerment on one side and individual autonomy on the other.one proposed solution was supported by most of the panel members, butthree members preferred different solutions, two in the direction of greaterdemocratic accountability and constitutional empowerment and one in thedirection of greater individual autonomy. we present first the majority positionand an explanation of its features, followed by the views of those who did notfully agree with it.the majority view was that data subjects should be allowed control overresearch and statistical uses of data they are required to provide for administrativepurposes when1. they are required to provide the data as a condition for participationin needstested entitlement programs that provide benefits to specialpopulation groups, and2. the proposed uses are not clearly related to the mission and functionof the agency or system that collected the data.this position represents an attempt to reconcile the rights of individuals tocontrol uses of their data with the rights of society to obtain the information itneeds for efficient design and management of programs and policies designed topromote the general welfare. the position is deliberately stated in broad terms,and those who supported it did not try to spell out the implications of itsprovisions in every circumstance. programs like food stamps and aid tofamilies with dependent children would clearly be covered by provision 1;medicare and social security retirement benefits would not. provision 2 wouldnot necessarily give data subjects control over all transfers of identifiableinformation about them to other agencies. it would apply only if the proposed useof the data by the recipient was not clearly related to the purpose for which theywere collected.whenever provisions 1 and 2 both apply, those who supported this positionbelieve that data subjects should be clearly informed of their option to withholdtheir data from certain kinds of statistical and research uses and that no pressureshould be applied to dissuade them from exercising that option. they believe that apassive consent mechanism, which assumes consent except for data providerswho, when given the opportunity, express their desire not to have theirinformation used for such purposes, would be adequate to protect the interests ofindividuals.one consideration that led to this proposed solution was thedata subjects78private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.absence of any clear mechanism, independent of the agencies directly involvedand representing the interests of data subjects and data users, for reachingdecisions on what kinds of statistical and research uses of mandatory data sets areappropriate and under what circumstances data subjects should be allowed to optout. in chapter 8, where we discuss the management of confidentiality and dataaccess functions in the federal statistical system, the panel expresses its support(recommendation 8.5) for the creation of an independent federal advisory bodythat would be responsible for promoting enhanced protection for all federal dataabout persons and responsible data dissemination for statistical and researchpurposes. if such a body is created, it could play a very constructive role indecision making on specific uses of mandatory data sets.two panel members preferred a different method of treating proposedstatistical and research uses not directly related to the mission and function of theagency or system that collected the mandatory data. they believe that all suchuses, regardless of the nature of the population groups affected, should requirereview and approval by an organization or institution other than the datacollecting agency and the agency, organization, or individual desiring to use thedata. for approval of a proposed use, three conditions would have to be met:1. the intended use is to provide evidence pertinent to a general socialconcern, scientific discovery, or significant public policy issue.2. the intended analyses cannot be demonstrated to be incapable ofproviding such evidence.3. the intended analyses would not compromise the dignity andpersonal freedom of the data providers.notification statements to data providers would include information aboutany such uses approved prior to the time of data collection. they might alsomention the possibility that additional statistical and research uses might beapproved and would describe the process that would govern such determinations.one panel member expressed a preference for more restrictive conditions onstatistical and research uses of mandatory data sets than those provided in themajority position. this member believes that persons providing data foradministrative purposes should have control over all such uses that are not clearlyrelevant to the program for which the data were collected, without regard to thekind of population covered by the program. in effect, the firstdata subjects79private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.condition attached to the majority proposal would be eliminated. a ''passivewaiver" procedure would be acceptable, that is, the data could be shared if thedata provider did not explicitly forbid it after being notified of the proposed uses.this position was taken based on the member's subjective weighing of the valueof individual autonomy and control over information about oneself comparedwith the value of more nearly complete and economically obtained data.research related to confidentiality and dataaccesscontrolled survey experimentsthree major u.s. studies have conducted included experiments on informedconsent procedures for a statistical survey of the general population. in the late1970s, the committee on national statistics (national research council, 1979)conducted a facetoface survey in which the confidentiality assurances given torespondents were systematically varied. five separate versions were studied: (1)assurance of confidentiality in perpetuity, (2) assurance of confidentiality for 75years, (3) assurance of confidentiality for 25 years, (4) no mention ofconfidentiality, and (5) a statement that replies could be given to other agenciesand the public. participation rates decreased monotonically with decreasingassurances of confidentiality, but the observed spread among the five versionswas less than three percentage points. further, twothirds of the refusals camefrom persons who declined to participate before the interviewer had a chance toread the introduction to the survey. for those who did participate, nonresponseand underreporting to the income question, which was the most sensitive oneincluded in the survey, were greater when weaker confidentiality assurances weregiven.in an experiment that was also part of a facetoface survey, singer (1978)investigated the effects of more versus less information about sensitive subjectmatter in survey introductions, varying assurances of confidentiality, andrequiring or not requiring a signature to document consent. varying theinformation given to respondents about the content of the survey had noobservable effect on participation rates or the quality of survey response, norwere participation rates affected by varying assurances of confidentiality.however, response rates to sensitive questions were higher for those who hadbeen given absolute assurances of confidentiality.data subjects80private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.asking respondents to sign a consent form would have caused a significantdrop in participation rates for the survey if it had been required in order toconduct the interview. however, signing the consent form was not required andmost of the respondents who refused to sign were still willing to be interviewed.in a telephone survey, singer (1979) investigated the effects of variations ininformation about survey content and the purpose of the study on participationrates and response rates to individual questions. she found no significantdifferences.singer (1993) has prepared a comprehensive review of the above and otherrelated studies, including some conducted in germany. the review, originallyprepared for the panel, includes some studies of passive consent procedureswhereby data subjects or providers are notified that some step will be taken (e.g.,their children will be enrolled in a schoolrelated research study) unless theynotify the researchers of their disapproval. some of the studies, in addition tovarying treatments experimentally, asked participants directly about theirattitudes and perceptions on matters related to informed consent, privacy, andconfidentiality.the results of the various studies do not always agree but, taken in all, theyprovide the basis for some tentative conclusions: behavior does not necessarily mirror expressed concerns. most persons,when asked directly, thought that assurances of confidentiality wouldmake people more willing to answer questions, but experimentsembedded in surveys of the general public showed only smalldifferences in participation rates between those given strong assurancesand those given weak assurances or none at all. moreover, some recentexperiments have shown that elaborate assurances of confidentiality canreduce willingness to participate (singer et al., 1990). when potential survey respondents are contacted without prior notice,such as an advance mailing, most refusals to participate occur before theinterviewer has had a chance to explain the confidentiality protectionsthat will be given to survey responses. requiring a signature to document consent significantly reduces surveyparticipation rates. to a point, verbal assurances of confidentiality appear to result in lessnonresponse and more accurate responses to questions on sensitivetopics, like income. in some instances, however, especially when theassurances immediately preceded the sensitive question, there were morerefusals to answer.data subjects81private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. studies involving technical means of ensuring confidentiality, such asrandomized responses, have sometimes yielded higher estimates ofsensitive behavior, but the lack of significant changes in some studies orfor some variables indicates that the conditions required for this to occurare not clear. there is evidence that many people do not hear, understand, orremember precisely what is said in the introduction to an interview(singer, 1979).cognitive researchthe past decade has seen increasing recognition of the contributions that thecognitive sciences can make to survey research (see, e.g., tanur, 1992). threefederal statistical agencies, the bureau of labor statistics, the census bureau, andthe national center for health statistics, have established small units toundertake laboratory and field studies of the cognitive processes of respondentswho are asked to comprehend survey questions, retrieve relevant informationfrom memory, and make judgments about how to answer the questions. most ofthe research has been aimed at improving questions on specific topics. however,the behavioral sciences research group at the bureau of labor statistics, withsupport from the statistics of income division, internal revenue service (irs),has recently begun a program of research on how providers of personal dataunderstand and interpret words and phrases contained in informed consent andnotification statements (van meliswright et al., 1992).the research at the bureau of labor statistics has two components. aninitial investigation will identify and evaluate people's perceptions of thelanguage, terms, and concepts that might be used in assurances of confidentiality.the second phase will investigate the effect of various terms and concepts onparticipation decisions in order to determine which of them may be effectivelyand ethically used to promote participation and truthful answers in surveys. theanalyses will include terms and concepts related to data providers' willingness tohave the information they provide shared in identifiable form with anotherorganization.public opinion researchseveral u.s. public opinion surveys have addressed privacy questions, and afew have been devoted entirely to such issues, notably a series of surveysconducted by louis harris and associatesdata subjects82private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in recent years. however, these surveys have focused primarily on privacy andconfidentiality issues related to uses of information about individuals by theprivate sector, and they provide only limited information on public attitudesabout government statistical activities. a 1990 survey in the series was sponsoredby equifax inc. (1990), a provider of consumer and business informationservices. most of the questions were about information practices of commercialorganizations and government agencies in general. one item asked respondentsabout how much they trusted several different organizations, including thecensus bureau, to collect information about them and treat it responsibly. theproportion who had high or moderate trust in the census bureau (81 percent, with 2percent not sure) was as large as that for any other organization and considerablylarger than most (e.g., 67 percent for the internal revenue service, with 1 percentnot sure).the internal revenue service (1984, 1987) has sponsored several nationalsurveys of taxpayers to study their opinions and attitudes about irs personnel,programs, and activities. some of the results are relevant to the questionsdiscussed earlier in this chapter concerning the use of information frommandatory data sets (such as those based on income tax returns) for statisticalpurposes not directly related to the purposes for which the information wasobtained. most of the taxpayer opinion surveys, for example, included questionsabout statistical and other nontax uses of information provided on tax returns. themost recent survey, the 1990 taxpayer opinion survey, included questions onknowledge of tax laws and policies governing sharing of tax data, views on whatthe provisions of those laws and policies should be, views on sharing tax data forspecified purposes, and the possible use of irs and social securityadministration records in future population censuses.the 1990 survey data (see table 3.1) indicated that most taxpayers hadlimited knowledge of the relevant laws and policies and had not read or thoughtmuch about the sharing of tax data with other parts of the government.nevertheless, the majority said they had substantial interest in the subject. whenasked in general terms for their views about policies for sharing tax data, themajority of respondents took a fairly restrictive view. for example, 64 percentagreed strongly or agreed that the irs should never release information aboutpeople's income to other government agencies under any circumstances.however, when respondents were subsequently asked about several kinds ofreleases ofdata subjects83private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tax data to particular agencies for specific purposes, their reactions were quitedifferent, as shown in table 3.1. for example, when taxpayers were asked whatthey thought about the use of certain kinds of administrative records in thedecennial census in order to reduce the cost of the census and the burden onrespondents, 70 percent favored the use of social security information on date ofbirth and sex, and 61 percent favored the use of irs information on place ofresidence and income.table 3.1 taxpayer attitudes on specific releases of tax dataagency and purposefavoropposenot surethe department of justicešfor major criminalinvestigations (such as drugs and organized crime)77211the veterans administrationšfor determiningwhether veterans are eligible to receive benefitsbecause they are unable to work70273the census bureaušfor identifying where peoplehave moved in order to study population trends(statistical use)65333the department of agriculturešto maintain an uptodate list of farms for crop and livestock surveys(statistical use)59374state governmentsšfor improving state collectionof taxes from businesses56422state governmentsšfor improving state collectionof taxes from individuals44524members of congressšfor any use they considerappropriate13843source: tabulations from the 1990 taxpayer opinion survey provided by the research division,internal revenue service.data from the 1990 and earlier taxpayer opinion surveys should be used withcaution, for several reasons. first, the wording and format of the questions aboutsharing tax information differed significantly from one survey to the next.second, the data reflect only the opinions of the member of each taxfiling family(asdata subjects84private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.defined for individual income tax purposes) considered to be most knowledgeableabout that family's taxfiling practices. third, most respondents to the 1990survey had little knowledge of laws and policies governing nontax uses of theirreturn information and had not given much thought to such matters. subject tothese caveats, the survey results suggest that the majority of taxpayers support theidea of sharing their tax information with other agencies for statistical purposes.however, minorities of taxpayers, generally in the range of 15 to 20 percent, arestrongly opposed to such data sharing.at the time this report was being prepared, the full irs report and thepublicuse data file from the 1990 taxpayer opinion survey had not beenreleased. when these outputs become available, it will be possible to analyze howthe demographic and social characteristics of taxpayers are associated with theirattitudes toward statistical and other nontax uses of their tax return information.findings and recommendationsstatistical agencies need to "know their respondents." how do dataproviders interpret concepts like privacy, confidentiality, disclosure, data sharing,and statistical purposes? how well do they understand informed consent andnotification statements, and how are their decisions on survey participationinfluenced by different formats and modes of presentation? what kinds ofinformation about themselves do they consider to be most sensitive? what dothey think about the linkage of their information from two or more sources? howdo their reactions vary by raceethnic group, gender, and socioeconomic status?the research described in this section has begun to provide useful answers tosome of these questions. such research should continue because it is not completeand because public opinion about statistical data collection activities may varygradually over time as a result of changes in the technological, social, andpolitical environments in which public surveys are undertaken. moreover, suddenchanges in the environment for conducting public surveys are possible inresponse to highly publicized incidents involving improper disclosure and uses ofconfidential personal data in connection with nonstatistical activities, either in thepublic or private sector.data subjects85private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 3.4 statistical agencies should undertake and supportcontinuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitorthe views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, responseburden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, andrelated issues.public information activities of statisticalagencies and organizationscurrent practicesstatistical agencies explain their positions on confidentiality questions andfair information practices to individual data providers through the use of informedconsent procedures and notification statements. they also attempt tocommunicate their positions on such matters to the general public or to particulargroups and organizations through various kinds of public information activities.the motivation for some of these activities is to enlist the support of the publicand various organizations for specific programs, such as the decennial census. inother instances, public information activities develop as responses to specificallegations or suggestions that data collected for statistical purposes are not beingkept confidential.following are some examples of constructive public information activitiesthat have come to the attention of the panel: the bureau of the census (1985) has developed a generalpurposebrochure, how the census bureau keeps your information strictlyconfidential , which succinctly describes the legal and physical securityprotections that are provided for information collected by the censusbureau. the brochure cites favorable comments from severalnewspapers and other sources about the confidentiality provided tocensus bureau data. the census bureau discussed the application of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques (see discussion of these techniques in chapter 6) tosmallarea tabulations from the 1990 census with representatives ofseveral organizations, including the american civil liberties union(aclu), to determine their views, as data users and privacy advocates.in the discussions, the aclu representatives had to balance theirprivacy concerns against their interest in ensuring that minority groupsreceive proper voting representation. in this instance, the latter concernwon out. it wasdata subjects86private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.agreed that the exact counts of persons aged 18 and over by race orethnicity should be published and that the planned use of techniques toreduce disclosure risks would be applied only to other variables. the american statistical association's (1991) committee on privacy andconfidentiality has developed a brochure on surveys and privacy toanswer questions about privacy and confidentiality, clarify theresponsibilities of survey takers, describe a respondent's reasonableexpectations, and encourage survey response. in addition to surveyrespondents and survey takers, the intended audience for the brochureincludes "the public, the media, and congress." the committee obtainedfunding from four statistical agencies to print and distribute a largenumber of the brochures.an example of unfavorable publicity requiring a response or clarification ofthe census bureau's confidentiality policies is provided by the announcement,early in 1990, by the lotus development corporation and equifax of plans tomarket a cdrom product called lotus marketplace: households. prospectivepurchasers were offered a data base containing information on 80 million u.s.households, including names, address, gender, marital status, income, buyingpreferences, and even "psychographic categories," such as "cautious youngcouple" or "innercity single.''the sales brochure for lotus marketplace: households mentioned thecensus bureau as one of the product's important sources of data. a quick readingof the brochure might have given the impression that household incomes werebeing obtained directly from individual census returns (some press reportsconveyed this impression; see, e.g., lewis, 1991). they were not. as was madereasonably clear in the technical portion of the brochure, the household incomevalues were modelbased estimates obtained by using smallarea data from thedecennial census plus household size and other variables from other sources.nevertheless, the census bureau received some indignant inquiries as to whyindividual census information was being made available for a commercial database.because of strong objections about the privacy and confidentiality aspects ofthis data base by many organizations and individuals, lotus marketplace:households was withdrawn from the market early in 1991. a particular objectionto the product was that the cdrom format would preclude the possibility ofcorrections to individual data items. however, similar data bases indata subjects87private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other formats are being developed and sold. smallarea data from the decennialcensus and geocoding systems developed and released by the census bureau arelikely to be used in many of these systems. statistical agencies can expect morequestions to be raised about their relation to such commercial enterprises, andthey must face the possibility that objections to them might have a spillovereffect on public willingness to participate in government surveys.recommendationsthe panel believes that the risks of major or deliberate violations of privacyor confidentiality are extremely low in the federal statistical system. the risks aresomewhat higher for federal administrative records, as illustrated by recentrevelations of sales of social security records to private investigators (seewashington post, december 28, 1991:a1; baltimore sun, february 29,1992:1a), and probably highest of all for private sector record systems, asillustrated by the lotus marketplace example. the public, however, does notalways distinguish among these different types of records, and there is a dangerthat violations not involving statistical data bases can create moral outrage andhave damaging spillover effects on federal statistical programs.recommendation 3.5 federal statistical agencies should continue to developsystematic informational activities designed to inform the public of their abilityto maintain the confidentiality of individually identifiable information, includinguse of legal barriers to disclosure and physical security procedures, and theirintentions to minimize intrusions on privacy and the time and effort required torespond to statistical inquiries.recommendation 3.6 agencies should be prepared to deal quickly andcandidly with instances of "moral outrage" that may be directed at statisticalprograms from time to time as a result of actual or perceived violations ofpledges of confidentiality given to data providers by data collectors. theagencies should be prepared to explain the purpose of specific data collectionactivities and the procedures used to protect confidentiality. they should acceptfull responsibility if a violation occurs and should announce measures to preventfuture violations.data subjects88private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 3.7 as part of the communication process, statisticalagencies should work more closely with appropriate advocacy groups, such asthose concerned with civil liberties and those that represent the rights ofdisadvantaged segments of the population, and with specialists on ethical issuesand human rights.some agencies may want to include members of such groups on theiradvisory committees.data subjects89private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data subjects90private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4data usersplease, sir, i want some more.charles dickens, oliver twiststatistical agencies serve as intermediaries and mediators between dataproviders and data users. in chapter 3 we asserted that the federal statisticalsystem could not function without the cooperation of data providers. it is equallytrue that the system would be in serious trouble if it was not able to satisfy, to areasonable degree, the needs of a broad array of users inside and outsidegovernment. failing this, it would not be fulfilling its purpose and would notdeserve to be supported with public funds. data users would have to place greaterreliance on commercial data sources, which could have potentially undesirableconsequences for the scope, cost, and quality of data available to them.in addition, feedback from a wide data user community is essential formaintaining and improving the quality of federal statistics. it is an effective wayto find errors and uncover anomalies in the data and to assess data quality.in this chapter, we examine the relationships between federal statisticalagencies and the persons and organizations that use their statistical products. thechapter has three sections. in the first, we set the stage by defining basic conceptsassociated with data access. next, we consider the expectations that data usershave about access to federal statistics and the extent to which those expectationsare being and should be met. finally, we examine the ethical and legalresponsibilities of data users. at present, users' formal responsibilities extendalmost entirely to the statistical agencies, but in a broader sense data users alsohave ethical and pragmatic responsibilities to data subjects and to society atlarge.data users91private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic concepts related to data accessthe data products of statistical agencies are released to other agencies,organizations, and individuals for statistical and research uses. these uses includeend uses, such as policy analysis, commercial and academic research, advocacy,and various educational applications in the private and public sectors. they alsoinclude intermediate  uses, such as the development of sampling frames forsurveys, the enhancement of existing data sets by adding information from othersources, and the evaluation of data quality by comparing aggregate data orindividual records (microdata) from different sources.most releases of publicly collected data for intermediate statistical uses areto other government agencies and their contractors or grantees. the spectrum ofend users is very broad, however, especially in the private sector. in government,it includes policymakers, policy analysts, program planners and evaluators,researchers, and educators. in the private sector, it includes all of the foregoing,plus advocacy groups, market analysts, and the media.depending on users' requirements, the products released to them mayconsist of aggregate data or individual records, with or without explicitidentifiers, such as name, address, and social security or employer identificationnumber. media for release may be hard copy or electronic, and the latter mayassume various forms, such as tapes, diskettes, cdrom, or direct onlinetransmission. online access may be in the form of transmission of complete datasets or outputs resulting from queries of inhouse data sets.a significant attribute of data access, the term for release when seen fromthe user's side, is whether access is unrestricted or restricted . we consider dataaccess to be unrestricted if aggregate data or microdata are available to anyonewho wants them (and is willing to pay any user fees that may be required),without restrictions or conditions of any kind on the uses to be made of the data.access is restricted whenever any conditions on use are imposed.restricted access is important for two reasons. the first relates to end usesof the data. in preparing data for unrestricted access, agencies may have to limitseverely the amount of information included in statistical summaries orindividual records in order to comply with requirements to preserve theconfidentiality of individually identifiable information. such limitations maydata users92private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prevent users from performing the analyses best suited to their needs. as a result,returns from the investment of public funds in data collection and processing maynot always be as great as they otherwise would be. the use of various forms ofrestricted access can overcome some of the limitations by allowing access tomore detailed data, under controlled conditions, for selected users outside theproducing agency.it is also important that there be data sharing for intermediate statisticaluses. in the decentralized federal statistical system, in order to improve thequality and consistency of information collected by different agencies and toavoid costly duplication of effort, data are sometimes shared among statisticalagencies. such data sharing cannot be unrestricted, however, because it usuallyrequires access to individually identifiable information.expectations of data usersbackgroundincreasing demands for accessdemand for access to federal statistical data increased at an extraordinaryrate in the 1980s and will surely continue to do so in the 1990s. this demand hasbeen fueled by the development of powerful, widely accessible computers andsophisticated analytic software, improved data transmission capability, thecreation of largescale administrative data sets with numerical identifiers, andfavorable user experience with publicuse microdata sets based on statistical andadministrative data collections.some of the demand for access is being satisfied. data users have access tofederal data that they could scarcely have imagined 50 years ago. nevertheless,potential users inside and outside government continue to assert that they haveimportant needs that are not being met. are they like spoiled children, neversatisfied with what they receive, always wanting more, or is there somelegitimacy to their complaints? are statistical agencies being sufficientlyreceptive to user needs, or could they do more? below we summarize theevidence that we have obtained and draw some conclusions on these complicatedquestions.meeting user needs: successes and failuresthe picture over the past two decades is mixed. overall, there can be littledoubt that user access to data has increased,data users93private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but so has demand. some new restrictions have also been imposed. to convey theflavor of developments during this period and a sense of the current situation, wepresent examples of movement in both directions. (these examples apply only todata on persons. user access to data on businesses and other organizations isdiscussed in chapter 7.)following are some developments that signify a potential for greater useraccess: substantial growth in the use of publicuse microdata sets issued byfederal statistical agencies; increased inhouse access to more detailed microdata files forresearchers participating in the american statistical association/national science foundation (asa/nsf) fellows program and othersimilar arrangements; in addition, some statistical units, like thenational agricultural statistics service and the statistics of incomedivision of the internal revenue service, have made arrangements forresearchers to use such data under controlled conditions in the unit'sstate or regional offices; increased use of formal user licensing agreements by governmentagencies and nongovernment organizations that have developedimportant research data bases with federal fundingšthese agreementsprovide for access, at the user's work site, to detailed microdata setsunder controlled conditions; initiation of the release, by the national center for education statistics(nces), of encrypted microdata files in cdrom format with builtinsoftware for analysisšthis mode of release may permit more widespreaddissemination of microdata sets that link survey and administrative dataon persons; the undertaking of research to explore the possibility of releasingmicrodata sets that do not contain data for any specific individual butwould allow users to draw valid inferences from the data (see chapter 6and rubin, 1993, for details); and increased use of formal agreements for interagency sharing ofidentifiable data about persons for statistical and research purposes.until recently, for example, the bureau of labor statistics (bls), theprimary funding agency for the census bureau's current populationsurvey, had access only to tabulations and publicuse microdata filesfrom the survey. however, the census bureau and bls have recentlyconcluded an interagency agreement that allows the latter to haveaccess, for use in special analyses and methodological research, tononpublic microdata from the current population survey. (chapter 6provides details on this and other examples.)data users94private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the other side of the ledger, the following are instances in which attemptsto arrange for interagency sharing of data or access by nongovernment users forlegitimate and often potentially important statistical uses have not succeeded: gates (1988) provides several examples of user requests for censusbureau demographic microdata that were denied because ofconfidentiality concerns. the topics that the users had hoped to studyincluded a disparity in social security benefits between adjacent cohortsof retirees, the economic wellbeing of persons living outsidemetropolitan areas, racial segregation in the united states, and theoutcomes of the selective service draft lotteries held in the 1970s. the tax reform act of 1976 ended presidential authority to allowaccess to tax return information through executive orders (wilson andsmith, 1983). the act specified which organizations could have access totax return data and for what purposes. it created new barriers to access,for statistical and research purposes, to employee earnings data andother tax return information, such as taxpayers' current addresses.among the consequences of this legislation have been (1) almostcomplete denial of external access to the social securityadministration's (ssa's) continuous work history sample, (2)increased difficulty in tracing study populations in epidemiologicfollowup studies, (3) increased difficulty in developing arrangementsfor the sharing of lists of businesses among federal statistical agencies,and (4) barriers to the linkage of survey and tax return data for studies ofthe income distribution of the general population or selected subgroups. for many years, the national center for health statistics (nchs) used asampling frame based on address lists from the decennial census for itsnational health interview survey (nhis), a continuing national samplesurvey on health topics, for which the sample selection and field workare done by the census bureau. however, the confidentiality provisionsrequired of the census bureau (title 13 u.s.c.) prevented nchs fromusing the sample of households derived from census addresses for othersurveys in which data were to be collected for nchs by privatecontractors. in the early 1980s, nchs abandoned the use of decennialcensus address lists and, at a very substantial cost, switched to asampling procedure that required independent listing of addresses insample areas by field workers. the census bureau continues to selectthe sample and, using the new frame, collect the nhis data for nchs;because the survey is now conducted under the provisionsdata users95private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of title 15 u.s.c., the census bureau is able to share identifiableinformation with nchs for the latter's statistical uses in other surveysand analyses. release of data to other users is governed by nchsconfidentiality requirements, as stated in title 42 u.s.c. as a result of recent arrangements between ssa and state vital statisticsoffices for joint issuance of birth certificates and social securitynumbers, ssa no longer receives raceethnic information for mostbirths. information on the raceethnic status of the parents is recorded onbirth certificates, but it is not being made available to ssa. while theimmediate consequences are limited, in the longer run this practice willmake it difficult or impossible for ssa to analyze the effects of itsprograms on different racialethnic groups and for the census bureau toprovide reliable intercensal population estimates by race. it will also be anegative factor in considering a possible shift to greater reliance onadministrative records in conducting the decennial censuses ofpopulation. although some researchers are gaining restricted access to microdatasets at agency sites through fellowship programs and similararrangements, many other potential users of such data sets cannot beaccommodated or could work more effectively at their home sitesbecause of the reduced cost and better access to computing facilities. asnoted, a few agencies (e.g., nces) are offering offsite access underlicensing agreements, but others either lack the legal authority(especially the census bureau) or do not choose to offer sucharrangements. as discussed in chapter 3, the office of management and budgetrecently issued a legal opinion that the census bureau's data subjects andproviders cannot waive their entitlement to confidentiality under title13. the ruling caused the national institute on aging to abandon effortsto conduct a potentially valuable followup study of surviving panelmembers from the longitudinal retirement history survey, which hadbeen conducted in the 1970s for the ssa by the census bureau underthe authority of title 13.because of legal restrictions or other concerns about the confidentiality ofthe data requested, most federal statistical agencies, unlike the census bureau, donot systematically document cases in which they have denied data user requestsor provided only part of the data requested. if they did, and the panel believesthey should, we probably could have presented similar examples from severalother agencies.data users96private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.factors that affect agency decisions on accessin deciding what kinds of releases of personal data can and cannot be made,federal statistical agencies must first ensure that they comply with all relevantstatutory requirements and honor all pledges made to data subjects and providers.failure in either respect could seriously compromise their ability to carry outtheir mission. many agency officials believe that in addition to adhering to legalrequirements and honoring commitments to respondents, they must be perceivedby the public as doing so (see, e.g., butz, 1985b). on the other hand, to survive,statistical agencies must be perceived by the public and especially by theexecutive and legislative branches of government as fulfilling their basic missionby providing information that is relevant to important social and economic policyquestions and that can be used in ways that benefit society.federal statistical agencies must also consider the costs associated withvarious forms of dissemination. all forms of dissemination have some costs, butrestricted access procedures tend to be more resource intensive. even if users arewilling to pay some of the costs, agencies with employment ceilings must givepriority to their primary data collection, processing, and dissemination activities,as opposed to, say, undertaking special tabulations on a reimbursable basis,providing staff support and computer services for an asa/nsf fellow, or makinga site visit to a licensed user to ensure that all access conditions are beingobserved.user influence on agency decisionsto what extent and by what means are users able to influence agencydecisions on access? few mechanisms are available specifically for this purpose.the panels that have been established at the census bureau and the nationalcenter for education statistics to determine how much information can beincluded in microdata files that are released to nonagency users do not includeany representatives of nongovernment data users. the census bureau, weunderstand, has been considering an arrangement whereby outside advisorsrepresenting data subjects and data users would review decisions of its microdatareview panel twice a year and recommend whatever changes in release policiesthey consider appropriate.users have opportunitiesšat meetings of the american statisticalassociation, the association for public data users, the councildata users97private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of professional associations on federal statistics, and other professionalorganizationsšto discuss dissemination procedures with other users and withagency representatives. discussions of this kind influenced the census bureau'schoice of statistical disclosure limitation procedures for summary tape files fromthe 1990 decennial census. the bureau switched from the cell suppressionprocedures used in previous censuses, which had caused many problems forusers, to a new procedure that did not require any cell suppression.another topic that is often discussed in such settings is the population sizecutoff for the smallest geographic areas that can be identified for individualrecords in publicuse microdata sets. the census bureau lowered its generalcutoff from 250,000 to 100,000 in 1981, but some users would like to see itlowered further.a few users who have been denied data they want have requested access tothe data under the freedom of information act. however, most regular users offederal data for research and statistical purposes are reluctant to take such a stepbecause of concerns, whether justified or not, that their ongoing dealings with thestatistical agencies might be prejudiced.another option might be to seek changes in the statutes that restrict access todata. given the complexity of existing confidentiality statutes and the legislativeprocess in general, it is hard to predict the outcome of attempts to change therules for data access through changes in legislation. (the confidentialitylegislation now in force and the pros and cons of seeking changes are discussed inchapter 5.)findings and recommendationsdata sharing within governmenta substantial amount of data sharing occurs between agencies for statisticaland research purposes. nevertheless, some of the laws that govern theconfidentiality of statistical data prohibit or severely limit interagency sharing ofdata collected by some agencies. laws that control access to administrativerecords, such as tax returns and earnings records, restrict their use for importantstatistical applications. as noted by the council of economic advisers (1991),barriers to data sharing for statistical purposes have led to costly duplication ofeffort, inconsistencies among related data sets, and excessive burden onindividuals and organizationsdata users98private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.who are asked to supply information. they have also made it difficult orimpossible to develop data sets needed for policy analysis on important topics,such as trends in income distribution and the longrange consequences ofoccupational and other environmental exposures to suspected carcinogens.recommendation 4.1 greater opportunities should be available for sharingof explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies forstatistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records canbe properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations aboutindividual data subjects. greater access should be permitted to key statistical andadministrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and otherstatistical uses. additional data sharing should only be undertaken in thoseinstances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel'srecommendations for informed consent or notification (see recommendations3.2 and 3.3).the panel supports the proposal of the council of economic advisers(1991:6) that legislation be developed that would permit ''limited sharing ofconfidential statistical information solely for statistical purposes betweenstatistical agencies under stringent safeguards."access to data by nongovernment usersbecause of legitimate concerns about the possibility of disclosure ofindividual information, statistical agencies have limited the amount of detaileddata provided to nongovernment users in tabulations and publicuse microdatafiles. this lack of detail limits the ability of users to do research that couldcontribute to the understanding and resolution of significant economic and socialproblems. some agencies have developed mechanisms for providing access tomore detailed information on a restricted basis, but existing arrangements are farfrom meeting all legitimate needs.recommendation 4.2 federal statistical agencies should seek to improve theaccess of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and thedevelopment anddata users99private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of tested administrativeprocedures.we believe that this can be done without sacrificing confidentialityprotection for data subjects and providers. as discussed further in chapter 5,legislation should not pose unnecessary barriers to interagency data sharing forstatistical and research purposes. it should extend legal sanctions for violations ofconfidentiality to include data users who are not employed by the agency thatproduced the data. among the administrative procedures, the panel believes thatlicensing agreements that allow users to analyze data sets at their own work sitesare a particularly promising solution.it is difficult to evaluate the tradeoffs between confidentiality of and accessto data without better information on the numbers and types of user requests fordata that are being denied for confidentiality reasons. without such information itis hard to define the problems that inhibit data access.recommendation 4.3 all federal statistical agencies should establishsystematic procedures for capturing information on a continuing basis aboutuser requests for data that have been denied or only partially fulfilled. suchinformation should be used for periodic reviews of agency confidentiality anddata access policies.better information on denied requests, however, will not fully reveal theextent to which important uses of data are not made because the data are notaccessible. users who already know that certain data sets are not available areunlikely to make much effort to develop plans for analyses that would requireaccess to such data.legal and ethical responsibilities of data usersbackgroundlegal responsibilities of usersusers given restricted access to personal data are asked and sometimesrequired by law or written contracts to comply with various conditions relating totheir use and disposition of the data. such conditions may include the following:data users100private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. use of the data solely for purposes specified in an access agreement, use of the data only at specified physical locations, allowing access only to specified individuals, observing limitations on further releases of the initial data set or theproducts produced from it, observing provisions for eventual disposition of the data and outputs, application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques and physicalsecurity measures to protect the data from unintended disclosure, and execution of a written agreement between the releasing agency and therecipient and formal extension of the agreement to all individuals whowill have access to the data.in some instances users who violate conditions associated with their accessto the data are subject to criminal or civil penalties.the features of arrangements for providing restricted data access varyaccording to the uses that will be made of the data. intermediate statistical usesgenerally involve transfer of data with identifiers from one agency to another,based on formal interagency agreements covering all or most of the conditions ofuse listed above. a basic principle of such agreements is that there must be fullcompliance with the legal confidentiality requirements of both agencies at alltimes. for releases of census bureau data, this is accomplished by havingpersons in the receiving agency who will have access to identifiable data takeoaths as special sworn employees of the census bureau, which makes themsubject to the same penalties as regular census bureau employees for anyimproper release or disclosure of identifiable information.the conditions associated with restricted access for end uses and thepenalties for violations are much more varied, especially when the recipients ofthe data are not other federal agencies. among the more restrictive conditions arethose associated with access obtained by individual researchers under a asa/nsffellows program that has been in operation since 1978. for research requiringaccess to potentially identifiable records, fellows must usually work onsite at oneof the federal agencies that participate in the program, and they are subject to thesame penalties as regular agency employees for violation of confidentialityrequirements. in addition, asa/nsf fellows usually have access to the data onlyfor the term of their appointment.less restrictive procedures are used by the national centerdata users101private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for health statistics (nchs) in its release of microdata files based on thenational health interview survey and other surveys. prior to release of the file,which can be used at the recipient's work site, nchs applies standard statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques to the files, but it recognizes the impossibility ofreducing the risk of disclosure of individually identifiable information to zero.thus, each recipient is required to sign a document (see figure 4.1) indicatingacceptance of restrictions on how the data will be used and on rerelease of thefile to other organizations. recipients must agree not to attempt to identifyindividual units in the file and, if a unit should be inadvertently identified, notifythe nchs and refrain from disclosing the discovered identity to others. if nchslearns that the agreement has been violated in any way, the user responsiblewould probably be denied further access to nchs microdata files.the nchs has recently begun to release some of its microdata files on cdroms, without requiring a signed data release agreement. whenever the cdrom is used, the user is presented with an onscreen notification of the datarestrictions, which are essentially the same as those shown in figure 4.1. thisscreen cannot be bypassed and the striking of a specific key is taken as theindication that the user has read and agreed to the restrictions and recognizes thepenalties (national center for health statistics, 1992a).the national center for education statistics is experimenting with a form ofrestricted access that occupies an intermediate position with respect to conditionsof use. under a licensing agreement, researchers in organizations and agenciesare allowed to use confidential nces data at their own sites for statisticalpurposes. the agreement incorporates several provisions designed to maintain theconfidentiality and physical security of the data, including agreement by the usersto be subject to unannounced inspections of their work site. all persons who willhave access to the data must sign affidavits of nondisclosure and are subject tosevere penalties for violation of their oath.licensing agreements are also being used by universitybased researchorganizations to allow restricted access to detailed microdata sets based onfederally funded surveys. jabine (1993a) provides two examples, one relating tothe panel study of income dynamics and the other to the national longitudinalsurvey of youth. the conditions are similar to but somewhat less rigorous thanthose of the nces licensing agreement just described. one of the organizationsinvolved includes a hidden unique identifier in eachdata users102private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data users103private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the data sets it releases so that it would be able to determine the origin ofany copy found in unauthorized hands. both of the agreements carry financialpenalties for violations.this brief account portrays some of the steps that have been taken in recentyears to accommodate the needs of users for data sets that are too detailed torelease without any conditions of use attached to them. the sentiment is growingamong government statisticians that producers and users of statistical data shouldshare responsibility for adherence to the confidentiality pledges given to datasubjects and providers and that violations of that understanding by users, likeviolations by agency staff, should be subject to penalties. at present, the natureof the penalties and the legal authority for assessment of penalties on usersvaries, and there does not appear to be a consensus on what would be mosteffective.the idea that data users should be held legally responsible for theconfidentiality of the data to which they have access is not new; it was advancedby the asa's ad hoc committee on privacy and confidentiality in its 1977report. the committee encouraged the dissemination of microdata sets bystatistical agencies and said that they should be released without restrictions orconditions, provided all explicit identifiers had been removed and "it is virtuallycertain that no recipients can identify specific individuals in the file" (americanstatistical association, 1977:75). the committee recommended that data sets notmeeting the second requirement be made accessible for research and statisticaluses only if a specific set of conditions on use were agreed to in advance, inwriting, by the recipient. they recommended further that the releasing agencyassume responsibility for ensuring that users are observing these conditions andthat "both the recipient and the agency staff are subject to enforceable penaltiesfor failure to observe the agreed conditions of use" (p. 75).a less detailed recommendation about release of microdata files wasincluded in the bellagio principles, which were developed at a 1977 internationalconference on privacy, confidentiality, and the use of government microdatafor research and statistical purposes (see flaherty, 1978). the bellagioprinciples support widespread dissemination of data, including microdata, forresearch and statistical purposes, subject to confidentiality controls. a specificrecommendation was that users of microdata should be required to agree inwriting to protect the confidentiality of the files. no reference was made,however, to sanctions for users who violate confidentiality requirements.data users104private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical responsibilities of usersin a search for material related to the obligations and responsibilities ofexternal users of data, that is, users not directly associated with the agencies ororganizations that developed the data sets, the panel reviewed guidelines andstandards established by several professional associations and other groups. asdescribed in chapter 3, the american statistical association and the internationalstatistical institute have developed detailed guidelines covering theresponsibilities of agencies and organizations that collect data and, in someinstances, use their own data for analyses. however, we found that those andother guidelines of professional societies had relatively little to say about theethical obligations of those who use data provided by other organizations.one exception comes from the bellagio principles. principle 14 (flaherty,1978:277) reads as follows:professional or national organizations should have codes of ethics for theirdisciplines concerning the utilization of individual data for research andstatistical purposes. such ethical codes should furnish mutually agreeablestandards of behavior governing relations between providers and users ofgovernmental data.the report of the asa's ad hoc committee on privacy and confidentialityrecommended that "training in ethical standards and in privacy safeguards shouldbe incorporated into the statistics and survey research curricula at colleges anduniversities" (american statistical association, 1977:76). this would be a usefulstep, but to reach a larger part of the evergrowing population of external usersone would need to ensure the inclusion of similar training in curriculums forsociology, economics, and other disciplines whose members are likely to besecondary users of federal and other data sets.what appears to be an unnecessarily rigorous requirement for data access isincluded in the asa's ethical guidelines for statistical  practice. arecommendation to data collectors was toensure that, whenever data are transferred to other persons or organizations,this transfer conforms with the established confidentiality pledges; and requirewritten assurance from the recipients of the data that the measures employed toprotect confidentiality will be at least equal to those originally pledged(american statistical association, 1989:24).since the term "data" was not defined, this recommendation seems tosuggest that no data, whether in aggregate or microdata form,data users105private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with or without identifiers, should be transferred for any purpose withoutobtaining written assurance from recipients that they will protect confidentiality.we suspect this was not really the intent of the recommendation. perhaps thecommittee meant the recommendation to apply only to data in explicitly orpotentially identifiable form. if this supposition is correct, the committee'sposition and the panel's recommendations below would be consistent.findings and recommendationssecondary data users tend to be impatient with restrictions that inhibit accessto data they want for their research, and they may occasionally attempt tocircumvent such restrictions. the panel strongly urges all data users to recognizethat the continued ability of federal statistical agencies to meet user needsdepends on scrupulous observance of confidentiality pledges given to datasubjects and data providers. users must be willing to accept responsibility forappropriate use of data entrusted to them. they must abide by agencyimposedconfidentiality requirements that include features such as licensing agreements,bonding, access only at authorized sites, and legal sanctions for failure to abide byagreed conditions of use. if they believe that restrictions on access to some kindsof data are unnecessarily stringent, the ethical course is to work through existinginstitutions to change the rules, not to seek ways to circumvent the rules.recommendation 4.4  all users of federal data, regardless of the formalconditions of access, should subscribe to the following principles for responsibledata use:(a) conscientiously observe all conditions agreed to in order to obtainaccess to the data. allow access to the original data set only by thosepermitted access under the agreed conditions of recipiency andensure that all such persons are aware of the required conditions ofuse.(b) make no attempt to identify particular individuals or other unitswhose data are considered to be confidential.(c) in the event that one or more individuals or other units are identifiedin the course of research, notify the organization that provided thedata set, and do not inform anyone else of the discovered identities.data users106private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 4.5 to promote knowledge of and adherence to theprinciples of responsible data use,(a) federal statistical agencies should ask all recipients of federalmicrodata sets to submit to the releasing agency, in writing, theiragreement to observe the above principles, plus any other conditionsdeemed necessary for specific data sets.(b) professional societies and associations that have ethical codes,standards, or guidelines should incorporate these principles in them.(c) the principles and the justifications for them should be included inacademic and other training for disciplines whose members are likelyto be users of federal statistical data.other potentially relevant types of controls are in place in universities and insome government settings, such as the national institutes of health. forexample, investigators planning research involving human subjects must havetheir research proposals approved by the local institutional review board. a morerecent development is the establishment of procedures for promoting scientificintegrity and investigating allegations of fraud and misconduct in universitybased research. such oversight mechanisms, with suitable definition of theirscope to cover research uses of federal data sets, could serve to reassurecustodians of federal data that adequate controls are in place to monitorcompliance with data protection rules and regulations by users in the researchcommunity. the panel applauds the development of local institutionalmechanisms to promote ethical behavior in the research community and hopesthat they will include fair statistical information practices and compliance withthe data protection requirements of statistical agencies among their concerns.data users107private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data users108private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5legislationinformation maintained and used solely for statistical or research  purposes is not treateduniformly under existing law.commission on federal paperwork, 1977the commission believes that existing law and practice do not adequately  protect theinterests of the individual data subject.privacy protection study commission, 1977– to change or make a law involves a long, cumbersome process, while  technologies andsocial conditions sometimes change very fast.edmund rapaport, 1988legislation in large part determines and constrains federal policies andpractices affecting data subjects and data users. for federal statistical agencies,pertinent statutes determine when response to surveys is mandatory, who canhave access to individually identifiable information collected for statistical andresearch purposes, the conditions of access, and the penalties for unlawful usesand disclosures of the information. statutes also determine who can have accessto administrative records for statistical and research purposes.two kinds of legislation provide the framework for federal policies andpractices with respect to confidentiality and data access: governmentwide andagencyspecific legislation. in the former category, the privacy act of 1974 (p.l.93œ579) is the most important, and the freedom of information act of 1966 (p.l.89œ487) and the paperwork reduction act of 1980 (p.l. 96œ511) are alsorelevant. in the latter category, several federal statisticallegislation109private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.agencies, for example, the bureau of the census, the national agriculturalstatistics service (nass), the national center for education statistics (nces),and the national center for health statistics (nchs), are subject to laws that gobeyond the governmentwide statutes in specifying the confidentiality and dataaccess policies they must follow. among legislation that affects the statistical andresearch uses of administrative records, the tax reform act of 1976 (p.l. 94œ455) is of special significance.in its consideration of the legislation that regulates statistical and researchuses of federal records, the panel benefited greatly from the endeavors of earliercommissions and other groups and individuals who have explored these issues,including cecil (1993), the commission on federal paperwork (1977a, b),flaherty (1979, 1989), newton and pullin (1990, 1991), the office of federalstatistical policy and standards (1978), and the privacy protection studycommission (1977a, b, c). the problems we identified were well documented byour predecessors, and they proposed reasonable solutions to them. most of theproblems persist, however, and their significance has only increased because ofthe changes since the late 1970s in the environment in which federal statisticalagencies operate.the regulatory structure provided by the governmentwide and agencyspecific statutes mentioned above is exceedingly complex. there is littleuniformity in the treatment of confidentiality and data access questions, and theability of federal statistical agencies to protect the confidentiality of individuallyidentifiable records is not always backed by suitable statutory provisions.conversely, in some instances excessive restrictions on access needlessly limitopportunities to share records across agencies for statistical purposes and to makedetailed microdata sets available to potential users.this chapter has three sections. we describe the main features of therelevant governmentwide information statutes in the first section and agencyspecific statutes for some of the major statistical agencies in the second. in thethird section we present findings and recommendations.the general plan of this report has been to deal primarily with issues relatingto data for individuals in chapters 1 through 6 and to address issues relating todata for organizations in chapter 7. however, this chapter constitutes anexception to the general plan because many provisions of agencyspecificlegislation apply equally to both kinds of data.legislation110private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.general regulation of federal statistical andresearch recordsthe privacy act of 1974 is the most prominent feature of a general systemof regulation that also includes the conflicting demands of the freedom ofinformation act of 1966, the paperwork reduction act of 1980, and thecomputer matching and privacy protection act of 1988 (p.l. 100œ503). thefreedom of information act specifies the conditions under which the disclosureof federal agency records, including statistical records, may be compelled. thepaperwork reduction act is intended to reduce unnecessary requirements forpaperwork by federal agencies, and it permits review of data collection requestsby the office of management and budget (omb). the computer matching andprivacy protection act regulates the use of computer matching of federal recordssubject to the privacy act. matches performed for statistical purposes arespecifically excluded from the coverage of the act, however.below we summarize two components of this general system of regulation,the privacy act and the freedom of information act. our focus is the impact ofeach act on federal data used for research and statistical purposes. the privacyact applies only to data on identifiable individuals; the freedom of informationact applies to data on individuals and organizations.the privacy actthe administrative abuses of data held by the federal government thatoccurred in the early 1970s eroded public trust and confidence and led to thepassage of the privacy act of 1974 and the tax reform act of 1976. the privacyact was the first attempt by congress to provide comprehensive protection of anindividual's right to privacy by regulating the collection, management, anddisclosure of personal information maintained by government agencies (title 5u.s.c. § 552a).1 it specifies a general system of regulation for individuallyidentifiable federal records.before the privacy act was passed, federal policy on data managementpractices encouraged data sharing among agencies in order to reduce the burdenand expense of reporting. this openaccess policy was restricted only whenstatutes provided for the confidentiality of specific sensitive record systems. in1974, the privacy act reversed this general policy by recognizing the right ofindividuals to control dissemination of information they providedlegislation111private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.about themselves to federal agencies. the privacy act sought to strike a balancešto preserve individuals' interests in controlling identifiable information whilerecognizing the legitimate uses of that information.2briefly, the general provisions of the privacy act require that federalagencies (1) grant individuals access to their identifiable records maintained bythe agency, (2) ensure that existing information is accurate and timely and limitthe collection of unnecessary information, and (3) limit the disclosure ofidentifiable information to third parties. this third provision of the privacy act,which forbids the disclosure of any identifiable record without the prior writtenconsent of the individual (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(b)), is the crux of the right ofprivacy provided by the act.the term statistical record is defined in the privacy act as "a record in asystem of records maintained for statistical research or reporting purposes onlyand not used in whole or in part in making any determination about an identifiedindividual, except as provided by § 8 of title 13 (which governs the censusbureau)" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(a)(6)).the privacy act defines a system of records as "a group of any recordsunder the control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the nameof the individual or by some identifying number, symbol, or other identifyingparticular assigned to the individual" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(a)(5)).3 anenforceable informed consent requirement in the act could thwart the disclosureof identifiable information for purposes that the individual never considered andwould not approve. as described below, however, numerous exceptions arepossible.the privacy act seeks to enforce its standards through civil and criminalpenalties. employees of agencies and their contractors who knowingly andwillfully disclose personal information contrary to the requirements of the actmay be fined up to $5,000 and the agency may be sued for "actualdamages" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(g)(1)(d),(i)(1)). because of the need to showthat the agency acted in a willful and intentional manner and the need todemonstrate actual damages, there have been few successful lawsuits (flaherty,1989:342œ343; lodge, 1984). consequently, the effectiveness of these penaltieshas been questioned (see, e.g., coles, 1991).twelve categories of exceptions to the consent requirement of the privacyact are intended to accommodate legitimate needs for individually identifiableinformation. for instance, an agency may, at its discretion, disclose identifiablerecords without prior written consent to officers and employees of the agencywho have a need for the record in the performance of their duties. while such anexemption is certainly necessary, several federal organizations have interpretedthe term agency quite broadly, thereby restricting the protections of the privacyact. for example, the department of health and human services has defined theentire department as a single "agency" under the terms of the privacy act, therebypermitting exchange of identifiable information throughout the department aslong as there is a jobrelated need for such information (national center forhealth statistics, 1984). other exceptions include disclosures that are required bythe freedomlegislation112private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of information act (see below); exceptions granted to the bureau of the census(for planning or carrying out a census, survey, or related activity under title 13of the u.s. code), the general accounting office (to permit auditing of federalprograms), and the national archives; and disclosure in emergencycircumstances involving the health and safety of an individual. the privacy actalso permits disclosure of identifiable information without written consent toother federal agencies for authorized civil or criminal law enforcement activitiesand disclosure pursuant to a court orderšdisclosures to which individuals wouldmost likely decline to consent.of special interest to data users is an exception that permits access to recordsthat are not individually identifiable upon "written assurance that the record willbe used solely as a statistical research or reporting record" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(b)(5)). the privacy act poses no barrier to the dissemination of anonymousinformation; if the research objectives can be accomplished with nonidentifiabledata, rendering the data anonymous satisfies the standards of the privacy act andthe information can be disseminated. in fact, as cecil (1993) notes in a paperprepared for the panel, this exemption offers very little, because a record that isnot individually identifiable is not a "record" within the definition of the privacyact (see note 3) and therefore is not subject to the restrictions on disclosureimposed by the act.obtaining data from individually identifiable federal records for statisticalpurposes can be difficult for data users, even those in other federal statisticalagencies. the restrictions of the privacy act can bar the disclosure of identifiablerecords unless the disclosure is brought within one of the exemptions. in an idealsituation, data collectors would be able to anticipate such disclosure needs andobtain the informed consent of data subjects at the time the information isgathered. when the need for statistical or research access to agency records wasnot anticipated or when the initial consent becomes invalid, a data collector mayhave to recontact the data subjects to obtain proper consent. recontacting datasubjects who participated in an earlier statistical or research study imposesspecial difficulties, however. for example, some target populations are highlymobile, and thus addresses and telephone numbers that were obtained at the timethe individuals were originally contacted may be outdated. recontacting suchdata subjects is also likely to be expensive and subject to selfselection biases.one of the privacy act exemptions permits disclosure of anlegislation113private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.identifiable record for a "routine use," that is, "for a purpose that is compatiblewith the purpose for which it was collected" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(a)(7)). anagency may choose to designate statistical analysis as a routine use of all or aselected portion of its record systems (see note 3). this enables the agency to giveoutside data users access to data from identifiable records for statistical purposeswithout first gaining the consent of the data subjects to whom the records pertain.instead of obtaining data subjects' consent prior to disclosure for such a "routineuse," the agency must only publish a notice of the anticipated routine uses of therecord in the federal register and accept comments from the public for a periodof 30 days (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(e)(4)(d),(e)(11)). such routine uses must alsobe explained to data subjects when similar information is gathered in the future.a great many agency notices in the federal register allow disclosure forstatistical and research purposes as a routine use. for instance, the department ofhealth and human services has been particularly thorough in identifying recordsystems that have research potential and publishing notices permitting research asa routine use (o'neill and fanning, 1976:171œ188). one version of thedepartment's routineuse notice requires an assessment of the risks and potentialbenefits of the research and requires the data user to sign an agreement to protectthe records from subsequent disclosure. this is one instance in which thediscretion delegated to agencies by the privacy act has been used to fashion aspecific set of standards to permit data users from outside the agency to analyzedata contained in individually identifiable records for statistical purposes whilemaintaining safeguards appropriate to the information. however, the need to relyon the routineuse exemption to overcome the failure of the statute to provide forstatistical and research access to identifiable records is an awkward solution tothe problem. without a statutory policy concerning access to federal records forstatistical and research purposes, individual agencies are free to developregulations that may either be too restrictive or fail to offer adequate protection tothe identifiable information provided by data subjects.it is important to note that the privacy act, which applies indiscriminately tostatistical and administrative records, offers little protection from improperdisclosure of statistical records for nonresearch purposes. an agency couldconceivably use the routineuse exemption to the act to diminish the protectionfor such records by designating audit and enforcement as routine uses after thedata are gathered. also, the privacy act places no obligationlegislation114private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on outside data users to maintain the confidentiality of the records or limitsubsequent disclosure; once the records are released to a data user who is notunder the jurisdiction of the act there is no assurance that the data subject's rightswill be protected. the restrictions of the privacy act extend to contractors onlywhen "an agency provides by a contract for the operation by or on behalf of theagency of a system of records to accomplish an agency function" (title 5 u.s.c. §552a(m)).in summary, the privacy act's failure to distinguish statistical and researchpurposes from administrative purposes in restricting access to individuallyidentifiable records can pose a major obstacle for data users who want to analyzesuch information for statistical or research purposes. regulation of administrativerecords is based on the awareness that the records may be used to make decisionsregarding individuals, such as the award or termination of benefits. such a systemof regulation does not recognize dissimilar analytic uses of data for statistical orresearch purposes in which the information is not used to make decisionsregarding individual data subjects. data users have become adept at framing theirstatistical or research needs, and the associated data protections, within thestandards developed for administrative records. in some instances, it may bepossible to anticipate the statistical or research purposes and obtain consent fordisclosure of identifiable data at the time they are collected. otherwise, the datauser must structure a request for statistical or research use of individuallyidentifiable data to fit within one of the exceptions to the consent requirement ofthe privacy act, such as the routineuse exception.freedom of information actthe freedom of information act of 1966 (title 5 u.s.c. § 552) alsoregulates the disclosure of research and statistical records. the act permits publicaccess to records maintained by federal agencies unless the request for accessfalls within one of nine specific exemptions. statistical records maintained byfederal agencies, even those developed by private parties, are subject todisclosure under the act if not otherwise exempt. for example, records concerningdifferences in breastfed and formulafed infants that were collected by a groupof nonprofit, churchrelated organizations and deposited with a federal agency forstatistical analysis were ordered disclosed when producers of infant formularequested copies of the data from the agency under the act (see st. paul's legislation115private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benevolent educational and missionary institute v. u.s., 506 f. supp. 822 (n. d.ga. 1980)). if the research records are not maintained by the federal agency, theact does not compel disclosure, even if the agency funded the research and relieson the results in setting public policy. for example, the supreme court declinedto order the disclosure of research records developed under an extended researchgrant awarded to a group of private physicians and scientists studying theeffectiveness of treatments of diabetes. even though the food and drugadministration relied on the controversial findings of the study to restrict thelabeling and use of certain drug treatments and refused to make the data availablefor independent reanalysis, the court determined that the act does not reachrecords maintained by grantees (see forsham v. harris, 445 u.s. 169 (1980)).two exemptions to the general disclosure mandate of the freedom ofinformation act are of concern to researchers. first, an exemption under the actmay be appropriate for identifiable records if such records will yield sensitiveinformation about individual research participants. exemption 6 of the actrestricts disclosure of "personnel and medical and similar files the disclosure ofwhich would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" (title5 u.s.c. § 552(b)(6)). this exemption is intended to protect sensitive informationidentifiable to an individual, including research and statistical information, fromunwarranted disclosure. if the court determines that disclosure of identifiableagency records "can reasonably be expected to invade [a] citizen's privacy,"disclosure will not be ordered (see d.o.j. v. reporters committee for freedom ofthe press, 489 u.s. 749 (1989); new york times co. v. n.a.s.a., 920 f.2d 1002(d.c. cir. 1990) (en banc)). although there have been a few cases in whichidentifiable research records have been the object of a request, evolving standardsof protection and different standards of protection across federal circuits result inconsiderable uncertainty regarding the degree of protection under thisexemption.4 nonetheless, the proprivacy provisions appear to be a strongprotection.second, research information with commercial or financial value may bewithheld under exemption 4 of the freedom of information act, which extendsprotection to "trade secrets and to information which is commercial or financial,obtained from a person, and privileged or confidential" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552(b)(4)). such records need not be individually identifiable and may include recordsof organizations. this exemption, however, has been narrowly construed, whichhas made it difficult for most research and statisticallegislation116private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.records to qualify. to qualify for the exemption, the research records must be ofcommercial or financial value that will be diminished by disclosure. further, theresearch records must qualify as "privileged or confidential." a promise ofconfidentiality when the research data were collected will be given some weightin determining if this standard is met, but such a promise alone will not besufficient to protect the data. exemption 4 has been granted only when there hasbeen a further demonstration that disclosure of information would result incompetitive harm to a commercial enterprise (see public citizen health researchgroup v. food and drug administration, 539 f. supp. 1320 (d. d. c. 1982)) orthat release of such information is likely to "impair the government's ability toobtain necessary information in the future" (see national parks conservationassociation v. morton, 498 f.2d 765, 770 (d.c. cir. 1974)). these standardswere recently interpreted to recognize a greater interest in maintaining theconfidentiality of information that is provided the government on a voluntarybasis if it is of a kind that the provider would not customarily release to the public(critical mass energy project v.  n.r.c., 1992 u.s. app. lexis 19336 (d.c.cir., 1992), (en banc)). this categorical exemption for information supplied to thegovernment on a voluntary basis is intended to ensure its continued availability.agencyspecific legislationas with the governmentwide statutes, agencyspecific legislation is notuniform in specifying the conditions of access to individually identifiable data forstatistical and research purposes and the requirements for maintaining theconfidentiality of such data. to implement agencyspecific legislative provisions,federal statistical agencies have developed administrative policies, practices, andprocedures, some of which we cover in this section. we provide a more thoroughdiscussion of the administrative mechanisms used by the federal statisticalagencies in chapter 6.in this section, we first summarize the agencyspecific legislation thatgoverns three major federal statistical agencies (bureau of the census, nationalcenter for education statistics, and national center for health statistics). wealso discuss the impact on federal statistical activities of the tax reform act of1976, the legislation that governs access to the data collected by the internalrevenue service (irs). our presentation is not meant to be an exhaustivediscussion of agencyspecific legislation; other federallegislation117private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical agencies, such as the bureau of justice statistics (bjs) and thenational agricultural statistics service, have statutes that protect theconfidentiality of their data, and we refer to selected provisions of those statutesin presenting our findings and recommendations.next, we address issues raised by the fact that federal statistical agencieswithout adequate statutory protection for the confidentiality of their data mustrely on administrative policies that have no statutory basis. we use the bureau oflabor statistics (bls) and the energy information administration (eia) toillustrate the difficulties that agencies have encountered and the strategies theyhave employed when protection of data in their custody is not addressed bystatute. we conclude this section with a discussion of the legislation for two newstatistical agencies, one established by statute in the department of transportationin 1991 and another that has been proposed for environmental statistics.most of the background material for this section was provided by theagencies discussed in response to the panel's request for information about theircurrent statutory requirements, policies, and practices. we appreciate theagencies' willingness to help by providing this material.bureau of the censusin contrast to the lax protection of statistical records under the privacy actof 1974, the statutory protection of statistical information collected by the censusbureau under title 13 of the u.s. code is extremely rigorous. it allows fewopportunities for those outside the agency to use individually identifiable recordsfor statistical purposes. in recent years the census bureau has made some effortto develop standards and procedures that would permit greater access toinformation that it maintains (gates, 1988). but the statutory standards, andinterpretation of those standards by the supreme court, still pose a formidablebarrier to the release of data outside the census bureau in a form that permits therange of statistical analyses desired by sophisticated data users.the census bureau is governed by legislation that permits the bureau to (1)use census information only for statistical purposes (with one limited exception,an agreement with the national archives, which is discussed in chapter 6), (2)publish data only in a way that prevents the identification of individuals, and (3)prohibit anyone from examining information that identifies an individuallegislation118private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.unless they are census bureau employees sworn to uphold the confidentialityprovisions of title 13 (u.s.c. § 9(a)). in addition, this statute allows the censusbureau to employ temporary staff to do work authorized by title 13 providedthey are sworn to uphold the confidentiality provisions specified in the legislation(see title 13 u.s.c. § 23). such "special sworn employees" may be employed inanother government agency. violation of title 13 standards by employees orspecial sworn employees carries a penalty of a fine of $5,000 or five years inprison, or both (title 13 u.s.c. § 214). the statute also permits the censusbureau to furnish "tabulations and other statistical materials which do notdisclose the information reported by, or on behalf of, any particular respondent"and to "make special statistical compilations and surveys, for – [parties outsidethe census bureau] upon the payment of the actual or estimated cost of suchwork" (title 13 u.s.c. § 8(b)).the statutory standards governing the census bureau are among the fewthat have the benefit of an interpretation by the supreme court. in baldrige v.shapiro (455 u.s. 345 (1982)) the court considered the extent to which masteraddress lists, compiled as part of the decennial census, can be made availableoutside the census bureau. several cities challenged the 1980 census count oftheir populations, contending that the census had erroneously counted occupieddwellings as vacant, and they sought to compel disclosure of a portion of theaddress lists used by the census bureau in conducting its count in their respectivejurisdictions. although the case involved access to this information for purposesother than research, in ruling on the case the court also offered an interpretationof title 13 that clarifies the limits of the discretion of the census bureau torelease statistical information that is individually identifiable.the district court had ordered the census bureau to make the addressregister available, reasoning that the confidentiality limitation is "solely to requirethat census material be used in furtherance of the bureau's statistical mission andto ensure against disclosure of any particular individual's response." the supremecourt reversed this decision, interpreting the standards of title 13 to suggest thatthe release of any microdata, even microdata not identifiable to an individual, isinconsistent with the standards of title 13. the court cited the constitutionalpurpose of the census in apportioning representation among the states and theimportance of public cooperation in obtaining an accurate census. according tothe court, the confidentiality protections oflegislation119private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.title 13 are intended to encourage public cooperation by explicitly providing forthe nondisclosure of certain census data, and "[n]o discretion is provided to thecensus bureau on whether or not to disclose the information referred to in §§ 8(b) and 9(a)" [of title 13] (baldrige v. shapiro, 455 u.s. 355 (1982)).the cities that sought the master address lists had argued that theconfidentiality protections were intended to prohibit disclosure of the identities ofindividuals who provided census data. the court, however, rejected thecontention that the confidentiality provisions protect raw data only if theindividual respondent can be identified, thereby raising questions regarding theauthority of the census bureau to release individual census data even when theidentification of individuals is not possible:[various parties] vigorously argue that sections 8(b) and 9(a) of the censusact are designed to prohibit disclosure of the identities of individuals whoprovide raw census data; for this reason, they argue, the confidentialityprovisions protect raw data only if the individual respondent can be identified.the unambiguous language of the confidentiality provisions, as well as thelegislative history of the act, however, indicates that congress plainlycontemplated that raw data reported by or on behalf of individuals was to be heldconfidential and not available for disclosure (baldrige v. shapiro, 455 u.s. 355(1982)).the census bureau has not interpreted the title 13 standards as broadly asthis language would permit and has continued to release unidentifiable microdatafor statistical purposes. the court's opinion, while speaking of "data" and"statistical uses," is in fact about the authority of states and municipalities toaudit the findings of the census bureau, a purpose that was specifically precludedwhen the statute was passed. further, access to address lists would imply accessto any individuals living at the addresses, so characterization of the research dataas "unidentified" seems misplaced. nevertheless, the language of the supremecourt suggests that the census bureau is limited in its discretion to release data topersons who are not sworn to uphold the confidentiality provisions of title 13.the restrictions discussed above extend to all data collections undertakenunder the authority of title 13. the census bureau also may undertake surveyresearch under alternative authority, such as title 15, that allows it to conductspecific studies for other organizations, thereby avoiding the restrictions of title13 on release of identifiable information. growing demand for identifiableinformation that can be used in conducting followup surveyslegislation120private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or linked with administrative data has resulted in the census bureau's conductingunder title 15 authority an increasing number of reimbursable surveys sponsoredby other agencies. there are two primary differences in the way the censusbureau conducts such surveys. first, the bureau cannot use the decennial censusas a sampling frame if identifiable microdata from the survey are to be sharedwith the sponsoring agency. second, when seeking the consent of respondents toparticipate in a title 15 survey, the bureau makes clear that it is collecting theinformation as an agent of the sponsoring agency and that the sponsor, not thecensus bureau, will be responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of theinformation.national center for education statisticsstatistical data collected by the national center for education statistics isgoverned by legislation that follows closely the pattern of protection for datagathered by the census bureau. in april 1988, public law 100œ297, theaugustus f. hawkinsrobert t. stafford elementary and secondary schoolimprovement amendments of the general education provisions act (gepa),was passed. the hawkinsstafford amendments (u.s.c. § 1221e1) established arigorous system of protection of educational statistical data collected andmaintained by nces. the system (1) prohibits the use of "individuallyidentifiable information" for purposes other than the statistical purposes for whichit was supplied, (2) prohibits the publication of information that will permit theidentification of an individual, (3) permits examination of individuallyidentifiable reports only by persons authorized by the nces commissioner, and(4) limits access to individually identifiable data to those who take an oath not todisclose such data. the amendments allow nces to use temporary employees toanalyze individually identifiable data for statistical purposes if such persons aresworn to observe the limitations described above.information collected as part of the national assessment of educationalprogress (naep), one of the ongoing studies of nces, is subject to a separateconfidentiality requirement under the hawkinsstafford amendments. tomaintain the confidentiality of naep records, the amendments state thatthe commissioner shall ensure that all personally identifiable informationabout students, their educational performance, and their families and thatinformation with respect to individual schools remain confidential, inaccordance with section 552a oflegislation121private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.title 5, united states code (emphasis added) (p.l. 100œ297, § 3403(a)(i)(4)(b)(i)).this section of the amendments cites the privacy act of 1974 as the standardfor maintaining confidentiality of the information, even though the privacy actapplies only to individuals, not to institutions and organizations such as schools(see newton and pullin, 1990). the provision requiring that school informationremain confidential poses particular difficulty for those who wish to use naepdata to study the effects of programs in schools with certain characteristics.in 1990 the statutory framework governing nces records was furtherconfused by the passage of amendments to gepa that specifically exempted fromthe protections of the hawkinsstafford amendments data gathered as part ofseveral longitudinal studies of individuals at the postsecondary level andfinancial aid surveys (see § 252 of the excellence in mathematics, science andengineering act of 1990, p.l. 101œ589). it appears that these data are governednow by the comparatively lax protections of the privacy act. the resultingexceptions to the general provisions of the hawkinsstafford amendmentsprovide a fragmented pattern of regulation that is likely to leave data subjects andproviders uncertain of the extent to which their information will remainconfidential.inadvertent disclosure is an especially difficult problem. the educationalresearch community has developed a number of data sets with identifiableinformation that are beyond the reach of this legislation, some of which includeinformation gathered by nces prior to the hawkinsstafford amendments. thepossibility of matching survey data to existing records, thereby inadvertentlydisclosing information that can be associated with specific data subjects, is muchgreater for educational records than for individual census bureau records. thus,when the individual is the unit of analysis and similar surveys exist that wouldpermit the linking of information, an nces policy statement (national center foreducation statistics, 1989) directs nces staff to examine common variables anddistributions of responses to minimize the risk of disclosure. staff of nces alsoreview nonfederal data files to ensure that such files will not present anopportunity for a match with nces data that would yield individually identifiableinformation. other information that nces staff must take into considerationbefore releasing a publicuse data file is set forth inlegislation122private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.''standard for maintaining confidentiality" (see standard iv0192 in nationalcenter for education statistics, 1992:39œ41).files in which data on individuals are nested within assessments ofinstitutions and organizations (e.g., school, district, state) require additionalscrutiny. many educational research programs rely on such nested researchdesigns to assess the effectiveness of classroomand schoolbased programs. ifdata on individual students or teachers are associated with specific schools, thereleased data cannot include schools that can be uniquely identified. according tothe policy statement,the assumption is made that school and school district administrators willknow which students or teachers were interviewed in the survey, regardless ofany procedures used to disguise the identity of these individuals or attempts tokeep this information from the administrators. therefore, if a school or districtcan be identified in a file, that file cannot be linked to student or teacher records(national center for education statistics, 1989:5).while the legislation governing release of nces statistical information issimilar to the restrictive legislation governing the census bureau, nces hasdeveloped policies that permit greater access to statistical data. for example, thecenter has disseminated microdata in encrypted cdrom format and developedlicensing agreements that allow researchers to use data at their own work sites(see chapter 6 for a discussion of such techniques). the center has more freedomto develop such policies because it is free of the restrictive statutory regulationsgoverning the census bureau. but, in other ways its task is even more difficult.its system of nested surveys of individuals and organizations complicates theprotection of schools, teachers, and students. publicly available information onindividual schools and districts, in addition to a network of sophisticatededucational researchers who are familiar with existing data sets, increases theopportunity for inadvertent disclosure beyond that faced by the census bureau.these differences result in considerable tension when legislative protectionpatterned after the census bureau is extended to nces.national center for health statisticsstatutes protecting health records collected, maintained, and disseminated bythe national center for health statistics offer another example of how theinadequate protection provided by the privacy act can be supplemented throughspecific statutorylegislation123private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.authority. section 308(d) of the public health service act (p.l. 85œ58) restrictsuse of data obtained by nchs to the purposes for which they were originallyobtained (42 u.s.c. § 242m(d)). when nchs requests information, it informsthe person or organization supplying the data of the general anticipated uses,which are usually limited to statistical research and reporting, and subsequentuses of the information are then so limited. section 308(d) further indicates thatsuch information may not be disclosed outside the agency in identifiable formwithout the advance, explicit consent of the person or establishment to which theyrelate.a number of manuals, policy statements, and publications expand on theserequirements (see mugge, 1984; national center for health statistics, 1978,1984). for instance, the nchs staff manual on confidentiality (national centerfor health statistics, 1984) provides a thorough discussion of how therequirements are to be interpreted.5 the most noteworthy aspect of nchs'spolicy is the explicit recognition that there is some risk of disclosure ofindividually identifiable information with the release of published tables andpublicuse data files and that such risks must be balanced against the importanceof sharing statistical information. this is one of the very few instances in whichexplicit recognition of this fact appears in an official agency policy statement.showing the center's awareness of the difficulty in ensuring confidentialityof data when publishing tables with small cell sizes, the manual presents guidancefor avoiding inadvertent disclosure. it states that "mitigating circumstances in agiven situation which may make it acceptable to publish data that, strictlyspeaking, could result in 'disclosures'" would justify a "special exception" to theguidelines (p. 17). for example, if data are based on a sample that is a smallfraction of the universe, it might be assumed that disclosure will not occurthrough published tables. errors in the data or incomplete reporting may alsoreduce the likelihood of disclosures taking place to a point that would justifypermitting publication of otherwise revealing tables. similarly, in discussing thestandards for the development of publicuse microdata files, the manualrecognizes thatthe only absolutely sure way to avoid disclosure through microdata tapes is torefrain completely from releasing any microdata tapes, but this would deprivethe nation of a great deal of very important health research. therefore, thecenter must make a determination as to when the public's need is sufficientlygreat to justify the risk of disclosure. it is the center's policy to releaselegislation124private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microdata tapes for purposes of statistical research only when the risk ofdisclosure is judged to be extremely low (p. 18).in assessing the acceptability of the risk, nchs considers the extent towhich the data involve a sample of the universe of relevant individuals orestablishments, the extent and availability of outside information necessary toidentify an individual or establishment, the expense of undertaking such aneffort, and the sensitivity of the information provided.according to the nchs manual, one exception to the above standards thatdid not require a "special exception" involved the publication of vital statistics.for example, a table could be published that indicated that within a specificcounty during a specific period there was one infant death or two deaths fromrabies. such exceptions were permitted because of "a longstanding tradition inthe field of vital statistics not to suppress small frequency cells in the tabulationand presentation of data" and because such publication "rarely, if ever, revealsany information about individuals that is not known socially'' (p. 17). however, in1989 nchs began to reexamine its policy on the release of vital statistics databecause the publication of statistical tables by county or the release of detailedpublicuse microdata files might inadvertently reveal a cause of death, such asacquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids), that was not "socially known" inthe community. the center and the states were concerned about controllinginadvertent disclosure in the publicuse microdata files because the center hadbeen releasing countylevel data in its vital statistics.the center obtains its vital statistics data from state health departmentsunder a contractual arrangement that assures that no information will be releasedthat could permit the identification of a specific individual or institution.however, two court cases (a 1987 case involving the atlanta constitutionaljournal and the state health department of georgia, and another in 1991involving the american civil liberties union and the state of illinois) raised theconcern of the states, as well as nchs, that the center was releasing data inpublicuse microdata files that might result in the inadvertent disclosure ofindividuals.6 as part of its policy reexamination, nchs held a special session atthe july 1991 public health conference on records and statistics to discuss theissues and a variety of alternative solutions with its data users.as a result of its reexamination, nchs changed its policy beginning withthe release of the 1989 natality and mortality publicuselegislation125private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microdata files, which were released in the fall of 1992 (see national center forhealth statistics, 1992b). according to this new policy, nchs will releasepublicuse microdata files in three versions:1. singleyear format: this format will be for a single calendar year andinclude data for cities, counties, and metropolitan areas with apopulation of 100,000 or more. certain dates (date of the event anddate of birth of mother, father, and/or decedent) will be excludedfrom the file. this file will be distributed by the national technicalinformation service (ntis).2. multiyear format: this second format will contain data for a threeyear period (e.g., 1987œ1989) for all counties and metropolitan areasand for cities with a population of 50,000 or more. again, certaindates (date and year of the event as well as date of birth of mother,father, and/or decedent) will be excluded from the file. this file willalso be distributed by ntis.3. special formats: nchs will consider releasing vital statisticsmicrodata files to data users whose needs cannot be met by either thesingleyear or multiyear format. such users must contact nchs andexplain their additional data needs. users who obtain speciallyformatted data files from nchs will be required to sign a moreextensive agreement on data use than the one that nchs typicallyrequires, an agreement that provides additional guidelines onavoiding inadvertent disclosure (see figure 4.1 and the discussion ofnchs's data use agreement in chapter 4).nchs will reevaluate its new policy on the release of vital statistics dataafter it has been in effect for one year.the nchs standards address in a straightforward manner the difficult issueof deductive disclosure of information. any disclosure is viewed as entailingsome degree of risk, and nchs is frank in acknowledging this in balancing thedegree of risk against the benefit to the public that is likely to arise from theresearch. the nchs has a number of advantages that may permit it the latitude todevelop such policies. first, it is an agency that recognizes its primary role asbeing research, thereby avoiding the difficulties that arise when trying to design asystem for handling records that are used for administrative purposes as well.further, it collects much of its own information and does not require thecooperation of agencies that may follow more restrictive practices. (the nchsvital statistics program is an exception to this point; this program must rely onstatistical information reported by state registrars and is subject to varying staterestrictions. sincelegislation126private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nchs began relying on information the census bureau collects for it under theauthority of title 15, rather than title 13, it has avoided the more onerousrestrictions regarding disclosure of information by the census bureau.) finally,nchs maintains a staff of skilled researchers, which enables it to conduct someof the more sensitive analyses within the agency. nevertheless, its data collectionand dissemination activities provide an opportunity to examine the consequencesof having policies that recognize the possibility of an inadvertent disclosure ofidentifiable information and attempt to minimize that risk while releasinginformation that permits statistical research and reporting goals to beaccomplished.internal revenue serviceincome information is perceived by many as among the most sensitive andmost useful information collected by the federal government. studies based onlevels and changes in levels of reported income address a wide range of economicissues. the staff of the statistics of income division, irs, uses data from incometax returns and other sources to prepare publications and studies on a wide rangeof topics (see wilson and smith, 1983). when the success of such studiesrequires the use of individually identifiable information from other agencies, suchdata can sometimes be made available within the standards of the privacy act.however, the policy of the census bureau is that identifiable census recordscannot be transferred to the irs for statistical purposes even if the irs employeeswho will have access to the records are special sworn employees of the censusbureau.7difficulties also arise when outside agencies require income information forthe conduct of studies. although no abuses of income information released forstatistical purposes are known to have occurred, the tax reform act of 1976sharply limited outside access to irs income information for statistical purposes.the passage of this act and the subsequent restrictions on existing researchpractices illustrate how reforms directed at abuses of administrative records mayinadvertently hamper statistical and research uses of such records.prior to 1976 a number of executive orders permitted outside agencies to useirs income information if they followed certain standards in maintaining theconfidentiality of the information. however, in 1976 the congress, partly inresponse to the publicized disclosure of income tax information to the whitehouse,legislation127private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.passed the tax reform act of 1976 (see wilson and smith, 1983; u.s. codecongressional and administrative news, 1976:2897œ4284, p.l. 94œ455). thisact denied tax return information to the president and other executive agencies (§6103(j) of the internal revenue code) and expanded the definition of tax returninformation to include a broader range of social security earnings reports. as aconsequence, access to income information for statistical and research purposeswas sharply restricted.the internal revenue code, as amended by the tax reform act of 1976,provides that tax returns and "return information" are confidential and not to bedisclosed except as authorized by law (§ 6103(a)). "return information" isextensively defined to include virtually every aspect of information filed with theirs, including a taxpayer's identity and address and the fact that a return was filed(§ 6103(b)(2)). as a result, most releases of filing information to other federalagencies for purposes of statistical research must be in anonymous form.exceptions are made for specified statistical and research uses by other units ofthe treasury department, the census bureau, the bureau of economic analysis,and by a subsequent amendment (p.l. 95œ210), the national institute foroccupational safety and health (§ 6103(j) and § 6103(m)(3)). the irs mayundertake special statistical studies at the request of another agency, evenmerging irs records with records from the other agencies (§ 6108). suchopportunities, however, may be limited by the resources and interests of the irs,as well as the need of the requesting agencies for access to detailed andpotentially identifiable data used in such studies.a serious loss of important statistical products, as well as significantincreased costs, was imposed on the federal statistical system as a consequence ofthe tax reform act. for example, external uses of the social securityadministration's continuous work history sample were substantially curtailed,as was access to irs name and address information for medical followup andepidemiologic studies (see chapter 6 for details). and, as a result of the act,federal statistical agencies faced a new obstacle in their efforts to promote sharingof business lists (see chapter 7).agencies lacking explicit statutoryprotection of establishment datawith few exceptions, the statutory protection of information onestablishments and other organizations that is collected for statistical purposes isfar weaker than the statutory protection oflegislation128private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal data. although we address the uses of statistical data on organizations inchapter 7, we mention them here to provide a contrast with the regulatoryschemes for personal records. several agencies that collect statistical informationprimarily from establishments and organizations do not have statutes thatexplicitly protect the confidentiality of such information.the experience of the energy information administration in attempting tomaintain the confidentiality of statistical information collected from oilcompanies illustrates the problem. at the time the data were gathered, the eiaassured the companies involved that the information would be used only forstatistical reporting purposes. the eia relied on its statutory authority toadminister this statistical program to develop regulations that were intended toguard against administrative uses of such information (see the department ofenergy policy statement contained in the federal register, 45(177):59812œ59816). however, conflicting statutory authority requires the disclosure of suchinformation to other federal agencies for official use upon request. specifically,title 15 u.s.c. § 771(f) states that "information [referred to in section 1905 oftitle 18] shall be disclosed by – the [secretary of energy], in a manner designedto preserve its confidentialityš(1) to other federal government departments,agencies, and officials for official use upon request–."when the antitrust division of the department of justice sought identifiableinformation to aid in two investigations of price gouging, the eia resisted and thematter was referred to the office of legal counsel in the department of justice,which ruled that eia must produce the information requested by the antitrustdivision. protracted negotiations regarding the precise nature of the data to bereleased ensued; the justice department eventually closed the cases withouthaving received any proprietary data. the justice department, however,continues to hold that it is legally entitled to such data (u.s. general accountingoffice, 1993; see chapter 7 for additional detail).the bureau of labor statistics also collects extensive statistical informationon establishments and other organizations, much of which is reported voluntarily,without specific statutory protection to preserve the confidentiality of identifiableinformation. however, bls has been more successful than eia in fashioning aprotective shield for such information. based on a combination of regulations andlower court decisions, bls has developed policies that enable it to honor thepledges of confidentiality that are given when it collects establishment data.legislation129private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the basic philosophy of bls is to protect the confidentiality of the data thatit collects. this fundamental position is articulated in a series of policy directivesthat set forth procedures for safeguarding sensitive bls information. thesecretary of labor has authorized the commissioner of bls to develop policies togovern the disclosure of all data collected by bls (u.s. department of labor,1972). these policies are intended to ensure that "data collected or maintainedby, or under the auspices of, the bureau under a pledge of confidentiality shall betreated in a manner that will assure that individually identifiable data will beaccessible only to authorized persons and will be used only for statisticalpurposes or for other purposes made known in advance to therespondent" (bureau of labor statistics, 1980:6).this pattern of regulation was upheld by a federal district court whenemployment data from unemployment insurance (ui) reports that would identifyindividual establishments were sought under the freedom of information act (seehufstead v. norwood, 529 f. supp. 323 (s. d. fla. 1981)). the reports had beenvoluntarily supplied to bls by a state employment security agency, which wasrequired by state law to keep such reports confidential, and bls had pledged tokeep the reports confidential. the court refused to order disclosure, finding theinformation to be exempt from the disclosure provisions of the freedom ofinformation act because such disclosure "would impair the bureau of laborstatistics' ability to collect that data in the future." more specifically, the courtfound that bls met the test for an exemption from disclosure under exemption 4of the freedom of information act (title 5 u.s.c. § 552(b)(4)), established innational parks and conservation ass'n v. morton, 498 f.2d 765, 767 (d. c. cir.1974), 529 f. supp. at 326. in addition, because each state has laws andregulations protecting the confidentiality of its ui data, bls is given extraprotection. that is, if ui data are requested, bls cannot release the data withoutconforming to the states' laws and regulations.while bls has been successful in honoring pledges of confidentialitywithout formal statutory protection, it has had relatively few legal tests of itspledge. will promises of confidentiality be honored if the secretary of laborshould revoke the delegation of authority to bls's commissioner and begin to usethis information in enforcement proceedings, or share some of it with thedepartment of justice for investigatory purposes? without clear statutoryprotection, the adequacy of the protection for confidential information onbusiness establishments may be constrainedlegislation130private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.by the policies of successive administrative officials and varying interpretationsof courts of different jurisdiction.the bureau of labor statistics has, on occasion, sought statutory protectionfor the confidential statistical information that it collects. for instance, a letterfrom secretary of labor elizabeth dole to the hon. thomas foley, speaker ofthe house of representatives, dated june 21, 1990, describes a proposed laborstatistics confidentiality act. as of early 1993, however, no action had beentaken on such legislation.new statistical agencieslegislation passed late in 1991 established a new statistical agency, thebureau of transportation statistics, in the department of transportation. also in1991, legislation was considered, but not passed, that would have created adepartment of the environment, with a bureau of environmental statistics as oneof its components. the roles of the two agencies, one already authorized and theother being considered, differ somewhat from the common conception of what afederal statistical agency does. instead of their collecting data on relevant topicsdirectly from persons or organizations, it is apparently intended that each of thetwo agencies will accomplish its mission primarily by compiling, analyzing, andpublishing data collected by other components of its parent department.the bureau of transportation statistics was created by section 6006 of theintermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 (p.l. 102œ240). theonly provision of the act that relates to confidentiality and data access is thefollowing short paragraph:(e) prohibition on certain disclosures.šinformation compiledby the bureau shall not be disclosed publicly in a manner that would reveal thepersonal identity of any individual, consistent with the privacy act of 1974 (5u.s.c. 552a), or to reveal trade secrets or allow commercial or financialinformation provided by any person to be identified with such person (§ 111).the above provision mentions only public disclosure. it does not establish aclear basis for full functional separation of data that might be received by thebureau of transportation statistics from other statistical agencies or fromadministrative sources and used by it for statistical and research purposes. theconference report on the legislation goes somewhat further in this direction,stating thatlegislation131private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the conferees intend that the director establish such procedures as necessaryto ensure that all bureau data are collected and stored in such a way that theycannot be used to prosecute individuals or reveal business information that couldharm persons or corporations (102nd cong. 1st session, conference report102œ404:461œ462).at this time, it is difficult to predict what kinds of problems the bureau oftransportation statistics is likely to have in managing its confidentiality and dataaccess functions given this lessthancomprehensive statutory basis.8the key portion of the confidentiality provision drafted for the proposedbureau of environmental statistics is a statement almost identical to the one citedabove from the transportation legislation. one is left with the overall impressionthat in drafting confidentiality legislation for new statistical agencies the draftershave given relatively little attention to what can be learned from experience.what statutory provisions are needed to maintain the principle of functionalseparation of administrative and statistical or research data and to maximize thedissemination of useful data while protecting confidentiality? how can demandsfor access to individually identifiable statistical data for nonstatistical purposes besuccessfully resisted? how does the statutory language affect the agency's abilityto share identifiable data with other federal agencies for statistical and researchuses? a look at the experiences of the statistical agencies whose legislation wehave described in this chapter (and the experiences of the energy informationadministration described in chapter 7) would have provided valuable insightsinto what has worked well and what has not.findings and recommendationscurrent legislation impedes the constructive exchange of data for statisticaland research purposes while failing to provide adequate protection of theconfidentiality of statistical and research records. the panel notes two majorinadequacies of the current situation.first, many agencies not covered by specific confidentiality legislation haveto rely on the privacy act to protect identifiable data on individuals. there areserious limitations to the protections provided by the privacy act for data fromindividuals, however. the panel notes three related limitations to the privacyact:legislation132private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1. although the privacy act does provide for separate treatment anddisclosure of anonymous statistical data, it does not distinguishbetween administrative uses of data and statistical uses. thus, it doesnot provide for the separate treatment of identifiable statistical dataand identifiable data from administrative record systems.distinctions between statistical and administrative data correspond tothe purpose for which the data were collected and the assurancesoffered to the respondent. (the panel strongly supports the principleof functional separation of statistical and administrative data; seediscussion in chapter 1.)2. the privacy act does not prohibit administrative and regulatory usesof individually identifiable data obtained for statistical purposes.exceptions to the informed consent requirement may permitstatistical data to be used for administrative and regulatory purposes,in violation of assurances given the individual at the time theinformation was collected that the information would be used for theexclusive purpose of conducting research or statistical analysis.3. the privacy act requires agencies to inform individuals of theanticipated routine uses that will be made of their data at the time thedata are collected. however, the routineuse exemption permitsexchange of identifiable information for an unanticipated purpose ifthat purpose is "consistent" with the original purposes mentionedwhen the information was collected. loose standards for defining aconsistent use may diminish the protection afforded statisticalrecords by permitting the release of identifiable research records foradministrative, enforcement, and other nonresearch purposes thatmay jeopardize the interests of data subjects (see coles, 1991).second, there is wide variation among statistical agencies in the degree ofconfidentiality protection that is afforded by legislation. among the agenciesreviewed in this chapter, protection varies greatly, from the rigorous protectionprovided for data collected under title 13 by the census bureau, to the currentlyuncertain protection of data collected by the energy information administration,to the absence of specific statutory protection for the bureau of labor statistics.the panel notes three major effects of this variation:1. the degree of data protection often is determined by the statutesgoverning the specific agency maintaining the information. as aresult, the same kind of information may receive greaterlegislation133private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or lesser protection depending on the agency that maintains it, andwithout regard to the sensitivity of the information.2. variation in protection among agencies may thwart the exchange ofinformation across agencies. those agencies that are required by lawto maintain an especially high degree of confidentiality are not ableto transfer data to agencies that do not have the same level ofprotection. for example, the national agricultural statistics service(nass) transfers lists of farms to the census bureau for the latter'suse in developing a mailing list for the census of agriculture.however, nass cannot obtain the complete mailing list for thecensus of agriculture for use in developing a sampling frame for itsown surveys. instead, it must develop its own sampling frame atconsiderable additional cost, even though both agencies collect datafrom essentially the same universe.3. differing levels of statutory protection across agencies may causeconfusion for data subjects and providers who do not pay closeattention to subtle differences in the assurances of confidentialitythat accompany agency requests for information. these assurancesoften are carefully drafted to correspond with the unique level ofprotection provided by each agency. but the distinctions maybecome blurred or lost when data providers respond to requests forinformation from several agencies. as a result, data providers mayplace too much trust in agencies with limited means of protectingdata used for statistical and research purposes, and they may notknow which agencies have a sound legal basis for offering morerigorous protection.recommendation 5.1 statistical records across all federal agencies should begoverned by a consistent set of statutes and regulations meeting standards for themaintenance of such records, including the following features of fair statisticalinformation practices:(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle offunctional separation as defined by the privacy protection studycommission,(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data,(c) a requirement of informed consent or informed choice whenparticipation in a survey is voluntary,(d) a requirement of strict control on data dissemination,(e) a requirement to follow careful rules on disclosure limitation,legislation134private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(f) a provision that permits data sharing for statistical purposes undercontrolled conditions, and(g) legal sanctions for those who violate confidentiality requirements(see recommendation 5.3 for further discussion of this requirement).the panel believes that such legislation should be crafted so that it does notrequire renewal in short intervals. the confidentiality legislation for the nationalagricultural statistics service, for example, is contained in the food security actof 1985 (p.l. 99œ198, § 1770), which must be renewed every five years. webelieve that all statistical agencies should have permanent confidentialitylegislation so as to meet the legitimate expectations of respondents forconfidentiality.the seven features listed above are intended to be an integrated package, not ashopping list of possible options. while the list contains the minimum standards,the panel does not wish to discourage the high standards on confidentiality thatare already in place for some agencies. existing and proposed legislation shouldbalance such competing values as data protection and data dissemination.9to attain the proposed standard for the maintenance of statistical records, thepanel sees two complementary approaches:1. the standards might take the form of new governmentwidelegislation, a "federal statistical records act," that would protect theconfidentiality of records used for statistical purposes across theentire federal government. such an act would (1) distinguish betweenadministrative and statistical records on the basis of use, (2) establishand mandate functional separation between administrative andstatistical records, (3) encourage disclosure of statistical records forstatistical uses, and (4) restrict disclosure of statistical records fornonstatistical uses. the legislation would complement the privacyact and perhaps be incorporated in it. however, amending theprivacy act, which extends protection only to individuals, will not bea suitable means of addressing concerns regarding statistical datamaintained by federal agencies on establishments and organizations.(see chapter 7 for the panel's recommendations concerningstatistical data on organizations.)2. a second approach would be to incorporate the standards in agencyspecific confidentiality legislation, adapting them to the specificmission and programs of each statistical agency. for this approach,the panel suggests that specialized legislative provisions bedeveloped that apply the standards outlined above to the specificlegislation135private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tasks of each statistical agency. thus, there would be two levels ofprotection: first, the federal statistics records act and, then, specificlegislation governing each agency.these approaches are not mutually exclusive, and some combination ofstrategies may be appropriate. for instance, the privacy act could be amendedwhile model legislative provisions were being developed.statutory standards that prohibit disclosure of statistical data if there existsany possibility of association with a specific individual or organization place anunnecessarily strict limitation on exchange of data for research. althoughstatutory requirements for nondisclosure (other than those in governmentwidestatutes such as the privacy act of 1974) vary considerably from one agency toanother, most are stated in absolute terms to the effect that no information can bereleased if it can be associated with a specific individual or organization. forexample, the census bureau's title 13 prohibits the publication of any data fromestablishments or individuals collected under this statute if the data can beidentified. similarly, legislation governing the national center for educationstatistics prohibits the publication of data that would permit the identification ofan individual.if taken literally, requirements of "zero disclosure risk" would virtuallyeliminate the dissemination of statistical data, especially in the form of publicusemicrodata. removal of explicit identifiers (such as name, address, and socialsecurity number) and careful application of statistical techniques to protectconfidentiality (see chapter 6) are not enough to protect individually identifiabledata from ever becoming known. there is almost always some residual risk,which cannot be easily quantified, that a diligent "snooper" who wanted to do somight identify one or more data subjects included in a tabulation or microdatafile.in practice, many of the statutory requirements that are expressed in absoluteterms have been interpreted to mean that unrestricted access to a particular dataset requires that a reasonable effort be made to keep the risk of disclosingindividually identifiable information at an acceptably low level. agency officialsexercise judgments to decide what statistical disclosure limitation proceduresmust be applied in order to keep disclosure risk acceptably low. judgments arerequired because no one can have full knowledge of the externally available datasets and other factors that might lead to disclosure and because the concept ofwhat constitutes an acceptably low risk of disclosure is inherentlylegislation136private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.subjective. also, the incentive for "snooping" will vary greatly across differentdata sets, thus affecting risk.the implementing regulations for the privacy act allow federally supportedresearchers to disseminate project findings that do not contain information thatcould reasonably be expected to be identifiable. a criterion of a "reasonably lowdisclosure risk" has been used by omb in its interpretation of the privacy act. inproviding executive branch agencies with guidelines for implementing theprivacy act, omb defines the phrase "not individually identifiable" to mean that"the identity of the individual can not reasonably be deduced by anyone fromtabulations or other presentations of the information" (federal register, 40(132):28954).recommendation 5.2 zerorisk requirements for disclosure of statisticalrecords are, in practice, impossibly high standards. regulations and policiesunder existing statutes should establish standards of reasonable care. newstatutes should recognize that almost all uses of information entail some risk ofdisclosure and should allow release of information for legitimate statisticalpurposes that entail a reasonably low risk of disclosure of individuallyidentifiable data.few sanctions for improper dissemination of research records are designedto extend beyond federal agencies to contractors, grantees, and nonagencyresearchers. in most of the statistical agencies the panel reviewed, employees takean oath or sign an affidavit to indicate that they are aware of the statutoryconfidentiality provisions associated with the data and the penalties for violatingthose provisions.among the federal statistical agencies included in our review, only thenational center for education statistics and the bureau of justice statistics havelegislation that includes penalties for violation of confidentiality provisions bynonemployees. for nces, such penalties are for data users who have access todata from a subset of surveys that were listed in the 1990 amendment to thehawkinsstafford amendments (see § 252 of the excellence in mathematics,science and engineering act of 1990, p.l. 101œ589). the statute for bjs is muchbroaderšcontractors and grantees are subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 forviolating the confidentiality provisions of bjs's legislation (42 u.s.c. § 3789g(a)).legislative sanctions for violating confidentiality provisions are desirablefor all data users, within and outside a federal agency.legislation137private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.currently, some penalties for violating confidentiality have the force of law,but others do not. informal penalties, such as declining to provide additional datato users who fail to observe agency confidentiality standards, are among the fewoptions currently available to agencies that do not have statutory provisions forpenalizing such users. such practices could be effective for users whosestatistical activities require frequent use of federal data sets. however, they wouldbe unlikely to deter those who want to identify individual units in a data setmerely to satisfy their curiosity or to embarrass the agency that released the data.legislative sanctions and informal penalties for violating confidentialityhave not been widely applied. this could be due to the fact that there have beenfew violations, that violations have occurred without agencies' knowledge, or thatagencies have been reluctant to impose sanctions for violations due to the adversepublicity that might result. nevertheless, it is clear that sanctions authorized bylegislation can play an important role in protecting the confidentiality ofstatistical data by raising the consciousness of data custodians and data users.as noted in chapter 4, data users are pressing agencies to provide greateraccess to statistical data. currently, federal agencies are the ones who "suffer" theconsequences when confidentiality violations occur. they fear such negativeoutcomes as lower response rates or decreased cooperation from respondents andare understandably cautious about broadening access to confidential statisticaldata since it merely increases the risk for them. nonemployees who are data usersmust also share responsibility for maintaining the confidentiality of data. datausers must recognize their responsibilities and data providers need the assurancethat sanctions bring to users' responsibilities.recommendation 5.3 there should be legal sanctions for all users, bothexternal users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain theconfidentiality of data.this recommendation is tied to the panel's position discussed in chapter 4,that is, that users must be prepared to accept legal and contractual sanctions forviolations.contractual sanctions for violating confidentiality might also be broadenedto include the data user's organization. one enforcement device that has been usedin federally supported survey research is the requirement that the user'sorganization deposit a specified sum of money before the data user can obtain themicrodata.legislation138private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the money is forfeited if the data user fails to live up to the specifiedprovisions of the agreement on data release. this approach has been used by theuniversity of michigan's survey research center in releasing detailed microdatafiles from longitudinal surveys conducted with grant support from the nationalscience foundation (see jabine, 1993a).notes1. this discussion of the privacy act is taken, in part, from cecil (1989).2. for a more detailed discussion of the origins of the privacy act, as well as a discussion of the wayin which it is inappropriate to contemporary recordkeeping practices, see flaherty, 1989:306314,366370.3. the privacy act defines a record as "any item, collection, or grouping of information about anindividual that is maintained by an agency, including, but not limited to, his education, financialtransactions, medical history, and criminal or employment history and that contains his name, or theidentifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual, such as a fingeror voice print or a photograph" (title 5 u.s.c § 552a(a)(4)).the term statistical record is defined in the privacy act as "a record in a system of recordsmaintained for statistical research or reporting purposes only and not used in whole or in part inmaking any determination about an identified individual, except as provided by § 8 of title 13 (whichgoverns the census bureau)" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(a)(6)).the privacy act defines a system of records as "a group of any records under the control of anyagency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual or by some identifyingnumber, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(a)(5)).4. for an example of the differing standards that have been adopted under this exemption fordisclosure of names and addresses contained in files held by federal agencies, see rubin (1990). for adiscussion of the evolving nature of this exemption, see andrussier (1991).5. see "requirements relating to confidentiality and privacy in data collection contracts" andrequirements relating to confidentiality and privacy in data processing contracts," appendixes aand b, respectively, in national center for health statistics (1984).6. the cases are the atlanta journal et al. v. ledbetter et al., superior court of fulton county, stateof georgia, civil action file no. d40588 (1987) and jane doe ii et al. v. lumpkin, united statesdistrict court, central district of illinois, case no. 891224 (1991).7. one of the requirements of title 13 is that the census bureau notlegislation139private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.publish results from data collected under this authority that could be used to identify respondents. inits effort to reduce the risk that a respondent to a title 13 survey could be identified, the censusbureau has adopted a microdata protection criterion that precludes release of information that isobtained from or matchable to administrative records systems. (for more information, see gates,1988.)8. late in 1992, toward the end of the bush administration, secretary of transportation andrew h.card, jr., announced the formation of the bureau of transportation statistics and appointed robertknisely as deputy director (u.s. department of transportation, 1992). as of early 1993, the firstdirector of the bureau of transportation statistics had not been appointed.9. the panel is not the first group to find statutory inadequacies and to recommend the passage ofgovernmentwide legislation that would protect the confidentiality of federal statistical records.among those recommending the passage of such legislation were the privacy protection studycommission (ppsc), which was created by the privacy act of 1974, and the 19781979 president'sreorganization project for the federal statistical system. one of the ppsc's key recommendationsfor statistical records was that governmentwide legislation be passed that established the principle offunctional separation (privacy protection study commission, 1977a). the president's reorganizationproject for the federal statistical system (1981:203) concluded that "existing legislation did notprovide a consistent framework for the protection of statistical confidentiality" and similarlyrecommended the passage of governmentwide confidentiality legislation for statistical records.legislation140private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6technical and administrative proceduresthe federal government has led the way in the development of statistical  methodology –to protect the confidentiality of respondents, usually  called disclosureavoidancetechniques.barbara bailar, 1990the disclosure control to be applied to the release should ideally  be based on informationabout – i. the degree of protection provided  by a specific scheme; and ii. the amount ofloss of information introduced  by that scheme.tore dalenius, 1991va officials acknowledged their income verification match project  had gone awry. acomputer malfunction in chicago caused more than  650 veterans to receive anotherveteran's income tax information.washington post, may 27, 1992introductionthe general and agencyspecific information statutes discussed in chapter 5provide the framework for the confidentiality and data access policies andpractices of federal statistical agencies. within this broad and complexframework, the agencies have substantial latitude to develop and apply specifictechnical and administrative techniques in order to achieve wide disseminationand use of publicly collected data while protecting the confidentiality ofindividual information.statistical agencies have two main options for protecting the confidentialityof released datašproviding restricted data and providing restricted  access. thefirst option entails restricting the content of data sets or files to be released.before releasing a microdatatechnical and administrative procedures141private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.file, for example, an agency would usually remove explicit identifiers (e.g.,name, address, and social security number) and might further curtail theinformation in the file (e.g., by giving people's ages in fiveyear intervals ratherthan by exact date of birth). the second option entails imposing conditions onwho may have access to agency data, for what purpose, at what locations, and soforth. (a similar distinction was made by marsh et al. (1991b) in a paper aboutdata dissemination practices in the united kingdom. instead of restricted dataand restricted access, they used the terms safe data and safe setting.) microdatasets that are released with no restrictions on access (but typically with manyrestrictions on content) are commonly referred to as publicuse data sets.there is an inverse relationship between restrictions on data and restrictionson access: as data restrictions increase, fewer restrictions on access are neededand vice versa. some user needs cannot be met with restricted data, however,because the data transformation required to ensure data confidentiality is soextreme that the restricted data are useless for inference purposes. in response, anagency may allow more restricted access to less restricted data. conversely, toensure confidentiality, access may have to be so restricted that a legitimate usercannot, as a practical matter, obtain the data. again in response, an agency mayallow less restricted access to more restricted data. neither restricted data norrestricted access alone is a panacea. to make effective use of data whileprotecting confidentiality, both options are needed, often in combination. on theother hand, without assurances of adequate confidentiality shields, data collectionmay be stymied. a study of draft evaders who fled to a neutral country, forexample, was never conducted because researchers were unable to convince thepotential respondents that their anonymity could be ensured (sagarin, 1973).thus, the comment by dalenius quoted at the beginning of this chapter is to thepoint. confidentiality protection shields must be both effective and faithful to theoriginal data. the goal of technical and administrative shields is to protectconfidentiality adequately while leaving the statistical agency sufficientlyunencumbered that it can furnish faithful data. the criterion for faithful data issimple and compelling: "the user expects to be the peer of the data collector inanswering a research question" (david, 1991:94).this chapter has two main sections. in the first section we discuss statisticaltechniques for protecting the confidentiality of data on persons and other datasubjects included in released data sets. it is widely accepted that it is virtuallyimpossible to releasetechnical and administrative procedures142private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data for statistical use without incurring some risk that one or more persons canbe identified and information about them disclosed, especially if substantialresources are used in a deliberate attempt to do so. the goal of using statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques (mathematical methods that depend on statisticalcharacteristics of the data) prior to releasing data is to reduce the magnitude ofthat risk.1in the second section of the chapter, we discuss agency policies andprocedures for providing restricted access to data on persons. we also presentexamples of several kinds of restricted access, including data sharing betweenagencies for statistical purposes and access by end users outside the government.one of the examples includes the release of microdata in encrypted form.encryption is a technical procedure, but it is not generally thought of in thecontext of statistical disclosure limitation techniques, and so we include it in ourdiscussion of restricted access procedures.restricted data: statistical techniques forprotecting confidentialityin this section we focus on the search for statistical techniques that restrictstatistical data so as to protect the confidentiality of the data while maintainingutility to the legitimate data user. although the topic is technical, our treatment isnot. nor do we provide a primer on available techniques. that would onlyduplicate concurrent work of the federal committee on statistical methodology(1993), subcommittee on disclosure limitation methodology, which is chairedby nancy kirkendall. we do describe the key concepts of the approach, evaluateits value for confidentiality protection and data access, and present ourrecommendations. in so doing, we address four topics: the nature of disclosurerisk and statistical procedures for disclosure limitation; current statisticaldisclosure limitation practices of federal statistical agencies; the impact ofincreased computer and communications capability on disclosure risk; andcurrent statistical disclosure limitation research.disclosure risk and statistical disclosurelimitation techniquesas defined in chapter 1, a disclosure occurs when a data subject is identifiedfrom a released file (identity disclosure), sensitivetechnical and administrative procedures143private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information about a data subject is revealed through the released file (attributedisclosure), or released data make it possible to infer the value of an attribute of adata subject more accurately than otherwise would have been possible(inferential disclosure). inferential disclosure may involve either identitydisclosure or attribute disclosure.2 the most general of these concepts isinferential disclosure, which was defined by dalenius (1977), supported by thefederal committee on statistical methodology (1978), and summed up by jabineet al. (1977:6) in the following statement: "if the release of the statistic s makes itpossible to determine the (microdata) value more closely than is possible withoutaccess to s, a[n inferential] disclosure has taken place." as discussed in chapter 5,the only way to have zero risk of inferential disclosure is not to release any data.in practice, the extent of disclosure can only be limited to below some acceptablelevel. indeed, in recommendation 5œ2 the panel suggested that new legislationshould recognize this fact and allow for release of information for legitimatestatistical purposes when it entails a reasonably low risk of disclosure.fellegi's (1972) view that disclosure requires identity disclosure andattribute disclosure is closest to what is commonly understood by disclosure andprovides a reasonable basis for legislative language. on the other hand, theconcept of inferential disclosure is useful to statistical agencies developing andanalyzing statistical disclosure limitation techniques. also, inferential disclosureencompasses a broader range of confidentiality risks that an agency shouldexamine.statistical disclosure limitation techniques involve transformations of data tolimit the risk of disclosure. use of such a technique is often called masking thedata, because it is intended to hide characteristics of data subjects. somestatistical disclosure limitation techniques are designed for data accessed as tables(tabular data), some are designed for data accessed as records of individual datasubjects (microdata), and some are designed for data accessed as computer databases. common methods of masking tabular data are deleting table entries (cellsuppression) and altering table entries (random error, or noise introduction).common methods of masking microdata are deleting identifiers, droppingsensitive variables, releasing only a small fraction of the data records,3 andgrouping data values into categories (as in topcoding, whereby data valuesexceeding a certain level are assigned to the top category). as discussed below,direct access of computer data bases, a recent phenomenon, may involve eithertabular data ortechnical and administrative procedures144private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microdata, but it raises new statistical disclosure limitation issues.prior to releasing statistical data, a statistical agency removes from the datarecords any explicit identifiers (such as name, address, social security number,telephone number) of data subjects that are not needed for statistical purposes. inmany situations, however, this obvious step of deidentification or anonymizationis not adequate to make the risk of disclosure reasonably low.4 to go beyond adhoc measures to reduce the risk of disclosure, it is necessary to have ways ofmeasuring the nature and extent of disclosure possible in specifiedcircumstances. in the context of inferential disclosure, duncan and lambert(1986) measure the extent of disclosure in terms of the change in uncertaintyabout a shielded value prior to data release and after data release. commondisclosure limitation policies, such as requiring the relative frequencies ofreleased cells to be bounded away from both one and zero, are equivalent todisclosure rules that allow data release only if specific uncertainty functions atparticular predictive distributions exceed a limit. this effort generalizes work ofcassel (1976) and frank (1976, 1979) and demonstrates the analytic power of theinferential disclosure formulation.a seemingly different approach was taken by bethlehem et al. (1990), whofocus on the number of unique individuals in a population, and so use identitydisclosure limitation. to illustrate how surprisingly often individuals prove to beunique based on just a few common variables, they noted that a certain region ofthe netherlands contained 83,799 households. of those households, 23,485 werecomposed of a father, mother, and two children. looking only at ages of thefather and mother and ages and sexes of the two children (all ages in years),16,008 of the 23,485 households (68 percent) were unique. if a microdata filewas released containing this key information on ages and gender plus othersensitive information, confidentiality could easily be compromised in most casesby any individual having only basic background information about a household.at least that would be the case if confidentiality was attacked broadly, forexample, by an individual who simply sought to identify any one householdamong all households rather than some specific household. such "fishingexpeditions," although presumably rare in practice are a concern to agenciesworried that someone might seek to discredit their confidentiality policies.a disclosure risk analysis based on the number of unique entities can be oneelement of the duncan and lambert (1986) framework.technical and administrative procedures145private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.release of a microdata file in which key variables are generally widelyavailable in the external world could permit linking data for all of the uniquehouseholds. this would raise the disclosure risk drastically for the shieldedsensitive information.5when disclosure risk is too high, data can be masked prior to release. asnoted above, different statistical masking techniques are used for publicusemicrodata files and tables. in the case of a publicuse microdata file, statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques can be classified into five broad categories(duncan and pearson, 1991):1. collecting or releasing only a sample of the data: for example, thebureau of the census first released a publicuse microdata file with a1in1,000 sample from the 1960 census of population and housing;microdata products from the 1980 census included one based on a 1percent sample and another based on a 5 percent sample.2. including simulated data: this technique has not been implemented,but it is conceptually akin to including several identical limousines ina motorcade under threat of terrorist attack.3. ''blurring" of the data by grouping or adding random error to individual values: presenting subjects' ages in 10year intervals is anexample of grouping. for an example of addition of random error,the census bureau prepared a microdata file for researchers at thenational opinion research center from the 1980 census thatcontained census tract characteristics (e.g., percentage of blacks andhispanics, unemployment rate, median house value). because thetract characteristics had unique combinations and thosecharacteristics could readily be learned from census bureaupublications, the records could be linked to the actual tract ofresidence. that would have violated the census bureau policy of notidentifying a geographic area with fewer than 100,000 residents. toreduce this risk, tract characteristics were masked by adding randomerror, or noise (see kim, 1990).4. excluding certain attributes: an agency might provide a subject'syear of birth but not the month and day, or quarterly employmentdata could be replaced with yearly summaries.5. swapping of data by exchanging the values of just certain variables between data subjects: for example, the value for some sensitivevariable in a record could be exchanged for that in an adjacentrecord.for data released as tables, the blurring and swapping techniques describedabove have been used. three other statisticaltechnical and administrative procedures146private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disclosure limitation techniques are unique to tables (see cox, 1980, 1987;sande, 1984):1. requiring each marginal total of the table to have a minimum countof data subjects.2. using a "concentration" rule, also known as the (n,k)rule, where nentities do not dominate k percent of a cell; for example, requiringthat the reported aspects of the two dominant businesses in a cellcomprise no more than a certain percentage of a cell.3. using controlled rounding of table entries to perturb entries whilemaintaining various marginal totals.the more sophisticated the masking technique, the less accessible the dataand their analysis will be to many social scientists and policymakers. thestatistical disclosure limitation approach that creates the least problems foranalysts is masking through sampling because (at least with simple randomsampling) standard statistical inference tools readily apply. however, for publicuse microdata files, other statistical disclosure limitation techniques, such as theaddition of noise, present measurement error or errorsinvariables problems forthe user of the masked data (see, e.g., sullivan and fuller, 1989).6 this canintroduce bias in the inferences that are drawn.7 in general, the choice of anappropriate statistical disclosure limitation method depends on the statisticalprocedure to be used to analyze the data.selected statistical disclosure limitationpractices of federal statistical agenciessome federal statistical agenciesšnotably the census bureaušhavedevoted considerable attention to the development and implementation ofstatistical disclosure limitation techniques.8 in an enduring contribution, thefederal committee on statistical methodology (1978) issued statistical policyworking paper 2, report on statistical  disclosure and disclosureavoidancetechniques. the report summarized the practices of seven federal agencies,9 presented recommendations regarding statistical disclosure limitation techniques,and discussed the effects of disclosure on data subjects and users and the need forresearch and development in this area. because of their continued relevance, thepanel endorses certain key recommendations from statistical policy workingpaper 2 in presenting its own recommendations below. attention to this area isperhaps even more justifiable today because mosttechnical and administrative procedures147private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical disclosure limitation methods that are employed in practice lacktheoretical roots (see duncan and lambert, 1986; greenberg and zayatz, 1992).their ad hoc nature leads to criticism by potential users that they are excessivelyconservative. for decades, for example, the census bureau used an area sizecutoff of 250,000 residents to limit the disclosure risk based on geographicspecification, a cutoff that was lowered to 100,000 residents for most surveys andcensuses after systematic studies were conducted (see greenberg and voshell,1990a,b).procedures used for tablesseveral statistical agencies have applied disclosure limitation to tabulardata. in practice, most agency guidelines provide for suppressing the values in thecells of a table based on minimum cell sizes and an (n, k) concentration rule.minimum cell sizes of three are almost invariably used, because each member of acell of size two could derive a specific value from the other member. a typicalconcentration rule specifies that no more than k = 70 percent of a cell value isattributable to n = 1 entity. often, the particular choice of n and k is not revealedto data users. cell suppression in tables always results in a loss to the data user ofsome detailed information. because cell sizes are typically small in geographicareas with small populations, geographic detail is often lost (see below).procedures for microdata filesonly about half of the federal statistical agencies that replied to the panel'srequest for information included materials that documented their statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques for microdata. some that did merely indicatedthat the statistical disclosure limitation techniques for surveys they sponsoredwere set by the census bureau's microdata review panel because the surveys hadbeen conducted for them by the census bureau.major releasers of publicuse microdata (that is, the census bureau, thenational center for health statistics (nchs), and more recently the nationalcenter for education statistics, or nces) have all established formal proceduresfor review and approval of new microdata sets. in general those procedures donot rely on parameterdriven rules like those used for tabulations. instead, theyrequire judgments by reviewers that take into account such factors as theavailability of external files with comparabletechnical and administrative procedures148private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data, the resources that might be needed by a "snooper" to identify individualunits, the sensitivity of individual data items, the expected number of uniquerecords in the file, the proportion of the study population included in the sample,and the expected amount of error in the data.since locating a data subject geographically increases disclosure risk, acommon disclosure limitation method is to coarsen geographic detail. the censusbureau and nchs specify that no geographic codes for areas with a populationof less than 100,000 can be included in publicuse microdata files. if a filecontains a large number of variables, a higher cutoff may be used. the inclusionof localarea characteristics, such as the mean income, population density, andpercentage of minority population of a census tract, is also limited by thisrequirement because if enough variables of this type are included, the local areacan be uniquely identified. for example, in the energy informationadministration's residential energy consumption surveys, local weatherinformation has had to be masked to prevent disclosure of the geographic locationof surveyed households. lack of geographical coding may have limited effect oncertain analyses of national programs, like food stamps. yet expunging state ofresidence of a sampled household, as is done in the publicuse microdata files ofthe survey of income and program participation (sipp), precludes many usefulanalyses of programs (e.g., aid for families with dependent children) for whicheligibility criteria vary by state.10the impact of improved computer andcommunications technologythe president's commission on federal statistics reported in 1971 thatthe development of new methods of storing and recalling information bycomputer has generated considerable confusion in the public mind about thegovernment's need for personal information about individuals, and apprehensionabout the use of such information (pp. 198œ199).this comment remains emphatically legitimate today, over 20 years after thepublication of the report of the presidential commission. the public fears that thegovernment's amassing of large data bases will reach into the private lives ofcitizens (see, e.g., burnham, 1983; flaherty, 1989).the computer revolution that caused concern in 1971 is stilltechnical and administrative procedures149private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ongoing. in the 1960s and 1970s mainframe computers were available tocomparatively few individuals. beginning with the mass introduction of personalcomputers by international business machines (ibm) in 1981, significantcomputing power became available on the desks of most researchers. because ofimprovements in computer and communications technology, the prevailing modefor data storage today is a computer data base, and a frequent mode of access isthrough remote telecommunications. the latter permits large data bases to bedeveloped and maintained according to strict quality control standards whileallowing easy access by a widely dispersed group of data users. in thecommercial field the growth of airline reservation systems is a prototypicalexample of this phenomenon. in the area of research and policy analysis, thistechnology allows rich data bases to be assembled, provides access without aspecial trip to the site where the data are stored, and in some cases enablesresearchers to use their own software in analyzing the data. an oftencitedexample of such an arrangement is the luxembourg income study (rainwaterand smeeding, 1988), which maintains microdata sets containing measures ofeconomic wellbeing for many developed countries. the key consideration forcustodians of remotely accessed data bases is to provide the benefits of this easyaccess while ensuring confidentiality. only statistical aggregates, such astabulations, should be obtainable. the ability to download individual recordsshould be precluded. further, and this is more difficult, the data user should notbe able to inter the information contained in individual records from permittedqueries about aggregates.data base security has both administrative and technical aspects.administratively and at a systemwide level, the institution maintaining the database must create an environment in which passwords are not shared and the usethat individuals can make of secure data is subject to periodic audit and review.technically and at the data base level, reliance on access control procedures, suchas the use of passwords, is not fully adequate. all modern data bases are designedto provide security against direct query of certain attributes. in this way, any usercan be allowed to access only a restricted part of a data base. such a multileveldata base basically stores data according to different security classifications andallows users access to data only if their security level is greater than or equal tothe security classification of the data. unfortunately, this simple device does notpreclude the existence of what is called an inference channel (see denning andtechnical and administrative procedures150private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lunt, 1988). an inference channel is said to exist in a multilevel data base when auser can infer information classified at a high level (to which the user does nothave access) based on information classified at a lower level to which the userdoes have access. such a channel may be hard to detect because it may involve alengthy chain of inference and combine information that is explicitly stored in thedata base and other, external information.further, a data user may have legitimate access to statistical aggregates, suchas averages and regression coefficients for such sensitive attributes as medical orsalary information, while not being permitted access to information that isidentifiable to a specified individual. in such situations, inferential disclosurecontrol is usually implemented through query restriction (fellegi, 1972) orresponse modification (denning, 1980). in query restriction, certain queries, suchas those pertaining to a few entities in the data base, are not answered. inresponse modification, the answers to certain queries are modified, for example,by adding random error or rounding. in either instance, a problem stems from thefact that the data base can be repeatedly queried. each individual query may beinnocuous, but the sequential queries may be sufficient to compromise the database. this particular problem is an area of ongoing research (see adam andwortman, 1989; duncan and mukherjee, 1991, 1992; kellermcnulty andunger, 1993; matloff, 1986; tendick, 1991; and turn, 1990). to date, researchsuggests that (1) user demand for data access through remote querying ofrelational data bases is inevitable and (2) modern data bases give rise to specialproblems in protecting confidentiality that require new disclosure limitationtechniques.recent research on disclosure limitationuntil recently agencies had little theoretical justification for the statisticaldisclosure limitation tools they employed (see cox, 1986; duncan and pearson,1991). the tools of this field are not only statistical but also come from the fieldsof mathematics, computer science, numerical analysis, linear and integerprogramming; and operations research (see brackstone, 1990; greenberg 1990,1991). much of the research on disclosure limitation has taken place in federalagencies, especially the census bureau (bailar, 1990). recently, statisticaldisclosure limitation has begun to attract the attention of university researchers as afield of inquiry. below we describe a few recent studies of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques.technical and administrative procedures151private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.systematic frameworksduncan and pearson (1991) describe some general techniques for limitingdisclosures from microdata through a process of matrix masking. a statisticalagency would disseminate a transformed file rather than the original file. by aprocess of matrix multiplication, the records can be transformed, the attributescan be transformed, or both. by a process of matrix addition, the individual datavalues can be displaced. such matrix masking makes uses of wellknowndisclosure limitation methods. among recordtransforming masking techniquesare aggregation across records, suppression of certain records, release of statisticsfor ordinary least squares regression, release of a sample of records, andmultiplication of records by random noise. among displacing maskingtechniques are addition of random noise and addition of deterministic noise. inhis discussion of the duncan and pearson paper, cox (1991) suggests how certaingeneralizations of matrix masks can also make use of other disclosure limitationmethods, such as random rounding, grouping, and truncation.papers commissioned by the panelto aid its deliberations, the panel commissioned a series of papers dealingwith a range of issues bearing on confidentiality and data access (see appendix afor a list of the papers). below we briefly identify the contributions of thecommissioned papers that dealt most directly with statistical disclosurelimitation.fuller (1993), in his paper use of masking procedures for disclosure limitation, examines the confidentiality protection provided by adding randomerror to data elements. noting the importance of researchers' being able toanalyze the resulting masked data, he examines the costs of data masking as afunction of type of masking, degree of masking, and type of analysis. for a rangeof situations, fuller provides appropriate statistical estimation procedures basedon measurement error methodology.jabine (1993b), in his paper statistical disclosure limitation: current federal practices and research, summarizes the statistical disclosure limitationpractices of 18 agencies based primarily on their responses to a 1990 request fromthe panel for information about agency confidentiality and data access policiesand practices. his paper also provides an update on the statistical procedures usedby the agencies that were included in the 1978 statistical policy working paper2.technical and administrative procedures152private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lambert (1993), in her paper measures of disclosure risk and harm,develops a decisiontheoretic model for the actions of a data snooper inidentifying a target record. she also examines a variety of measures of disclosureharm and relates her discussion to a larger literature.little (1993), in his paper statistical analysis of masked data, discusses abroad range of masking methods, including randomized response, release ofsubsamples of records, suppression of cells in a crosstabulation, deletion ofsensitive values, deletion followed by imputation of values, addition of randomnoise, rounding, grouping or truncation, transformation, slicing files into subsetsof variables, slicing and recombination to form synthetic records, reduction toaggregate sufficient statistics, and microaggregation. he develops a likelihoodtheory for masked data files that combines elements of rubin's (1976) theoriesfor treatment assignment and missing data and heitjan and rubin's (1991) theoryfor coarsened data.kellermcnulty and unger (1993), in their paper database systems: inferential security, synthesize research that has been conducted by computerscientists and statisticians on problems of data security and confidentiality.computer scientists have focused on data release through sequential queries to adata base; statisticians have focused on the aggregate release of data.in his discussion of the commissioned papers at the panel's march 1991conference on disclosure limitation approaches and data access, rubinbroached the idea of applying multiple imputation methodology (see rubin,1987; little and rubin, 1987) to create artificial (synthetic) microdata files.11 inthis mode, federal statistical agencies would not release any actual data fromsubjects. the clear appeal of this notion is that there is no possibility of identitydisclosure in disseminating synthetic data. however, the notion gives rise toimportant questions: to what extent can synthetic data sets created by usingtechniques such as multiple imputation and data swapping satisfy user needs?what would be the legal and research standing of inferences drawn from them?shielding organizational datafor the most part, statistical disclosure limitation techniques have beendeveloped for data on persons and households. the task of protecting theconfidentiality of organizational datašfor example, economic data onestablishmentsšis more difficult becausetechnical and administrative procedures153private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational data are decidedly skew on key dimensions. federal statisticalagencies are thus reluctant to release publicuse microdata files on organizations.some research in this area has begun. wolf (1988), for example, examines atechnique of microaggregation that creates pseudorecords by combininginformation from similar records. he applies it to the census bureau'slongitudinal research development file (an earlier version of the longitudinalresearch database), which consists of a longitudinal file of manufacturingestablishment microdata records collected through the annual survey ofmanufactures and the census of manufactures for the years 1972œ1981. heexamines the utility of the masked data by comparing characteristics of thedistribution of the masked data with the corresponding characteristics of theoriginal data.12 other work in this area includes govoni and waite (1985),mcguckin and nguyen (1990), and spruill (1983).findings and recommendationsmany of the statistical agencies included in the panel's review havestandards, guidelines, or formal review mechanisms that are designed to ensurethat (1) adequate analyses of disclosure risk are performed and (2) appropriatestatistical disclosure limitation techniques are applied prior to release of tablesand publicuse microdata files. the standards and guidelines, however, exhibit awide range of specificity: some contain only one or two simple rules; others aremuch more detailed. examples of more detailed formal documentation orprocedures include those of the census bureau (for microdata), the energyinformation administration (for tabulations only), the national center for healthstatistics, and the 1977 social security administration guidelines, which are stillin effect. other statistical agencies have far less formal procedures. this variationover agencies in the comprehensiveness of disclosure review has littlejustification in terms of agency mission. further, unfulfilled opportunities existfor agencies to work together and learn from one another, perhaps poolingresources to investigate the strengths and weaknesses of various statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques.based on its findings, the panel endorses the following recommendationsfrom statistical policy working paper 2 (federal committee on statisticalmethodology, 1978) and then makes recommendation 6.1:technical and administrative procedures154private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendations from statistical policy working paper 2all federal agencies releasing statistical information, whether in tabular ormicrodata form, should formulate and apply policies and procedures designed toavoid unacceptable disclosures (pp. 41œ42:part of recommendation b1).to insure compliance with its disclosureavoidance policies and procedures,each agency that releases statistical information should establish appropriateinternal clearance procedures. there should be a clear assignment of individualresponsibilities for compliance (p. 43:recommendation b6).the – [statistical policy office, omb] should encourage agencies thatrelease tabulations and microdata to develop appropriate policies and guidelinesfor avoiding disclosure, and to review these policies periodically. to the extentfeasible, – [this office] should help agencies to obtain technical assistance inthe development of disclosureavoidance techniques (p. 43:recommendationb8).the – [statistical policy office, omb] should conduct periodic trainingseminars for federal agency personnel who are responsible for developing andapplying statistical disclosureavoidance procedures (p. 43:recommendationc2).since the panel convened, the federal statistical agencies have initiated someactivities consonant with the above recommendations. in particular, in 1991omb's statistical policy office took the lead in organizing an interagencycommittee to coordinate research on statistical disclosure analysis. thissubcommittee on disclosure limitation methodology was begun as an initiativeof the directors of the major statistical agencies.recommendation 6.1 the office of management and budget's statisticalpolicy office should continue to coordinate research work on statisticaldisclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadlyamong statistical agencies. major statistical agencies should actively encourageand participate in scholarly statistical research in this area. other agencies shouldkeep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques.as discussed above, statistical disclosure limitation methods can hide ordistort relations among study variables and result intechnical and administrative procedures155private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.analyses that are incomplete or misleading. because of this possibility, policyresearchers have expressed serious reservations about the use of statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques (e.g., smith, 1991). further, data masked bysome disclosure limitation methods can only be analyzed accurately byresearchers who are highly sophisticated methodologically. based on thesefindings, the panel makes the following recommendation:recommendation 6.2 statistical agencies should determine the impact onstatistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. they should be surethat the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typicalresearchers. if the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statisticalsoftware, the agency should make appropriate consulting and softwareavailable.the panel believes that no one procedure can be developed for all statisticalagencies. further, confidentiality laws governing particular agencies differ, as dothe types of data collected and the needs of data users. in light of these findings,the panel endorses the following recommendations contained in statistical policyworking paper 2:because there are wide variations in the content and format of informationreleased, the subcommittee does not feel that it is feasible to develop a uniformset of rules, applicable to all agencies, for distinguishing acceptable fromunacceptable disclosures. in formulating disclosureavoidance policies, agenciesshould give particular attention to the sensitivity of different data items.financial data, such as salaries and wages, benefits, and assets, and data onillegal activities and on activities generally considered to be socially sensitive orundesirable require disclosureavoidance policies that make the risk of statisticaldisclosure negligible–.agencies should avoid framing regulations and policies which defineunacceptable statistical disclosure in unnecessarily broad or absolute terms.agencies should apply a test of reasonableness, i.e., releases should be made insuch a way that it is reasonably certain that no information about a specificindividual will be disclosed in a manner that can harm that individual (p. 42:partof recommendation b1).special care should be taken to protect individual data when releases are basedon complete (as opposed to sample) files and when data are presented for smallareas (p. 42:recommendation b2).technical and administrative procedures156private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.given the potential difficulties that certain statistical disclosure limitationtechniques can cause for analysts, it is important that federal statistical agenciesinvolve data users in selecting such procedures. as greenberg (1991:375) notes,''survey sponsors and data users must contribute to the decision making process inidentifying areas in which some completeness and/or accuracy can be sacrificedwhile attempting to maintain as much data quality as possible." in the past,agency staffs have been essentially the sole determiners of which statisticaldisclosure limitation techniques are to be employed prior to releasing tables andmicrodata files.recommendation 6.3 each statistical agency should actively involve datausers from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques aredeveloped and applied to data.finally, over the past 30 years various agencies have released publicusemicrodata files successfully. marsh et al. (1991a) make a compelling case for therelease of publicuse microdata files. (note also collins, 1992, for a cautionaryviewpoint and marsh et al., 1992, for a rejoinder.) based on experience, such datadissemination has met a twopronged test: (1) the microdata files have beenuseful to researchers and policy analysts and (2) confidentiality has beenprotected. based on this finding, the panel makes the following recommendation:recommendation 6.4 statistical agencies should continue widespreadrelease, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detailthan currently provided.we note that expansion of the number and richness of publicuse microdatafiles to be disseminated would be better justified if all users were subject to andmade aware of sanctions for disclosure of information about individuallyidentifiable data providers (see recommendation 5.3).restricted access: administrative proceduresto protect confidentialityprocedures for providing restricted access to data typically establisheligibility requirements for access and impose a variety oftechnical and administrative procedures157private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conditions covering the purposes for which the data can be used, whichorganizations and individuals can have access, the location of access, physicalsecurity measures, and the retention and disposition of initial and secondary datafiles. written agreements are usually required, and criminal or contractualpenalties are often attached to noncompliance with the conditions of access.arrangements for providing restricted access to federal data for statisticalpurposes are not uncommon. in a paper prepared for the panel, jabine (1993a)provides 19 examples, most of them current, and his list was intended only toillustrate various types of access that are allowed, not to provide an exhaustivesummary. he also gives six examples of instances in which access could not beobtained to data that would have had important statistical uses.the characteristics of interagency data sharing agreements tend to bedifferent from those associated with arrangements for restricted access byexternal users. the former are more likely to involve sharing of individualrecords with explicit identifiers, for purposes such as developing sampling framesand enhancing data bases. the latter typically are designed to permit access topotentially identifiable records for statistical analysis. these two types of accessare discussed in the next two subsections.interagency data sharingwe begin this subsection by presenting examples of agreements that havebeen developed to permit interagency sharing of identifiable, or potentiallyidentifiable, personal records for statistical purposes. some of the examplesinvolve transfers of administrative records; others involve transfers of datacollected in statistical surveys. most of the examples are taken from jabine(1993a). following the examples, we discuss some of the general issues theyillustrate.this subsection does not include any examples of unsuccessful attempts todevelop interagency data sharing arrangements for statistical purposes. theabsence of such examples does not mean that all or even most proposals forinteragency sharing are successful. for some kinds of data, statutory restrictionsmake sharing impossible; in other instances, agencies' policies and theirinterpretations of confidentiality statutes have thwarted requests by otheragencies for access to their data. the very limited ability of federal agencies toshare business lists for statistical purposes (see chapter 8) illustrates the kinds ofbarriers that exist.technical and administrative procedures158private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of interagency data sharingbureau of labor statistics access to nonpublic microdata from the  currentpopulation survey the main sponsor and funding agency for the monthlycurrent population survey (cps) is the bureau of labor statistics (bls). thesurvey data are collected by the census bureau. because the sample ofhouseholds is based in part on address listings from the decennial censuses, allcps data are subject to the confidentiality provisions of title 13 of the u.s.code, which means that only census bureau employees (including special swornemployees) can have access to individually identifiable information.such limitations on access have long been a source of discontent on the partof agencies sponsoring household surveys conducted under the provisions of title13. sponsors believe they are unduly restricted in their ability to perform detailedanalyses of the survey data and to use the survey materials for intermediatepurposes that might involve data linkages or followup contacts with surveyrespondents to collect additional data. nonetheless, bls has opted to continue totake advantage of the sampling efficiency that results from the use of decennialcensus address lists for its cps sample. in february 1990, the census bureau andbls executed a formal fiveyear "memorandum of understanding on the use ofnonpublic current population survey microdata by the bureau of laborstatistics."13 under the agreement, bls users of nonpublic cps microdata(which consist of microdata with geographic area identifiers and no topcoding ofincome items, but without explicit identifiers) must be special sworn employeesof the census bureau. the data may be used for "longitudinal matching ofcurrent population survey records, general statistical research [methodologicalresearch related to the survey design and operations], and improvement andexpansion of general tabulations." no provisions are made, however, for linkingcps records with records from other sources or for followup contacts of anykind with cps respondents. the agreement and attached statement of policiesprovide for strict security measures by bls staff, periodic onsite inspections bythe census bureau, and regular reviews of the benefits of the sharingarrangement.linkage of records from the departments of defense and health and human services this example also covers restricted access to data for statisticalpurposes. however, it is somewhat unusualtechnical and administrative procedures159private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in that the purpose of the record linkage was to provide statistical tabulationsneeded to determine the feasibility of a subsequent linkage for nonstatistical,compliance purposes. the agencies that participated were the office of theinspector general (oig) in the department of health and human services andthe defense manpower data center (dmdc) in the department of defense.the purpose of the match was to determine how many military and civilianemployees of the defense department might be in arrears on courtordered childsupport payments. based on the findings, oig would determine whether toproceed with a fullscale records match for compliance purposes. the files to belinked were 1987 and 1988 tax intercept files in the custody of the familysupport administration of the department of health and human services anddmdc's personnel files for military and civilian employees of the defensedepartment. to accomplish the linkage, oig sent a tape to dmdc containing thesocial security numbers and names of persons potentially delinquent on childsupport payments. the latter agency matched this tape against its personnel filesand provided oig with a tabulation of the number of matches by category ofdefense department employment.the arrangements were formalized by an exchange of letters betweenofficials of the two agencies.14 the main conditions agreed to were that dmdcwould not use the oig records for any purpose other than the specified match andthat it would return the oig data file when the match was completed. one of theletters noted that the match would not be subject to federal matching standardsestablished by the computer matching and privacy protection act of 1988 (p.l.100œ503) because that act does not cover matches performed solely for statisticalpurposes.the number of matches found in the oigdmdc matching study wassufficient for the agencies to reach a decision to proceed with an ongoingmatching operation for compliance purposes. no defense department employeeswhose child support payments were in arrears were immediately affected becausetheir records had been matched in the statistical study. however, many of themmay have been subject to disciplinary action as a result of the subsequentmatching operations for compliance purposes.the 1973 exact match study what may have been the most ambitious andcomplex statistical record linkage study, involving both survey and administrativerecords, that has yet been undertaken occurred in the 1970s. the 1973 exactmatch study was atechnical and administrative procedures160private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.joint undertaking of the social security administration (ssa) and the censusbureau. as part of the study, the internal revenue service (irs) furnishedselected tax information from 1972 individual income tax returns to the censusbureau for matching to cps records (see kilss and scheuren, 1978). the primarygoal of the study was to provide a broad data base for addressing such policyissues as the redistributive effects of changes in income and payroll taxes andalternative social security benefit structures. specific uses included evaluatingthe quality of cps income reporting, conducting labor force participation andearnings analyses using cps income and demographic data and ssa earningshistories, and developing lifetime earnings models.the study linked survey records for persons in the march 1973 currentpopulation survey, including the income supplement, with their earnings andbenefit information for several years from ssa data files and irs informationfrom their 1972 tax returns. there had been earlier administrative data linkages tothe cps data, starting with the march 1964 round, but the scope of the 1973 studyexceeded that of any previous one. the study was designed to take advantage ofthe possibilities that had been opened up by advances in computer matchingtechniques and by the achievement of closetouniversal coverage by the irs andssa record systems (kilss and scheuren, 1984).the data products from the 1973 exact match study included severalpublicuse (unrestricted access) microdata files containing linked survey andadministrative record data. the files were widely used by researchers andprovided the basis for numerous published analytic and methodologic reports andpapers (kilss and scheuren, 1978, list 41 reports and papers).although the end products of the study were available to all users, theintermediate stages in their development required restricted access arrangementsamong the three agencies involved. kilss and scheuren (1984) summarize themanner in which the confidentiality requirements of the three agencies were met.none of the linkages was performed at the irs. for linkages performed at ssa(to extract earnings and benefit data for sample persons), limited extracts of cpsrecords were used and those records were processed only by ssa employees whohad been given appointments as special sworn employees of the census bureau.the primary personal identifier used to link records from the differentsources was the social security number, which respondents to the cps had beenasked to providešwith assurance that their numbers would be used only forstatistical purposes. thetechnical and administrative procedures161private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ssa did not provide administrative data to the census bureau for the smallnumber of cps respondents who declined to provide their social securitynumber.one concern of those responsible for the study was the possibility that anssa or irs employee could, in theory, use the linked data to identify one or moreindividuals in the publicuse file and then use the survey information in thoseindividuals' records for administrative purposes. to minimize this possibility(often called the reidentification problem), income items were topcoded (that is,values above specified levels were replaced by codes indicating that theyexceeded those levels) and the release of the most detailed publicuse file, whichincluded the tax return data, was delayed until the end of the period for which theirs retained the same tax return information for all persons in its electronicallyaccessible administrative files.could the same agencies collaborate on a study of this scope and utility forresearch on income distribution today? probably not. although the period forwhich the irs maintains computerized files of individual income tax data is stillabout the same, the returns are kept indefinitely on microfilm or microfiche, sothat the reidentification problem would not disappear completely. moreover, thecensus bureau, as a matter of policy, no longer releases publicuse microdatafiles that link census or survey and administrative data for individuals. even ifthese difficulties could be overcome, it would probably be difficult to marshal theresources necessary to carry out an interagency linkage study of this magnitude.census bureau use of irs and ssa personal records to carry out theirrespective responsibilities for the collection of federal taxes and theadministration of social security benefit programs, the irs and ssa havedeveloped extensive personal record systems that now cover large segments ofthe u.s. population. over the years, the census bureau has used those records inseveral ways to enhance its demographic censuses and surveys and to evaluatethe quality of census and survey data.census bureau uses of irs and ssa administrative data can perhaps be bestillustrated by explaining how the data serve as basic inputs to the censusbureau's program of intercensal population estimates for small areas. the censusbureau tracks trends in internal migration between censuses by matchingindividual taxpayer record extracts for successive years from the irs individualmaster file. the migration data from the matched extractstechnical and administrative procedures162private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.serve as inputs to the estimates of the total population of states, counties, andother government units. the tax files do not include information on the age, sex,or raceethnic classification of individual taxpayers, but this information can beobtained from the ssa's numident file, which contains the basic demographicdata obtained in connection with the issuance of social security numbers. thecensus bureau has used these and other subsidiary inputs to produce estimates ofpopulation for states and metropolitan areas by race and age.as explained in chapter 5, the internal revenue code allows certainstatistical uses of tax return information by the census bureau. specific uses arespelled out in some detail in a series of treasury department regulations thatidentify the content of the records to be transferred, the uses to which they can beput, and the security measures that must be adopted to protect the confidentialityof information turned over to the census bureau. the information from the ssa'snumident file is transferred to the census bureau under a general agreementbetween the two agencies that provides for limited sharing of information in bothdirections for joint statistical projects (see jabine, 1993a:example 6).the future of the census bureau's program to develop population estimatesfor states and counties by age, raceethnicity, and sex has been clouded by arecent development. under arrangements negotiated between ssa and stateregistrars of vital statistics, birth certificates and social security numbers are nowbeing issued jointly at the time of birth in most states. for the births covered bythese arrangements, ssa no longer obtains data on race/ethnic classification.unless ssa finds another way to get such information, which it has used only forstatistical analyses of its programs, the gradual increase in the proportion ofpersons for whom it lacks raceethnic information will degrade the censusbureau's ability to include raceethnic status in its smallarea populationestimates program.discussionan obvious requirement for interagency data sharing is that the statutoryconfidentiality requirements of all of the agencies involved must be observed. asecond requirement is that the transfer of data among agencies must be consistentwith statements made to data providers when the data were obtained from them.when these requirements are not the same for all of the agencies involved, thosethat are most stringent govern the arrangements.technical and administrative procedures163private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the case of the census bureau, the law says that only sworn censusbureau employees, who are subject to criminal penalties for improper disclosure,may have access to the data. thus, in any sharing arrangement involving censusbureau data, employees of other agencies can have access to the data only aftertaking an oath as special sworn employees of the census bureau. the use of thespecial sworn employee provision is further circumscribed by the requirementthat it only be used in connection with activities that are part of the bureau'sstatutorily defined mission.statistical uses of irs administrative records for purposes not related to taxadministration are limited to the agencies and purposes specified in the internalrevenue code. the tax reform act of 1976 (p.l. 94œ455) restricted such usesto other units of the treasury department, the census bureau, and the bureau ofeconomic analysis, in each case for particular purposes. a subsequentamendment (p.l. 95œ210) added the national institute of occupational safetyand health to the list of eligible recipients (p.l. 95œ210, § 6103(j) and 6103(m)(3)). the irs has engaged in some sharing of records with agencies other thanthose mentioned specifically in the code, but only for studies it considers to berelated to tax administration.in general, data sharing among federal agencies other than the censusbureau and irs for statistical purposes is less constrained by legislation.however, statistical agencies that receive some of their data from the states underfederalstate cooperative programs (e.g., bls and nchs) must comply withconfidentiality provisions of state law, which vary among states. in someinstances, potential users of identifiable data obtained by a federal agency undersuch cooperative arrangements have had to apply separately to each state forpermission to have access to its data. a federalstate cooperative program is alsocentral to the data collection activities of the national agricultural statisticsservice (nass). however, nass uses of the data are controlled by federalrather than state law because the data collection, while jointly financed, isfederally controlled (specified statistical products are provided to the states).developing arrangements for interagency data sharing can be a complex andtimeconsuming process, especially if more than two agencies are involved or ifnovel applications of the data are planned. new initiatives are likely to pose newlegal, ethical, administrative, and policy questions. the expected benefits interms of cost savings or better quality data must be substantial totechnical and administrative procedures164private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.justify the level of effort and perseverance needed to find acceptable answers. ithelps if the proposed data sharing arrangements offer benefits to all of the partiesconcerned.external data usersthe availability of highspeed computers and sophisticated analytictechniques and software have generated vastly increased appetites for federalstatistical data. the statistical agencies have tried to satisfy the demand by issuingmore detailed tabulations and publicuse microdata sets, but not surprisingly, theyhave succeeded only in whetting user appetites further. continued efforts to meetincreasing demands from users are important; many users have the capacity toconduct sophisticated research on important matters of public interest.for many of the data sets that users want, the risk of disclosure is greatenough that some form of restricted access is the only option for release. severalmodes of restricted access for external users have been developed by statisticalagencies. some of the important features of these access modes are eligibilitycriteria, location of access, cost and convenience for agencies and users, andmethods of protecting confidentiality. as in the previous subsection, we presentexamples of different modes of restricted access by external users. we alsopresent two examples of failures to gain access to data sets. we follow theexamples with a discussion of their key features and the comparative advantagesof different modes of access.examples of restricted access by external data usersasa/nsf fellows since 1978, the national science foundation (nsf) hasfunded and the american statistical association (asa) has administered aprogram designed to promote the exchange of ideas and techniques betweenfederal government statisticians and academic users of federal statistical data.five agencies, the bureau of labor statistics, the census bureau, the nationalcenter for education statistics, the national institute of standards andtechnology, and most recently, the national science foundation (as a hostagency), have participated in the program, which enables senior research fellowsand associates from universities to undertake research studies at one of the hostagencies for a period of up to one year. the national agricultural statisticsservicetechnical and administrative procedures165private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has a similar fellows program, administered by asa, but paid for entirely withagency funds rather than jointly by the national science foundation and theagency.the fellows work on research topics of joint interest to themselves and theirhost agencies. they have essentially the same access to agency data bases andcomputer facilities as regular employees doing similar work, and they are subjectto the same confidentiality requirements and penalties for improper disclosure ofindividually identifiable information. at the census bureau, for example, theasa/nsf/census fellows receive appointments, take oaths as special swornemployees, and are subject to the same title 13 confidentiality provisions,including penalties for violations, as regular employees.the asa/nsf fellows program has provided user access to data notavailable in unrestricted publicuse files for a substantial number of academicresearchers. from the start of the program through the end of 1991, 72 fellowsand 54 associates had worked at the first four agencies listed above, about threefourths of them at the census bureau. the primary restrictions are that access isavailable only at the agency's central facility, for a limited term (although fellowssometimes revisit agencies on a less formal basis), and only for projects that thehost agency deems to be of interest. a more serious problem is that nsf fundingfor large numbers of fellows is expected to end soon, and it is unlikely that theother agencies will be able to support similar numbers out of their own operatingfunds.remote online access: the luxembourg income study the luxembourgincome study is an international cooperative research project providing remoteaccess to microdata sets from household surveys conducted by membercountries. the project is designed "to promote research on the distribution ofincome – and the general economic situation of households and families in aninternational context" (cigrang and rainwater, 1990:1). the project is supportedby the government of luxembourg and the center for population, poverty, andpolicy studies, also in luxembourg.at present, microdata sets from 14 countries, with explicit identifiersremoved, reside in the luxembourg income study data base system maintainedat the government of luxembourg's computer center. microdata sets from theunited states, canada, and australia had previously been issued by thosecountries as publicuse files, but the data sets for the remaining countries hadeither been available with restrictions or not at all.technical and administrative procedures166private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data base system is designed mainly to provide remote access toregistered users through an earn/bitnet computer mail network. use of thedata is restricted to academic and policy analysis research. remote users submitjob requests in the spssx statistical language, specifying variable names used inthe system. dedicated batchprocessing computers execute the requests and theoutputs are forwarded to users over the computer mail network. to preventdisclosure of individual records, incoming job requests and statistical outputs aresubjected to automated reviews and those that fail the review are given to theluxembourg income study staff for further review. for all of the microdata sets,exact income amounts, some of which may have been taken from administrativesources, are rounded.once users receive the statistical outputs, they are not subject to furtherrestrictions on use or publication, other than the general requirement that use forcommercial purposes is prohibited. as of mid1990, the data base contained 22data sets from the 14 member countries, had about 150 registered users, and wasaveraging about 50 job requests a day.release in encrypted cdrom format the passage in 1988 of public law100œ297 (the hawkinsstafford amendments to the general education provisionsact) led the nces to undertake a comprehensive review of its policies forprotecting the confidentiality of individual information included in releases oftabulations and microdata sets. it became clear that for some of the microdata setsthat had been released previously without restrictions the risk of disclosingindividually identifiable data was too high. criteria and procedures wereestablished for deciding which files could continue to be released with norestrictions on access and which could not. for the latter group, other modes ofrelease were sought. one of these modes, the encrypted cdrom format, is thesubject of this example (wright and ahmed, 1990). another, licensingagreements for use at user sites, is the subject of the next example.under the encrypted cdrom format, users purchase a diskette containingan encrypted microdata set and software that can produce descriptive statisticsfrom the encrypted data. prior to release, agency staff evaluate the disclosurerisks associated with the outputs that can be produced with the software providedon the diskette. restrictions are built into the software to prevent the user fromprinting out unencrypted individual records or statistics that would tend todisclose individual information. it istechnical and administrative procedures167private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.unlikely that any users would attempt to deencrypt the records because of thehigh cost that would be associated with such an effort.in general terms, this mode of release can be considered either publicuse orrestricted access, depending on what conditions are imposed on recipients.significant advantages for users are the relatively low cost of access and theability to use the data at their own work sites. however, the only analyses theycan perform are those for which the necessary programs are included on thediskette. at present, only elementary analytic techniques are supported, but workis proceeding to incorporate more complex types of analyses into the system.this system has the potential for solving, at least in part, the reidentificationproblem described earlier in this chapter. microdata sets containing linked surveyand administrative data could then be released with very little risk that thecustodians of the administrative records could reidentify individual records.release of microdata under licensing agreements to meet the requirementsof users whose needs cannot be satisfied with publicuse or encrypted cdrommicrodata sets, the nces has developed a licensing procedure that allowseligible organizations or agencies to use its confidential data for research andstatistical purposes at their own sites (see wright and ahmed, 1990). some of thekey features of the standard agreement, which was approved for use on a trialbasis in november 1990, follow: all employees of the licensee who will have access to the data becomespecial sworn employees of nces. they are required to sign affidavitsof nondisclosure and are subject to severe penalties for violation of theiroath. the physical security of the identifiable data must be ensured by use ofspecified procedures. representatives of nces have the right to makeunannounced and unscheduled inspections of the licensee's facility toevaluate compliance. all publications and other data products must be submitted to nces forreview. if there are evident reasons to be concerned about the possibilityof disclosure, the products must also be submitted for review prior to anyrelease. the research conducted under the license must be consistent with thestatistical purposes for which the data were initially supplied to ncesand the data must be returned to the center or destroyed when theresearch is completed.technical and administrative procedures168private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. if the licensee is a state agency or contractor thereof, the attorneygeneral of the state must certify that the licensee cannot be required tomake individually identifiable data available to a state agency oremployee not covered by the agreement.these licensing procedures permit somewhat wider restricted access thanthat currently provided by the census bureau under its special sworn employeeprovision. the nces statutory provisions for the appointment of special swornemployees are identical, but the statutory definition of the latter's mission (in thehawkinsstafford amendments) places greater emphasis on the dissemination ofdata. much of the research on educational policy issues takes place outside thefederal government, and nces has taken the position that a licensing system thatallows researchers to work with restricted access files at their own site is animportant element of its compliance with its mission statement.by early 1992, nces had issued about 30 licenses to users. the statisticalpolicy office, omb, has announced that the licensing procedures and agreementwill be submitted to a formal regulatory review, including publication in thefederal register and comment by all interested groups.examples of failure to gain accessssa's continuous work history sample the social security administrationestablished its continuous work history sample (cwhs) system about 50 yearsago to serve as a multipurpose longitudinal data base for program analysis andresearch on earnings, social security benefits, labor force behavior, internalmigration, and other characteristics of the u.s. population. for a 1 percent sampleof all persons who have been issued a social security number, the systemcontains their date of birth, sex, and raceethnic classification (as stated earlier inthis chapter, raceethnic information is no longer being captured for most newbirths) from the social security number application form and longitudinalinformation on earnings and type and location of employment. the earningsinformation comes from employer annual wage reports (quarterly prior to 1978)submitted to the irs, and the information on type and location of employmentcomes primarily from applications to the irs for an employer identificationnumber.prior to 1976, cwhs files were widely available and were used for researchby other agencies and organizations on the subjects mentioned above. the cwhssystem was a prime source oftechnical and administrative procedures169private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information for labor market and related research. the proceedings of a 1978workshop on the uses of social security research files, for example, includedmore than 10 research papers based on cwhs data sets, mostly from nonfederalresearchers (social security administration, 1978). the bureau of economicanalysis also used cwhs data for its regional national income accounts andanalyses of regional labor force characteristics.to enable users to update their longitudinal cwhs files on a quarterly orannual basis, a numerical identifier was included with each record. initially, theidentifier was the actual social security number, but after a short time, the actualnumber was replaced by an encrypted number, based on a simple substitutioncipher. later, a more sophisticated transformation was introduced. it is also worthnoting that the specific combinations of social security number ending digitsused to select the 1 percent sample were published in a journal article many yearsago, at a time when the effects of such an action on disclosure risks were notgenerally understood.prior to 1974, cwhs files were released without restrictions. however,concerns arose that in files containing county and detailed industry codes it wouldbe possible to identify some employers, especially large ones. further, employerswith access to the file, making use of knowledge of the ending digits that hadbeen used to select the sample, would be able to identify records for some of theirown employees and to obtain information, for example, about their previous andother current employment. starting in 1974, because of these concerns, allrecipients were required to agree in writing not to redisclose their files withoutpermission or to attempt to identify individual employers or employees from thefile.as explained in chapter 5, the tax reform act of 1976 severely curtailedthe use of identifiable tax return information for statistical purposes by usersoutside the irs. both the employer information from employer identificationnumber applications and the earnings data were considered to be tax returninformation, and thus, the release of cwhs files containing such data cameunder the new provisions of the internal revenue code. in 1977, the irsconcluded that cwhs files could not be released in the same detail as previouslyto nonfederal users or to most of the federal agencies that had been using them,including the bureau of economic analysis, which had, until that point, played amajor role as a user and disseminator of cwhs files in convenient formats toother users (carroll, 1985; smith, 1989).technical and administrative procedures170private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.since the 1977 termination of releases under the arrangements that had beenused prior to the 1976 tax reform act, there have been a few releases of cwhsfiles, under restricted conditions, to other federal agencies. files with identifiersremoved have recently been released to the treasury department's office ofeconomic policy and the congressional budget office. provisions of the 1976tax reform act permit both of these agencies to use tax return information undercertain conditions, so one cannot anticipate similar releases to the many potentialusers who do not have this authority. one possibility for wider release would beto develop one or more versions of the cwhs containing less detailedinformation for characteristics like industry classification and geographic locationof employment. however, ssa and the irs have not been able to agree on aformula for doing this. thus, agencies like the bureau of economic analysis nolonger have access to the microdata files. it seems fair to say that while thecwhs continues to be used for policy analysis by components of the ssa and ahandful of other agencies, its availability to the broader community of users isonly a small fraction of what it was prior to passage of the 1976 tax reform act.access to address information in federal files for medical followup  andepidemiologic studies access to data for use in epidemiologic studies and useraccess to the results of such studies raise many complex issues. this examplefocuses on a single question: access to federal address information for use inlocating and tracking respondents in longterm followup studies. although a fewfederal agencies do have access to such information, access is so limited that itseems reasonable to put this example in the failure category.the importance of epidemiologic followup studies is hard to exaggerate.most people are exposed, in their work and other aspects of their lives, to a hostof substances and environmental factors that may lead to adverse health effects.some of these effects, such as cancer, may not show up until long after initialexposure. thus, to determine relationships between exposures and effects and toidentify the most serious environmental risks, it is necessary to follow groups ofexposed persons for long periods, say 20 years or more, and to determineperiodically the state of their health, and if they have died, the cause of theirdeath. for many such studies the group of persons to be followed is not identifieduntil well after the period of exposure, so that finding them is not a simplematter.technical and administrative procedures171private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.within the federal system, the best potential source of current addresses formost of the population is the irs, which has recent addresses and social securitynumbers for all tax filers and their dependents. the social securityadministration and the health care financing administration have the currentaddress and social security number for beneficiaries, who include virtually allpersons aged 65 and over, but their coverage of persons under 65 is limited.for death information, the national death index provides access toinformation on all registered deaths in the united states for 1979 and subsequentyears. because of restrictions imposed by the states on uses of their vital statisticsdata, nchs, which is the custodian of the national death index, can tellresearchers only which members of their study populations have died and thestates where those deaths occurred. researchers who want cause of death andother information appearing on the death certificate must contact the state wherethe death occurred to purchase a copy of the certificate. another limitation of thenational death index is that deaths prior to 1979 are not included. there wassome discussion of extending the coverage of the national death index back toabout 1965, but that was found to be infeasible.the social security administration releases information about date andplace of death to the public from its own files, and epidemiologists can obtain thisinformation about members of study populations they are tracking. however,section 205(r) of the social security act, added in 1983 (p.l. 98œ21), requiredthe agency to establish a program of voluntary contracts with the states to obtaindeath certificate information. the purpose was to correct ssa records andremove decedents' names from its benefit rolls. with some exceptions (see azizand buckler, 1992), ssa cannot provide epidemiologists and other researcherswith the death information it obtains from the states through this program. itregularly releases death information it obtains through its own sources.prior to 1976, it was possible, at least in some instances, to obtain currentname and address information from the irs for use in followup studies. suchaccess was completely cut off by the 1976 tax reform act; subsequentamendments made the information available again to the national institute foroccupational safety and health on a limited basis and also for followup studiesof veterans of military service. however, numerous other government and privateorganizations conducting followup studies dotechnical and administrative procedures172private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not have access to this relatively lowcost and effective means of tracking theirstudy populations.on a slightly different, but related subject, ssa cannot disclose, for use inepidemiologic followup studies, rosters of persons who have worked in aparticular industry during a specified period. such lists would be based oninformation from earnings reports and employer identification numberapplications, both of which are classified as tax return information and aretherefore prohibited from disclosure by the 1976 amendments to the internalrevenue code. for periods of employment prior to 1978 there would also bedifficulties because the manner in which the ssa's files are organized wouldmake the development of such lists a costly process unless a list based on the 1percent continuous work history sample could serve the purpose of the study.finally, ssa has little if any information on current addresses fornonbeneficiaries except on tax records that are subject to the internal revenuecode's restrictions on disclosure.discussionthese examples illustrate the wide spectrum of modes of external useraccess to federal statistical data, ranging from no access at all to completelyunrestricted access. legal requirements for confidentiality are not the only factorsthat influence statistical agencies' decisions on what modes of access areacceptable for particular classes of data and users. when the probability thatindividual records can be identified and the perceived sensitivity of the data itemsare high, the agencies are likely to impose greater restrictions on access byexternal users. an underlying consideration in all decisions is the possibility that awellpublicized violation of confidentiality might lead to widespread publicresistance to participation in voluntary or even mandatory statistical datacollection programs.users look for modes of access that are low cost and enable them to work attheir own sites with a minimum of restriction and formality. when their needscannot be met with publicuse data sets, they will generally prefer to work underlicensing agreements (smith, 1991) or with encrypted cdrom diskettes,provided those modes will give them timely access to the kinds of data theywant, in sufficient detail for their research. modes of access that require workingat agency sites or controlled remote access are not likely to be considered unlessthere are no alternatives and there are strong incentives to undertake the research.technical and administrative procedures173private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.archiving federal statistical data setsour concern in this subsection is with arrangements whereby publicuse andother versions of significant statistical data sets, largely in electronic form, areeither maintained by statistical agencies or transferred by them to the nationalarchives and records administration (nara) for preservation and future accessfor statistical and research uses. the potential interest in and value of secondaryanalyses of data files long after their original creation is much greater today thanit was even 10 years ago given the expanded availability of computer power andnew methods of analysis. some data sets may have the potential for illuminatingissues that were not even thought of when they were created. (an analogy wouldbe the practice of freezing genetic material for future breeding and research uses.)unfortunately, researchers who have explored the possibility of secondaryanalyses of old data sets have often encountered serious obstacles. in manyinstances, the desired files have not been preserved in any form (david, 1980;david and robbin, 1981). if the files do exist and are accessible, seriousdifficulties may still result from the lack of supporting documentation, outmodedstorage media, and failure to retain the entire data content of files that were usedfor the original analyses. the question, then, is what can be done to make thingseasier for future secondary analysts and historical researchers who will want towork with data sets that are now in existence or about to be created?current federal archiving procedures all federal agencies, includingstatistical agencies, operate under statutorily prescribed information managementprocedures that oblige them to notify the nara of proposed schedules fordisposition of their records. in turn, nara reviews the proposed schedules and,when it considers the records to ''have sufficient administrative, legal, research,or other value to warrant their further preservation by the united statesgovernment" (title 44 u.s.c. § 3303a (a)) may disallow the proposed destructionof the records. for records that have been in existence for more than 30 years, thearchivist (director of the agency) may direct the transfer of such records to thenational archives.in general, statutory restrictions on access to and use of records transferredto the national archives expire after a period of 30 years. however, under certainconditions, by agreement between the archivist and the agency that transferredthe records, suchtechnical and administrative procedures174private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.restrictions can remain in force for a longer period (title 44 u.s.c. § 2108(a)). inaddition, it is the usual policy of the national archives to maintain accessrestrictions for 75 years when the data are about individuals and their earlierrelease by the agency that transferred the records could have been denied underfreedom of information act exemption 6, which covers "personnel and medicaland similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarrantedinvasion of personal privacy" (title 5 u.s.c. § 552(b)(6)).the national archives only accepts electronic files that are physically intactand have adequate documentation to enable researchers to read and make validuse of the data. the agency takes necessary precautions, such as reading filesperiodically and recopying them to new media, to ensure that the data remainaccessible on current computers.archiving census bureau records arrangements for the archiving ofcensus bureau records are fairly well developed. economic census records,which identify the responding firms, can be used at the national archiveswithout any restrictions after the statutory period of 30 years has elapsed. under aspecial 1952 agreement between the archivist and the census bureau, microfilmcopies of the original population census records (which are of great interest togenealogists) that are transferred to the national archives are kept confidentialfor 72 years, after which time they are made available to users.about two years ago, another agreement between the archivist and thecensus bureau extended provisions of the 1952 agreement to records from thecurrent population survey and other demographic surveys conducted by thecensus bureau. the 72year period of confidentiality does not apply to anypublicuse microdata files that are transferred to the national archives, but itwould apply to internal census bureau survey data files whose content had notbeen restricted to make them suitable for unrestricted public access. to date, nosuch internal survey files have been transferred to the national archives, but thearchivist has requested files of this type and it is likely that they will betransferred once appropriate security arrangements have been agreed on. toillustrate the kinds of issues that arise, archived electronic files must be copiedperiodically to ensure their preservation in usable form, and the census bureaubelieves that such copying should be done by special sworn employees who aresubjecttechnical and administrative procedures175private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to criminal penalties for improper disclosure of census bureau information.the rapid replacement of paper records by electronic files as the primarystorage medium and the prospect of further changes in data base technology posemany challenges and opportunities for nara in its efforts to meet futureresearch needs. statutes and procedures developed for archiving paper recordswill require significant alterations. a panel established by the national academyof public administration to review these questions issued a report in 1991, thearchives of the future: archival strategies for the treatment of electronicdatabases. the tenor of that panel's recommendations is clearly expressed by thefollowing excerpt from the report:nara itself must take an active stance in seeking candidate databases  toevaluate for inclusion as part of the national archives [emphasis in original].persuasive and aggressive oversight should be the ringing quality of nara'srole in guiding the preservation policies of all federal agencies. and time is ofthe essence. an outstanding characteristic of electronic records – is that there is amuch briefer span of time in which to bring them under active preservation.nara's authority prevents it from taking forceful action to guaranteepreservation of records until 30 years have passed. electronic records notbrought under the control of a comprehensive and active preservation programare unlikely to survive more than a few years. nara must seek additionalauthorities to sustain a viable program for bringing electronic databases into thenational archives (pp. 1œ2).the report recommended that the national archives preserve data from 430federal data bases in addition to more than 600 that the agency had alreadydesignated as archival. the national archives is actively pursuing transfers fromthese data bases.restricted access: findings andrecommendationsrecommendation 6.5 federal statistical agencies should strive for a greaterreturn on public investment in statistical programs through carefully controlledincreases in interagency data sharing for statistical purposes and expandedavailability of federal data sets to external users.full realization of this goal will require legislative changes, as discussed inchapter 5, but much can be accomplished within the framework of existinglegislation.technical and administrative procedures176private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the panel believes that some of the newer and more userfriendly restrictedaccess techniques, such as the release of encrypted cdrom diskettes withbuiltin software and licensing agreements that allow users to use data sets attheir own work sites, have considerable promise, and it commends the agenciesand organizations that have pioneered the use of such procedures.recommendation 6.6 statistical agencies, in their efforts to expand accessfor external data users, should follow a policy of responsible innovation.whenever feasible, they should experiment with some of the newer restrictedaccess techniques, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodicreviews of the costs and benefits of each procedure.recommendation 6.7 in those instances in which controlled access at agencysites remains the only feasible alternative, statistical agencies should do all theycan to make access conditions more affordable and acceptable to users, forexample, by providing access at dispersed agency locations and providingadequate user support and access to computing facilities at reasonable cost.the panel agrees with the views expressed in the excerpt (above) from thenational academy of public administration's report on the archiving ofelectronic data bases.recommendation 6.8 significant statistical data files, in their unrestrictedform, should be deposited at the national archives and eventually madeavailable for historical research uses.this recommendation is intended to cover statistical data bases fromcensuses and surveys and those, like the statistics of income and continuouswork history sample data bases, that are derived from administrative records.we have purposely not been specific as to the content of such archived data basesand the length of time for which confidentiality restrictions should continue toapply. some data bases, like the economic and population censuses, mightinclude explicit identification of data providers. others, especially those based onsamples, might not include names and addresses, but would not be subject tostatistical disclosure limitationtechnical and administrative procedures177private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.procedures of the kind that are applied to produce publicuse microdata sets forcontemporary use.notes1. statistical disclosure limitation techniques are often referred to as disclosure control of disclosureavoidance. we prefer disclosure limitation because it expresses more clearly the fact that zerodisclosure risk is usually unattainable.2. these and other conceptualizations of disclosure are explored in duncan and lambert (1989),duncan and pearson (1991), and lambert (1993).3. called samples of anonymized records. see collins (1992) and marsh et al. (1991a, 1992).4. for example, as recognized by the national center for health statistics,of course, all direct identifiers of study subjects, such as name, address, and social security number,are deleted from the public use files. still, there are so many different items of information about anysubject individual or establishment in our typical surveys that the set of information could serve as aunique identifier for each subject, if there were some other public source for many of the surveyitems. fortunately there is not. but to minimize the chance of disclosure we take additionalprecautions; we make sure there are no rare characteristics shown on any case in the files, such as theexact bedsize of a large nursing home, or the exact date of birth of a subject, or the presence of a raredisease, or the exact number of children in a very large family. we either delete or encrypt the codeidentifying smaller geographical areasšplaces smaller than 100,000 in populationšbecause anyonetrying to identify a respondent will have his task greatly simplified if he knows the respondent's localarea (mugge, 1984:291).5. collins (1992) and marsh et al. (1992) provide further discussion of the relationship betweendisclosure risk and uniqueness.6. there are situations in which adding noise has no effect on certain important kinds of analyses.with, for example, the health care finance agency's medicare data, releasing values like exact dateof death can pose substantial disclosure risk. the common practice of coarsening the data to, say,year of death may limit the usefulness of survival analyses based on the data and make it impossibleto draw good inferences about the efficacy of certain medical treatments. however, shifting all datesby a fixed amount, unknown to the data user, will substantially lessen disclosure risk while leavingmost survival analyses unharmed, because survival analysis generally depends only on the elapsedtime between various events.technical and administrative procedures178private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7. some researchers have begun to address these issues. kamlet et al. (1985), for example, analyze the1980 national health interview survey, in which several averages are reported rather thanindividuallevel data because of confidentiality restrictions. typically, analysts of such data simplyuse the associated grouplavel information instead of the (unavailable) individuallavel data. askamlet et al. note, however, this practice can produce inconsistent estimates and regressioncoefficients of the wrong sign. kamlet and klepper (1985) demonstrate how consistent estimators canbe computed in special cases. hwang (1986) deals with the errorsinvariables nature of data maskedby adding noise. for such a case, fuller (1993) illustrates how the data can be analyzed.8. the material in this section is based largely on jabine (1993b), a paper commissioned by the panel.brackstone (1990) notes that the development and application of statistical disclosure limitationtechniques to protect the confidentiality of data is a relatively new area of statistics that arose out ofthe practical problems statistical agencies faced. early discussions include bachi and baron (1969)and steinberg and pritzker (1967). bailar (1990) identifies the development of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques to be one of the five major contributions of the census bureau. also seebarabba and kaplan (1975), cox et al. (1985), and greenberg (1990, 1991).9. the seven agencies are the bureau of the census, bureau of labor statistics, internal revenueservice, national center for education statistics, national center for health statistics, socialsecurity administration, and the statistical reporting service (now the national agriculturalstatistics service).10. based on conversation between thomas jabine, a consultant to the panel, and patricia doyle ofmathematica at a meeting of the american statistical association/survey research methods workinggroup on the technical aspects of sipp on may 21, 1992.11. published along with other discussion and commissioned papers in a special issue of the journalof official statistics 1993(2). see appendix a for a list of the papers.12. for univariate dimensions, he checks percentiles, the mean, standard deviation, and skewness. formultivariate dimensions, he checks correlation coefficients and covariance matrices.13. the memorandum was signed on february 2, 1990, by barbara e. bryant (census bureau) andjanet l. norwood (bls).14. the letters were signed on october 20, 1988, by john a. ferris (dmdc) and by kenneth c.scheflen (oig) on november 22, 1988.technical and administrative procedures179private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical and administrative procedures180private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7statistical data on organizationsthe idea of individual rights is well established in all societies  and cultures of the world.rights associated with collectives are,  however, another matter.paul reynolds, 1993introductionthe uses of statistics on businesses and other organizations are not as widelyunderstood as are the uses of statistics on persons and households based on thepopulation censuses, the current population survey (source of monthly estimatesof unemployment), the vital statistics compiled by the national center for healthstatistics, and other household surveys and administrative record sources. yet,economic statistics are critical to understanding the health of the economy and thedirection in which the economy is moving. the u.s. national economic accounts,the retail and wholesale price indexes, the data on foreign trade and financialflowsšall are based primarily on data collected from organizations. thegenerally favorable reception to the 1991 boskin initiative to improve the qualityof economic statistics (see council of economic advisers, 1991) is evidence ofthe importance that policymakers and other users attribute to these kinds ofeconomic data.types of organizationsstatistics on organizations (considered legal persons) cover all data subjects(units of analysis) other than natural persons or groups of natural persons, such asfamilies or households. occasionally, data for persons and organizations may bepart of the same data set. for example, some surveys link information about thebusinessstatistical data on organizations181private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.activities of sole proprietorships with demographic information about thepersonal characteristics of the proprietors. other surveys link information aboutsuch organizations as hospitals or schools with data on persons served by orworking in those organizations.there are many kinds of organizations, and the differences among themoften determine the level of confidentiality accorded to their data. in thecommercial sector there are three legal forms of ownership: sole proprietorship,partnership, and corporation. nonprofit corporations, which are exempt fromincome taxation, are a special group. among the forprofit corporations, thosewhose shares are publicly traded are subject to special reporting requirements,and the contents of their reports (e.g., to the securities and exchangecommission) are generally available to the public. a subset of forprofitcorporations, especially utility companies, are granted exclusive rights toparticular markets; in return, their financial and other data may be subject to evengreater public scrutiny.many companies consist of several individual establishments, at differentphysical locations. although data for the company as a whole may be readilyavailable to anyone, the same is not necessarily true for employment, payroll,production, and other data for each establishment controlled by the company.in the public sector, the general expectation is that most information aboutthe activities of federal, state, and local agencies and units of government will beavailable to all. public access to such data is facilitated by freedom of informationand sunshine laws at the federal level and in many states.differences between data on persons anddata on organizationslegislationas noted in earlier chapters, information about organizations is not protectedby the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93œ579). if a statistical agency that hasidentifiable information about organizations is not governed by agencyspecificconfidentiality legislation, it must rely primarily on exemption 4 of the freedomof information act (p.l. 89œ487), which covers "trade secrets and commercial orfinancial information obtained from a person [interpreted to include legalpersonsšsuch as business organizations] and privileged or confidential," to denypublic requests for accessstatistical data on organizations182private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to identifiable records for organizations. the freedom of information act,however, does not provide authority to deny requests from other parts of thegovernment.most of the major federal statistical agencies have some form of legislationthat allows them to protect the confidentiality of data on organizations that theycollect and process. one exception is the bureau of labor statistics, which, asexplained in chapter 5, has relied on a combination of regulations and lowercourt decisions to protect data that it obtains from businesses, either directly orthrough state employment security agencies.for most of the economic censuses and surveys conducted by the censusbureau, the confidentiality provisions in section 9 of title 13 of the u.s. codeapply. those provisions protect the confidentiality of respondents' file copies ofcensus and survey report forms, as well as the originals submitted to the censusbureau. they do not apply to reports collected from state and local governments,because those reports, by their nature, contain only data available, at least intheory, to anyone. they also do not apply to the data compiled from officialimport and export documents in the census bureau's foreign trade statisticsprogram. section 301(a) of title 13 makes the export data confidential unless thesecretary of commerce determines that it is in the national interest to disclosethem. the import data are not covered by title 13 because they are collected bythe customs service and only compiled by the census bureau. as a matter ofpolicy, the import and export data are published in extensive detail by commodityand other variables, but without explicit identification of importers and exporters.the majority of data cells in the most detailed tabulations are based on fewer thanfive transactions.some additional aspects of confidentiality legislation and its effects on theability of federal statistical agencies to protect data on organizations and to shareor release their data for statistical and research purposes are discussed inconnection with four case studies presented below.other differencesin addition to the differences in confidentiality protection based on the typeof organization involved and the statutory framework of the federal agency thatcollects the data, federal statistics on organizations differ from those on persons inseveral significant ways:statistical data on organizations183private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. response to statistical surveys of organizations is more likely to berequired by law. mandatory response requirements do not guaranteecomplete response to such surveys because prosecution of surveynonrespondents is not a high priority for federal law enforcement units.they do have the effect, however, that many surveys of organizations donot require a true informed consent process, as detailed in chapter 3. there are likely to be greater incentives for other federal agencies andindividuals to desire access, for nonstatistical purposes, to individuallyidentifiable statistical information about commercial organizations. asdiscussed below, agencies with regulatory and compliance roles mightconsider a survey of businesses a good source of leads to companies thatare or may have been in violation of laws and regulations. industrialspies might derive substantial material benefits by obtaining access totrade secrets and other information critical to a company's competitiveposition. for aggregate variables like production, payroll, and expenditures, thepopulation distributions for organizations tend to be much more skewedthan they are for most variables associated with persons. especially atthe subnational level, data for one or two large establishments candominate a data cell. as a consequence, there have been virtually noreleases of publicuse microdata sets containing business data, and aconsiderable amount of masking is required even in the public release ofaggregate statistics. the size of a firm also affects the dynamics of thedata collection process. small businesses are less likely to be users of thedata collected from them, have less influence over the content ofeconomic data collection programs, and are likely to bedisproportionately burdened by paperwork requirements.content of chaptermost of the panel members have had limited experience with data onorganizations and our time and resources did not permit a systematic review ofall the confidentiality issues associated with such data. we therefore chose casestudies as the vehicle for identifying and exploring selected issues that have cometo our attention. the remainder of the chapter consists of four case studies. foreach case study, we provide the relevant background information, discuss themain issues, and present our findings and recommendations.statistical data on organizations184private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the energy information administration vs. thedepartment of justice: a further erosion offunctional separationbackgroundearly in 1990, the antitrust division of the department of justice began aninvestigation into the sharp increases in the prices of home heating oil and otherfuels that had occurred as a result of unusually cold weather in december 1989.later in the year, the division also started an investigation of the increases ingasoline prices that followed the iraqi invasion of kuwait in august.to aid its investigations, the antitrust division requested the energyinformation administration (eia), department of energy, to provide specifieddata on prices, production, and other variables, some in aggregate form and somefor individually named companies or establishments. the energy informationadministration was willing to provide the aggregate data, but it resisted therequest for individual company records on the grounds that release would becontrary to its policy on disclosure of individually identifiable energyinformation in  the possession of the energy information administration, whichhad been published in the federal register (45(177):59812œ59816). theantitrust division's request did not meet any of the conditions, set forth insection e of that policy, under which eia would disclose individuallyidentifiable information to other federal agencies. further, eia pointed out that ithad notified survey respondents about its confidentiality policies and that itsfailure to abide by them could hurt its ability to collect complete, accurate, andtimely data in the future.although other federal agencies requesting data from eia had accepted its1980 policy on disclosure, the antitrust division did not. after prolongednegotiations, the matter was referred to the office of legal counsel in thedepartment of justice, which ruled on march 20, 1991, that the federal energyadministration act of 1974 (p.l. 93œ275), one of the statutes on which the eiapolicy on disclosure was based, required that eia produce the informationrequested by the antitrust division. subsequent to this ruling, the energydepartment brought the issue to the attention of counsel to the president, c.boyden gray. gray, although sympathetic to a prospective solution to eia'sproblem, did not feel he could recommend to the president that he direct thejustice department to withdraw its request in this instance. in the ensuingstatistical data on organizations185private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.months, there were protracted negotiations on the precise nature of the data to bereleased. eventually, the justice department closed the two oilpricinginvestigations after receiving some aggregate datašbut not companyspecificproprietary data from eia. the justice department, however, has indicated thatit believes it is legally entitled to such data and will seek to obtain it if appropriatein future investigations (general accounting office, 1993).with a few exceptions, the provisions of eia's 1980 policy on disclosure hadpermitted disclosures of individually identifiable data to federal agencies outsidethe energy department only for statistical purposes. the march 1991 justicedepartment ruling meant that that portion of the eia policy on disclosure couldno longer be sustained; identifiable records would have to be released to anyagency that insisted on having them.in august 1991, eia sent a letter to all of the roughly 25,000 respondents tothe surveys affected to notify them of the forced change in its policy. as ofjanuary 1992, eia had received approximately 50 letters and 200 telephone callswith complaints or inquiries. by the end of 1992 there had been no observableeffects on the completeness and timeliness of responses to the surveys. however,the real test will come if individually identifiable data are turned over to thejustice department and the disclosures are publicized in trade journals or othermedia.discussionis eia a statistical agency?the committee on national statistics (national research council, 1992b:2)has proposed the following definition of a federal statistical agency: ''a unit of thefederal government whose principal function is the compilation and analysis ofdata and the dissemination of information for statistical purposes." the committeealso states that a federal statistical agency, to be effective, must protect theconfidentiality of individual responses and must not disclose identifiableinformation for administrative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes.the principal mission of eia is statistical, and thus the agency may be saidto meet the basic definition proposed by the committee on national statistics,but there are significant exceptions. the department of energy organization act(p.l. 95œ91) requires eia to gather data in support of regulatory and programneeds of the department of energy. for those surveys that collect datastatistical data on organizations186private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.already available to the public and for those that collect data for regulatorypurposes, completed report forms are available for inspection by the public, andrespondents are informed of this fact.clearly, eia lacks the kind of confidentiality policy that the committee onnational statistics considers essential for an effective federal statistical agency.individually identifiable information can be disclosed and is sometimes requiredto be disclosed for nonstatistical purposes. the agency's 1980 policy ondisclosure allows disclosures for nonstatistical purposes to other units of thedepartment of energy, the congress, the general accounting office, and whenthe information does not come under the exemptions in the freedom ofinformation act, to the public. thus, the 1991 ruling by the justice department'soffice of legal counsel was not a first breach in an otherwise airtight policy offunctional separation of data. rather, it might be looked at as another hole in analready leaky dike.officials in eia are quite concerned about their inability to guarantee fullconfidentiality of information that they collect or acquire by other means forstatistical purposes. they have tried more than once to obtain legislation toremedy the situation, but they have yet to succeed. in the meantime, because itcannot guarantee confidentiality, eia has been unable to get access to otherstatistical agencies' lists of companies and establishments for use in its ownsurveys, and it must develop and maintain completely independent lists, atconsiderable cost.did eia mislead respondents?most of eia's survey respondents are companies or establishments and theirresponse to most of its surveys is mandatory. following final adoption of the1980 policy on disclosure, the agency developed a standard notificationstatement for its mandatory company and establishment surveys, which includedinformation about the conditions under which identifiable information might bereleased to the public in response to freedom of information act requests, tocourts and congressional bodies, and to other federal agencies. the provisions ofthe policy governing release to other federal agencies were not described in detailin the notification statement; respondents wanting full information had to obtainand study the complex 1980 policy statement in the federal register.one can assume that many respondents did not bother to obtain the policystatement and therefore were not familiar with thestatistical data on organizations187private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conditions under which their individual data might or might not be released toother federal agencies. it cannot be said that respondents in this category wereseriously misled, they were merely not fully informed. however, those who werefamiliar with the policy were confronted, when they received the august 1991letter from eia, with a suddenšand retroactivešchange. they had clearly beenmisled by a statement representing a policy that eia had believed it could followbut which turned out not to be fully supported by the relevant statutes.is the eia's problem unique?in a sense, every federal statistical agency operates under a differentstatutory and regulatory framework. however, as discussed in chapter 5, theagencies may be classified roughly as haves and havenots with respect tolegislation that both allows and requires them to apply the principle of functionalseparation to all data in their possession. the energy information administrationis clearly one of the havenots and is in an especially awkward position becauseits statutorily defined mission includes some collection of data for nonstatisticalpurposes. the bureau of labor statistics (bls) is also a havenot agency interms of legal protection of confidentiality, but its mission is more clearlystatistical and, as explained in chapter 5, it has so far been able to maintain defacto functional separation.the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act (p.l. 102œ240),passed late in 1991, included provisions to establish a separate bureau oftransportation statistics in the department of transportation. this legislation hasweak confidentiality provisions, clearly putting the new agency in the havenotcategory with respect to adequate statutory protection of the confidentiality ofdata obtained for statistical purposes. legislation, proposed but not passed in1991, to establish a separate statistical agency in a department of environmentalprotection had similarly weak confidentiality provisions.findings and recommendationsbusinesses are subject to many kinds of regulations and are also eligible forvarious benefits. monitoring compliance with regulations and determiningeligibility for benefits require substantial amounts of data for individuallyidentifiable units. such data are used to make decisions that directly affectindividualstatistical data on organizations188private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.businesses. they can also be used for statistical analyses, which are sometimesfocused directly on the program for which the data were collected and sometimesmay be entirely unrelated to it.some kinds of business data, however, are of interest only for statisticalresearch and analysis. such data can best be collected by statistical agencies thathave the authority and mandate to ensure that the data are fully protected fromdisclosure and from any use whatsoever for nonstatistical purposes. thecollection of data that have nonstatistical and statistical uses should be left toprogrammatic and regulatory agencies. such data, with identifiers if needed, canbe acquired by statistical agencies and used for statistical purposes, but once inthe possession of a statistical agency, the data should be given the sameconfidentiality protection as data collected directly by the agency.recommendation 7.1 the principle of functional separation, which the panelendorsed in recommendation 5.1(a), should apply equally to data for personsand data for organizations.a similar position was adopted by the conference of european statisticians(1991). its resolution on the fundamental principles of official  statistics in theregion of the economic commission for europe states that "individual datacollected by statistical agencies for statistical compilation, whether they refer tonatural or legal persons [such as business organizations], are to be strictlyconfidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes" (p. 8).as illustrated by the eia example, a statistical agency's intention to operateunder this principle is not sufficient.recommendation 7.2 legislation that authorizes and requires protection ofthe confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for allfederal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federalstatistical agencies that may be created (see also recommendation 5.1).an opposing argument is that, for the sake of efficiency, federal agenciesneeding data for nonstatistical purposes, especially if related to compliance ofbusinesses with laws and regulations, should be permitted to acquire the data fromany agency that has them. such a policy would seriously threaten the quality ofthe nation's economic statistics. businesses, knowing that their censusstatistical data on organizations189private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and survey forms could be used for any purpose, would be less inclined to submitcomplete, accurate, and timely data. one has only to review the history ofeconomic data in the socialist economies over the past 50 years to understandthis. why risk such consequences for the relatively small efficiencies that mightbe realized by compliance agencies in deciding which businesses should be thetargets of their detailed investigations?the eia example also illustrates the need to exercise care in thedevelopment of statements that notify respondents to mandatory surveys abouthow their data will be used and who will have access to them.recommendation 7.3 data providers, whether persons or organizations,should have ready access to as much information as they want about the uses ofthe information they are requested or required to provide to federal statisticalagencies. they should be told who will have access to their data in individuallyidentifiable form. statements of the collecting agency's intentions should beclearly distinguished from statements describing what is authorized and requiredby statute.inability to share business lists: anembarrassment to the federal statisticalsystembackgroundthe question of access to business lists for statistical purposes by federalagencies has a history covering more than half a century. it is a question that hasimportant implications for the cost, quality, and internal consistency of theeconomic statistics produced by the federal statistical system. in essence, theproblem is that there are significant barriers to interagency sharing of businesslists among agencies in the decentralized federal statistical system.broadly speaking, business lists are lists of companies, establishments,employers, and other kinds of economic units. the lists contain identifiers, suchas name, address, and employer identification number, and classifiers, such as astandard industrial classification (sic) code and size codes based onemployment, wages, production, or other measures. a primary statistical use ofbusiness lists is the development and maintenance of samplingstatistical data on organizations190private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.frames for censuses and surveys. in addition, the lists may be used as a means ofachieving uniformity in the classifications, especially sic codes, that are assignedto the same units by different agencies.major producers of economic statistics include federal statistical agenciesand operating agencies with statistical units. in the first category, the censusbureau, the bureau of labor statistics, and the national agricultural statisticsservice (nass) have major programs. we also allude in this case study to the useof business lists by the bureau of economic analysis (bea) and the energyinformation administration.in the second category, the internal revenue service (irs), with itsstatistics of income program, and the social security administration (ssa), withits continuous work history sample, are of major importance. these twoagencies maintain extensive business lists in connection with their tax and benefitprograms, lists that have great potential value (only partially realized at this time)for statistical applications. we also refer here to the use of business lists by thesmall business administration's (sba's) office of advocacy, which hasdeveloped its own lists for use in surveys and studies of small businesses.to what extent are business lists currently being shared? the census bureauin the early 1970s developed its standard statistical establishment list (ssel) toserve as a master list for use in all of its economic censuses and surveys. directuse of the ssel for intercensal surveys has been limited, however, because of thedifficulty of keeping the list current between censuses. the census bureau alsooriginally intended that the ssel would be available for use by other statisticalagencies. there have been several attempts, so far unsuccessful with one smallexception, to obtain legislation that would make this possible. a report by theeconomic policy council's (1987) working group on the quality of economicstatistics recommended that bls and nass be administratively designated, bythe office of management and budget (omb), as the "central collectionagencies" for nonfarm and farm business lists, respectively. however, thisrecommendation was never implemented.the census bureau obtains inputs to the ssel from several sources,especially the administrative lists of the irs and ssa. use of tax returninformation for this purpose is specifically permitted by the "statisticalinformation" exception to the disclosure constraints of the internal revenue code(see chapter 5). the terms of this exception were negotiated between irs and thestatistical data on organizations191private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commerce department in the 1976 amendments that established the currentdisclosure policy of the internal revenue code (title 26 u.s.c.). however, thosesame provisions prohibit redisclosure, by recipients, of tax return informationreceived for statistical purposes. for a particular establishment or employerwhose identity was originally supplied by the irs, the internal revenue codeallows the census bureau to contact the taxpayer, and any response returned tothe census bureau is considered to be data collected under the authority of thecensus bureau (title 13 u.s.c.) rather than tax return information.there is little flow of business list information from the census bureau toother agencies. exceptions are the occasional correction or updating of sic codeson lists provided by other agencies, under the authority of a 1953 opinion issuedby attorney general mcgranery (41 op. a.g. 120), and the release of certainssel information to bea, which has become possible as a result of legislationpassed by the 101st congress (foreign direct investment and internationalfinancial data improvements act of 1990, p.l. 101œ533). as part of the samelegislation, bea is required to share with bls and the census bureau selecteddata on foreign direct investment that it collects from business enterprises.there are a few other examples of business list sharing, but what is more tothe point is the sharing that is not occurring. the national agricultural statisticsservice shares its farm list information with the census bureau in preparation foreach quinquennial census of agriculture, but title 13 prohibits any reverse flowof information to nass for use in its extensive program of current agriculturalsurveys. the census bureau uses farm tax return lists from the irs as a majorsource of its sampling frame for the agricultural censuses, but the provisions ofthe tax reform act of 1976 (p.l. 94œ455) do not permit irs or the censusbureau to share the same lists with nass. the result has been to increasesubstantially the cost to nass of developing and maintaining the lists of farmsthat it needs for its data collection programs.for a long time there had been no sharing of data for individualestablishments or other units in either direction between the census bureau andbls, the two agencies with the most extensive program of economic surveys forthe nonagricultural sectors. however, changes are occurring. late in 1990, inpreparation for the 1992 economic censuses, the census bureau submitted arequest to omb for approval of several classification surveys to improve industryclassification for new businesses. the omb,statistical data on organizations192private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.within its authority under the paperwork reduction act of 1980 (p.l. 96œ511),denied the request by the census bureau to collect industry classificationinformation because, in its view, such collection would duplicate surveys alreadyconducted by the bls. the omb proceeded to work with bls, the censusbureau, and the irs to resolve some legal questions about the sharing of businesslist information. terms negotiated with the three agencies were incorporated in anorder (authorized under 44 u.s.c. 3510) directing limited sharing of the data (seemacrae, 1990). a formal interagency agreement between bls and the censusbureau (signed by barbara e. bryant, census bureau, and janet l. norwood,bls, april 19, 1991) implementing the omb order was negotiated with theassistance and support of omb. the matching of bls and census bureaurecords, based primarily on employer identification numbers, is being carried outat bls by bls employees who are also special sworn employees of the censusbureau. the emphasis in the list sharing is on the transfer of bls's sic codes tothe census bureau. under the mcgranery opinion cited above, the censusbureau's sic codes could be transferred to bls for units already on bls lists,but bls has not asked for the census bureau codes. it is not likely thatinformation for unmatched units on either agency's list can be transferred to andused by the other agency. however, the agreement includes research to evaluatesuch discrepancies in coverage with a view to developing a coordinated datacollection strategy, such as using a jointly sponsored data collection program, toresolve them.the eia and the sba's office of advocacy require general and specializedbusiness lists for most of their economic surveys, but neither has access to thecensus bureau's ssel, bls lists developed in connection with the federalstateunemployment insurance program, or the business lists that could be developedfrom the irs/ssa administrative systems. previous efforts to make the sselavailable to other agencies for statistical use have excluded eia and sba's officeof advocacy because, as explained above for eia, neither agency had the kind ofstatutory provisions that would guarantee that it could protect the shared listinformation from all access for nonstatistical purposes.the proposal for improving the quality of economic statistics issued bychairman michael boskin of the council of economic advisers (1991:6)included as one of seven major elements the development of legislation to permit"limited sharing of confidential statistical information solely for statisticalpurposes between statistical agencies under stringent safeguards." suchlegislation,statistical data on organizations193private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as now envisioned, would provide a statutory basis for sharing business lists andother kinds of data among four major federal statistical agencies: the bureau ofeconomic analysis, bureau of labor statistics, census bureau, and the nationalagricultural statistics service. as of early 1993, the legislation had not yet beenintroduced.practices in other countriesthe panel reviewed the policies and practices of several other developedcountries with respect to statistical and other uses of business lists established andmaintained by government statistical agencies. the review was based mainly oneight papers presented at two meetings of the international roundtable onbusiness survey frames, an informal international group of governmentstatisticians, which has met annually since 1986 to discuss statistical and otheruses of business lists. relevant papers from the 1989 meeting covered thebusiness list confidentiality and access policies of australia, france, japan, thenetherlands, sweden, and the united kingdom. papers from the 1990 meetingcovered finland and new zealand. we obtained information about canadianpolicies directly from statistics canada.the nine countries whose policies the panel reviewed vary widely as to whomay have access to business lists and the purposes for which they may be used.insofar as we could determine, finland, france, and sweden place no restrictionson access to and uses of basic list information other than payment of fees and, insome instances, prohibition of release to third parties. the most restrictivecountry was japan, which allows access to its complete list only by other units ofnational and local government, solely for statistical purposes. australia and theunited kingdom joined japan in allowing access only to other units ofgovernment, but they permitted some kinds of nonstatistical uses. thenetherlands allows disclosure to other units of government and specified types ofnongovernment entities, solely for statistical purposes. new zealand makes listinformation available to any type of organization, but it prohibits release to thirdparties and some types of nonstatistical uses.in canada, the statistics act allows the disclosure of lists of businesses, byorder of the chief statistician, as an exception to the general prohibition againstdisclosure contained in the law. a committee reviews requests for suchinformation, using criteria set out in an internal statistics canada policy, andmakes recommendationstatistical data on organizations194private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to the chief statistician, who has the discretion to grant or deny each request. foreach request, the review committee considers the proposed uses of the lists andtheir potential impact. lists may be released for the collection of statistical data ifthe proposed survey uses acceptable methodology, does not duplicate informationalready collected, and does not appear to jeopardize respondents' continuedcooperation with statistics canada. lists may also be released to assist data usersin the analysis or interpretation of data, and for that purpose, they are sometimesincluded in industry publications, particularly for the manufacturing sector. listsmay include any or all of the following information: names and addresses;telephone numbers for statistical inquiries; official language preferred forstatistical inquiries; services provided and products produced, manufactured,processed, transported, stored, purchased or sold; and size, expressed in terms ofan employment size range (letter from ivan p. fellegi, chief statistician ofcanada, to panel, january 26, 1993).three of the nine countries give units included in their lists the option tohave their names excluded from some kinds of releases. the united kingdom, inconnection with one of its economic surveys, requests permission frommanufacturers for their inclusion in a directory that is published at fiveyearintervals. less than half of the units, in terms of employment, agree to have theirinformation included. in finland and the netherlands, units may request to havetheir information excluded from any releases of directory information to otherorganizations. neither country provided information on the number of suchrequests.the most striking finding of this review was that none of the nine countrieshas business list policies as restrictive as those currently followed in the unitedstates. all of the countries reviewed allow, at a minimum, access to thegovernment's business lists by all units of national government (and generallylocal government units as well) for statistical purposes. some allow unrestrictedaccess to the lists for any purpose.findings and recommendationsin 1939, the u.s. central statistical board proclaimed the need for "a unitedstates business directory or official mailing list which will show the name,address, and industrial classification of each important businessenterprise" (bureau of the budget, 1961:1). over the intervening years, otherorganizations and advisory groups too numerous to mention have recommendedmore sharing ofstatistical data on organizations195private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.business lists (see, e.g., american statistical association, 1980; economic policycouncil, 1987), but until quite recently the trend has been in the oppositedirection.there is little doubt that significant savings and improvements in the qualityand comparability of the economic data produced by bls, the census bureau,and nass could be realized if all three agencies had full access to the irs/ssaadministrative lists and to each others' lists. further gains would accrue if otheragencies that conduct economic surveys could be brought into the system.the panel commends omb's statistical policy office for the steps it hasbeen taking to promote limited sharing of business list information between blsand the census bureau and to develop legislation that will permit further sharingof business lists, as recommended in the boskin initiative.recommendation 7.4 there should be increased sharing of business lists forstatistical purposes by federal and state agencies.detailed business lists, especially at the establishment level, that aredeveloped by federal agencies for statistical uses should be protected againstnonstatistical uses. hence, federal agencies should have access only if they canguarantee such protection. two potential statistical users, eia and the sba'soffice of advocacy, are currently unable to meet this requirement.recommendation 7.5 new legislation on sharing of business lists forstatistical purposes should provide that government agencies that are now unableto guarantee protection against nonstatistical uses can have access to businesslists if they acquire statutory authority for such protection in the future.waivers: whose information is it?backgroundstatistical agencies sometimes request permission from survey respondentsto use the latter's information in ways that depart from standard agency policiesfor the protection of confidentiality. for example, an agency might wish tostatistical data on organizations196private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. transfer individually identifiable information for an organization toanother agency for a statistical purpose, release tabulations without application of some of the maskingtechniques that would usually be used, or include identification information for respondents in a publisheddirectory of organizations.agencies may seek waivers from respondents for such purposes, eitherbecause the proposed uses of the latter's data would not usually be permitted byapplicable statutes or regulations or because the uses would be contrary toannounced agency policies. in terms of fair information principles, the process ofrequesting waivers, if carried out according to accepted procedures for informedconsent, allows respondents greater control over how information about them isused.organizations may benefit in some ways from granting waivers requested bystatistical agencies. for example, if a waiver permits two agencies to share anorganization's data for statistical uses, the organization will not have to provide itto each one separately. if the waiver allows an agency to publish a tabulation with aproduction or sales data cell that is dominated by the organization, the latter maybe in a better position to determine its market share. below we present severalexamples of situations in which federal statistical agencies have askedorganizations to waive confidentiality protections for their data.examplesin detailed tabulations of economic survey data, it is common for one or twodata providers to dominate a single data cell. for example, one establishment in acounty or state may account for a large proportion of total employment, payroll,production, or some other variable. as described in chapter 6, most agencieshave policies that suppress or mask such data cells when one or two unitsaccount for more than a specified proportion of the total. at least three federalstatistical agencies sometimes seek waivers that will allow them to include suchdata cells, without the usual suppression or masking, in their publications. thenational agricultural statistics service has a formal standard for its state officesto use for obtaining permission from respondents in instances in which there areonly one or two respondents in a cell or one respondent accounts for more than 60percent of the value to be published. written permission is required and must bestatistical data on organizations197private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.updated every five years (national agricultural statistics service, 1989).consideration is being given to updating the permission every two or three years.the bureau of labor statistics has a cooperative program with stateemployment security agencies for the collection of periodic occupationalemployment statistics data. frequently, a single company will account for a highproportion of the persons in particular occupations in its area. in such instancesthe state agency conducting the survey seeks waivers to allow publication of theaffected data cells.the census bureau has a current industrial reports program for periodiccollection, from manufacturers, of intercensal data on the production of a largenumber of specifically defined commodities. for some commodities, one or twomanufacturers may dominate total production, even at the national level. thecensus bureau uses a waiver procedure to obtain permission from surveyrespondents to publish data for the affected commodities.until recently, the census bureau also used waivers for a different purpose:to share individually identifiable data about cotton ginning operations withnass. as described in a july 18, 1990, memorandum to the panel from frederica. vogel, an official of nass,in the past, nass has had access to individual gin reports to compile data forthe monthly cotton production forecast. this data sharing activity was done withthe concurrence of the cotton gins so they could eliminate duplicate reporting.however, omb's legal counsel ruled in 1990 that census bureau employeesmay not release individually identifiable information collected under title 13,even when waivers have been obtained. it was omb's position, based on thelegislative history, that the provision of title 13 (§ 8(a)) that permits transfer ofcopies of reports to authorized agents was intended to apply only to specialsituations involving a few individual respondents, not to largescale transfer ofrecords from a particular survey. further, omb counsel argued, the right toconfidentiality under title 13 constitutes a public right (as opposed to a privateright) that cannot be waived by the respondent. in this particular instance, thedifficulty was resolved by transferring responsibility for the cotton ginning surveyprogram from the census bureau to nass, which is not governed by title 13.statistical data on organizations198private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.findings and recommendationsthe panel finds it somewhat incongruous that omb's interpretation of title13 prevents the census bureau from using a waiver procedure to share data withnass for statistical purposes, but that the census bureau is able to use a waiverprocedure in its current industrial reports program to permit the release of datacells whose publication would usually be contrary to the confidentialityprovisions of title 13. we believe that the use of waiver procedures for the kindsof statistical purposes illustrated in this section should be permitted, provided theconsequences of granting waivers are clearly explained to respondents and theyare not put under any kind of pressure to grant the permission requested.recommendation 7.6 the office of management and budget's statisticalpolicy office should develop uniform guidelines for federal statistical agenciescovering the purposes for which waivers of confidentiality protections byorganizations are considered acceptable and the methods of obtaining waiversfrom respondents. efforts should be made to amend the confidentiality statutesof federal statistical agencies that would otherwise be prevented from usingwaivers for generally accepted statistical purposes.with respect to waivers for the publication of data cells dominated by one ortwo large organizations, there may be some circumstances in which smallerorganizations contributing to the same cell, especially if they are few in number,should also be asked for permission to publish the data for that cell. if there areonly one or two smaller organizations, they may not want their large competitorsto have more precise information about them than would usually be available.the written policies we reviewed did not include any provision for preventingthat.user access: getting a better return oninvestments in economic statisticsbackgroundas we pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, organizations varywidely on many important characteristics, and thus individual organizations areoften easily recognizable on the basisstatistical data on organizations199private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of a few data items and classifiers, especially if their geographic location isgiven. consequently, federal statistical agencies have been unable, with fewexceptions, to issue publicuse microdata sets containing individual records,minus explicit identifiers, for companies, establishments, employers, and otherorganizational entities. even for aggregate data on organizations, the sameconsiderations restrict the amount of detail by location, type of economicactivity, and other classifiers that can be published.substantial benefits have been realized by data users, statistical agencies,and society as a whole as a result of the wide dissemination of publicusemicrodata sets on persons. comparable returns on investment in data collectionhave not been realized from the resources devoted to statistics on businesses andother organizations. those data are an underutilized resource.the same constraints carry over to hierarchical files containing data onpersons and organizations. as explained in chapter 6, an important reason whymicrodata from the continuous work history sample, a 1 percent longitudinalsample of persons issued social security numbers, are no longer widely availableto researchers is the concern that some large employers could be identified fairlyeasily on the basis of their industry classifications and geographic locations.thus, employers having access to the file might be able to identify their ownemployees who were in the sample and learn about their work histories andcurrent second jobs. similar considerations apply to data from surveys conductedby the national center for education statistics in which data are collectedsimultaneously for students, staff, and educational institutions.in chapter 6, we described several forms of restricted access to federalstatistical data that are provided for external users: american statisticalassociation/national science foundation (asa/nsf) fellowships that allowresearchers to work with data at federal agencies; remote online access withquery restrictions, as in the luxembourg income study; release of encryptedmicrodata in cdrom format; and various types of licensing agreements thatprovide access for users at their work sites, but place restrictions on the uses thatcan be made of the data and often include penalties for failure to abide by theterms of the agreement.to some extent, these kinds of arrangements have been providing greateraccess to data for organizations over the past few years. some of the asa/nsffellows, including those who have worked at the census bureau's center foreconomic studies, have had access to microdata for establishments andenterprises. throughstatistical data on organizations200private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contracts for joint research studies the center for economic studies has alsoprovided access to such data, at the census bureau, to several researchers fromnonprofit organizations. mcguckin (1992), in a discussion paper issued by thecenter for economic studies, proposes that some economic microdata sets bemade available to researchers, working as special sworn census bureauemployees, at the census bureau's regional offices. he also recommends a broadinterpretation of the requirement that research studies relying on this mode ofdata access be of joint interest to the census bureau and the researchers.the national agricultural statistics service and the economic researchservice of the department of agriculture have established a research enclave thatmakes it possible for researchers to have limited access, in washington, d.c., tomicrodata on farms from the two agencies' annual farm costs and returnssurvey. the national agricultural statistics service has also developedadministrative procedures that allow some researchers to have restricted access tostatistical data at its state offices. the national center for education statistics hasbecome an active proponent of dissemination of data by means of encryptedcdrom diskettes and licensing agreements, and some of the data released inthose ways are for schools.despite these developments, external users still have difficulty obtainingaccess to federal statistical data on organizations. this is particularly true for dataon nonagricultural establishments and other economic units, for which many ofthe data sets that would be of most interest to researchers are maintained by thecensus bureau.findings and recommendationsthe panel's general findings and recommendations about procedures forgiving external users restricted access to federal statistical data were presented inchapter 6. in brief, we expressed our belief that a greater return on publicinvestment in statistical programs would be possible through carefully controlledexpansion of the availability of federal data sets to external users. we encouragedstatistical agencies to develop and use some of the newer data disseminationtechniques, such as the use of encrypted cdrom diskettes and licensingagreements, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodic reviews ofcosts and benefits.we believe there is a need for substantially expanded userstatistical data on organizations201private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to federal statistical data about organizations, especially businessestablishments and other economic units.recommendation 7.7 federal statistical agencies that collect data onorganizations should make a special effort to improve access for statisticalresearch and analysis by external users and, if necessary, should seek legislationthat will permit them to develop licensing arrangements that allow such users tohave access at their work sites, subject to penalties for violating the conditionsunder which they are allowed access to the data.statistical data on organizations202private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8managing confidentiality and data accessfunctionstechnology always moves ahead of sound management principles.stuart sutton, 1991the effective functioning of the federal statistical system requiresresponsible policies toward data providers and data users. managers of federalstatistical programs must give constant, careful attention to confidentiality anddata access issues. however, new data collection and processing technologies,novel types of surveys, and innovative statistical uses of administrative recordsbring with them questions for which statutes, regulations, and policy statementsdo not always provide definitive answers.the general principles and recommendations in this report are broadlyfocused. in the course of this study, the panel has identified many more questionsthan it could expect to provide detailed answers for. we have tried to provideuseful guidelines, but we have not tried to give specific answers to questions suchas the following:ł how much detail should be included in aggregate statistics andmicrodata sets that are released to the public with no restrictions on theiruse? should a proxy respondent be allowed to providedata for another person or household without the latter's informedconsent?are passive waivers acceptable? to what extent should lists of businesses compiled by federal statisticalagencies be made publicly available? what conditions should be included in interagency agreements forsharing identifiable data for statistical purposes?managing confidentiality and data access functions203private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. what kinds of informed consent procedures are appropriate for telephonesurveys?agencies in the federal statistical system have established policies andprocedures for reaching administrative decisions about these and otherconfidentiality and data access questions. are those decision mechanismsadequate? if not, how might they be improved? in this chapter we look at internalagency staffing and organization of information management activities and atgovernmentwide mechanisms for standardizing and coordinating policies andpractices. we also examine the extent to which the decision processes of federalstatistical agencies incorporate the views of data providers and data users. wediscuss the relevant decision mechanisms, such as data protection boards, thathave been established in other countries, and we explore their possible relevancefor the u.s. statistical system.management of confidentiality and data accessquestions in the federal statistical systemwithin statistical agenciesthe documentation provided to the panel by federal statistical agenciesincluded several examples of policy manuals, policy memorandums andstandards related to statistical disclosure limitation procedures, informed consentprocedures, and other aspects of confidentiality and data access. the mostcomprehensive formal codification of these issues by any of the agencies thatresponded to our request for information was in two publications of the nationalcenter for health statistics (nchs): the policy statement on release of data forindividual elementary  units and special tabulations (1978; first published in1969) and the nchs staff manual on confidentiality (1984; first published in1978). the policy statement is addressed primarily to data users and focuses onvarious ways of gaining access to nchs microdata. the basic policy statement isas follows:within prevailing ethical, legal, technical, technological and economicrestrictions, it is the policy of the national center for health statistics toaugment its programs of collection, analysis, and publication of statisticalinformation with procedures for making available, at cost, transcripts of data forindividual elementary unitsšpersons or establishmentsšin a form that will notin anymanaging confidentiality and data access functions204private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.way compromise the confidentiality guaranteed the respondent (national centerfor health statistics, 1978:4).the nchs staff manual presents the agency's policies for the protection ofconfidentiality. it includes information and rules covering legal requirements andpenalties, employees' responsibilities, promise of confidentiality to respondents,treatment of requests for information, physical protection of records, disclosuresthat may be permitted, avoidance of unintentional disclosures through publisheddata, maintenance of confidentiality in the release of microdata files, andrequirements placed on contractors.several agencies have prepared written guidelines for the application ofstatistical disclosure limitation procedures in the release of tabulations andmicrodata. some of the guidelines contain only one or two simple rules; othersare much more detailed. agencies with more detailed formal documentation ofprocedures include the census bureau (for microdata), the energy informationadministration (eia; for tabulations only), nchs, and the social securityadministration (ssa). the panel found that agency guidelines gave much lessattention to other aspects of confidentiality and data access, such as thedevelopment of interagency data sharing agreements and the content of informedconsent and notification statements for surveys.two agencies, the census bureau and the national center for educationstatistics (nces), have internal committees that review all proposals for releasesof new microdata sets. the census bureau's microdata review panel has aformal charter and guidelines, as well as a standard prospectus that must becompleted by all divisions sponsoring new microdata releases. key elements ofthe microdata review panel's evaluation criteria were published in the federalregister (46(72):22017) at the time the panel was formally established in 1981.the microdata review panel has no outside members; however, the censusbureau is considering an arrangement for periodic review of the panel's policiesand decisions by outside advisors selected to represent data providers and datausers.the nces's disclosure review board was created more recently, in 1989.the board's primary function, like that of the census bureau panel, is todetermine whether microdata sets proposed for release pose an acceptably lowrisk of disclosure of individually identifiable data. the board consists of ncesstaff members and a census bureau representative.managing confidentiality and data access functions205private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.several federal statistical agencies have external advisory groups, and theysometimes ask them for their views on confidentiality and data access questions.the census bureau has asked several of its advisory groups to review its plansfor the application of statistical disclosure limitation procedures to decennialcensus data. about 1980, when eia was developing its confidentiality policies, itasked the american statistical association's (asa's) committee on energystatistics to review drafts of policy statements on more than one occasion. morerecently, eia has sought advice from the same committee on how to deal with theconsequences of the justice department's request for identifiable records(discussed in chapter 7).statistical agencies have also drawn on the committee on national statisticsto help them address specific problems. in the late 1970s, a panel established bythe committee in response to a request from the census bureau undertookresearch to obtain information on ''how people in the united states currently feeland behave in their roles as respondents, or intended respondents, in householdcensuses and surveys" (p. viii). the main findings from that panel's report,privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response (national researchcouncil, 1979), were discussed in chapter 3 of this report.prior to the start of this panel's study, the committee on national statisticsand the social science research council organized two workshops at the requestof federal agencies. the first workshop, sponsored by the national institute onaging, explored the legal and ethical aspects of a proposed followup survey ofsurviving members of the sample panel for the ssa's longitudinal retirementhistory survey. the second workshop, sponsored by the national sciencefoundation (nsf), explored various options for improving researchers' access tomicrodata from two of nsf's scientific and technical personnel data systems, thedoctorate records file and the survey of doctorate recipients.during the term of this study, the panel conducted a workshop onconfidentiality and data access issues for the national center for educationstatistics, which had been seeking advice from several groups on how best tocollect data and serve the needs of data users under the terms of new agencyconfidentiality legislation that had been passed in 1988. all three of theseworkshops brought together agency staff, data users, and experts on informationlaw, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and other relevant topics. severalmembers of the panel participated in one or more of the workshops.managing confidentiality and data access functions206private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the panel did not conduct a review of detailed management andorganizational issues, such as where confidentiality and data access functions areplaced within statistical agencies or the titles, grade levels, and qualifications ofthe individuals who play major roles. based on our general knowledge of thesematters, however, we can make a few broad statements. first, only a handful ofstatistical agencies have a staff person whose primary role is to deal with suchissues as informed consent, release of microdata, interagency data sharingagreements, and other aspects of confidentiality and data access. thedevelopment and application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques isfrequently assigned to mathematical statisticians in a unit responsible formethodological research and consulting assistance to operating units. in some ofthe smaller statistical agencies, there are no specialists on confidentiality issues,and the relevant questions are dealt with on an ad hoc basis by operating staff,some of whom have little or no pertinent background or experience.across statistical agenciesthe office of management and budget's (omb's) original statistical policydivision, the interim successoršthe office of federal statistical policy andstandards in the department of commercešand omb's current statistical policyoffice have played a role in developing and monitoring governmentwidestandards and policies regarding protection of confidentiality and access tofederal statistical data. two of the early statistical policy working papers issuedby the federal committee on statistical methodology covered relevant topics:no. 2, report on statistical  disclosure and disclosureavoidance techniques(1978), and no. 5, report on exact and statistical matching techniques (1980).working paper 2 and the interagency seminars based on it were instrumental inraising the level of awareness of federal statisticians to the need for more carefulapplication of statistical disclosure limitation techniques when releasingaggregate data or microdata.subsequent to the start of this panel's study, the head of the statistical policyoffice has taken steps to review, with agency representatives, such issues asinformed consent, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, interagency datasharing, and licensing procedures for data access for external users. early in1992, the office formed an interagency committee to exchange information oncurrent statistical disclosure limitation practices and on recent technicaldevelopments. (early in 1993, this committeemanaging confidentiality and data access functions207private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.became the subcommittee on disclosure limitation methodology of the federalcommittee on statistical methodology.) the office is planning a formal review,with public comment, of the data user licensing procedures that are now beingused on a trial basis by nces.as explained in chapter 7, the statistical policy office has beeninstrumental in persuading the census bureau and the bureau of labor statisticsto begin sharing business lists that until now have been developed and maintainedindependently. in addition, it is coordinating the development of proposedlegislation that would permit list sharing for statistical purposes among four ofthe major federal statistical agencies: the bureau of economic analysis, thebureau of labor statistics, the census bureau, and the national agriculturalstatistics service.the statistical policy office has also been working for some time on arevision of the omb circular, guidelines for federal statistical  activities. onecan expect, on the basis of an early draft published for public comment, that thefinal version of these guidelines will cover some of the issues studied by thepanel, such as the content of informed consent and notification statements and theconditions under which record matching for statistical purposes is appropriate.the statistical policy office reviews all data collection requests developedby the census bureau and the bureau of economic analysis. data collectionrequests submitted to omb by other federal agencies, including those forstatistical purposes, are reviewed by omb clearance officers who are not part ofthe statistical policy office. the statistical policy office provides advice onstatistical data collections to the clearance officers on request, and on its owninitiative it frequently makes recommendations concerning proposals sponsoredby statistical agencies. formsclearance reviews provide an opportunity toexamine informed consent and notification statements, but currently the ombreviewers do not work from any written guidelines, aside from the privacy actregulations, about what should be included in such statements. this may changewhen the omb circular mentioned above is issued.in addition to the interagency committees and other formal coordinationmechanisms established by omb's statistical policy office, there are many otherways in which employees of federal statistical agencies exchange informationabout the policies and procedures they use to deal with confidentiality and dataaccess questions. many surveys and other statistical programs involvemanaging confidentiality and data access functions208private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.two or more agencies and require joint efforts to develop appropriatemethodologies. official statisticians from different agencies often participate indiscussions of confidentiality and data access matters at meetings oforganizations like the committee on national statistics and the council ofprofessional associations on federal statistics. managers and technicians fromvarious statistical agencies have frequent contacts through their activeparticipation in national and local professional associations, as described in thenext subsection.the influence of professional societiesthe american society for access professionals is an organization whosemembership consists primarily of federal government employees whose functionsinclude activities related to agency compliance with the requirements of privacyand freedom of information statutes. the society organizes an annual symposiumin the fall and sponsors tutorial sessions each spring to update its members onchanges in privacy and freedom of information legislation and case law. a few ofthe society's members are from federal statistical agencies, and some of thepresentations at their annual symposiums have covered the application ofinformation legislation to research and statistical activities.as outlined below, the american statistical association has been activelyinvolved in addressing confidentiality and data access issues: two asa committees, the ad hoc committee on privacy andconfidentiality and the ad hoc committee on professional ethics, havedeveloped guidelines relevant to census and survey activities, especiallyin the area of informed consent (see discussions in chapters 3 and 4).the association now has a permanent committee on privacy andconfidentiality. over the years, several members of this committee havebeen employees of federal statistical agencies. the current chair wasgerald gates of the census bureau. as described in chapter 3, thecommittee has developed an informational brochure, surveys andprivacy. the journals and proceedings of asa have included numerous articleson statistical disclosure limitation theory and methods and other aspectsof confidentiality and data access. several panel discussions have beenheld on these topics at annual and other meetings. from time to time other asa committees, such as themanaging confidentiality and data access functions209private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.census advisory committee and the committee on energy statistics,have advised federal statistical agencies on confidentiality questions.other u.s. professional associations, including the american associationfor public opinion research, the american psychological association, and theamerican sociological association, have developed codes or guidelines for theirmembers, some portions of which are relevant to the conduct of surveys andexperimental research. and as mentioned in chapter 3, the internationalstatistical institute's (1986) declaration on professional ethics includedextensive guidelines for the content of informed consent procedures.on the data access side, meetings of organizations like the association ofpublic data users provide another forum in which agency statisticians and datausers can exchange views. also, data users tend to be well represented on thevarious advisory committees to federal statistical agencies, especially the onesthat deal with substantive rather than methodological issues.alternative models for managingconfidentiality and data access questions: alook at other countriesthe issues that the panel has studied are not peculiar to the united states. as anatural consequence of the coming of the information age, they have arisen in allof the countries that have led the way in the development of modern datacollection, processing, storage, and dissemination methods. the panel would beremiss if it failed to ask what can be learned from other countries that have alsobeen grappling with how to manage confidentiality and data access questions.the mechanisms described in this section go well beyond purely statisticaland research uses of data about persons. the privacy act in the united states andthe data protection boards established in other countries have jurisdiction overadministrative and statistical uses of individual records. a key question, forofficial statisticians, is how well these mechanisms take into account thedifferences between statistical and other uses of personal data.flaherty (1989:viii) has undertaken "a comparative examination of thepassage, revision, and, especially, implementation of data protection laws at thenational and state levels" in canada, the federal republic of germany, france,sweden, and the unitedmanaging confidentiality and data access functions210private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.states. his review, plus materials the panel obtained directly from statisticscanada, provide the main basis for our discussion of what has happened incountries other than the united states. also helpful were papers by dalenius(1979) and durbin (1979) in the journal of  the royal statistical society anddiscussants' comments on those papers.in the united states, the responsibility for oversight of compliance with therequirements of the privacy act of 1974 was assigned to omb. in contrast, ineach of the four other countries that flaherty studied, data protection legislationprovided for the establishment of a commissioner or board, with a considerabledegree of independence from the executive branch of the government, to monitorcompliance with the fair information practices mandated by the legislation. thestructure, scope of authority, and functions of those independent units vary.canada has separate privacy and information commissioners. both havejurisdiction only over records and information in the public sector and bothfunction mostly in an ombudsman/advisory mode, although they may take certaincases to the federal court of canada when agencies do not follow their advice.the swedish data inspection board has jurisdiction over record systems inthe public and private sectors, but only those maintained in electronic form.initially, all new electronic record systems had to be licensed by the board. thisproved to be unwieldy, and the procedure was changed to require registration,rather than licensing, of new systems, with some exceptions. the board has broadregulatory powers over all electronic record systems; for example, almost allrecord linkages are subject to its regulation.the federal republic of germany has an independent federal data protectioncommissioner, as well as data protection offices in the states. the federal andstate commissioners have jurisdiction over record systems in the public sectoronly and operate mainly in an advisory capacity. they maintain registers ofrecord systems, respond to complaints, and have the authority to conductinvestigations or audits of compliance with the fair information practicesmandated by law.france has a national commission on informatics, data banks andfreedoms (cnil), whose functions extend well beyond protection of the privacyand confidentiality interests of individuals. the cnil is an independent agencyand operates under the direction of a group of parttime commissioners. it hasbroad authority to regulate processing of automated personal data in the publicmanaging confidentiality and data access functions211private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and private sectors, carry out inspections, rule on complaints, maintain a registerof data processing activities, and assist persons to gain access to their own data.what impact have these independent boards and commissions had on thecollection and use of data about individuals for statistical and research purposes?in sweden, which pioneered formal data protection activities at the nationallevel, the data inspection board initially focused considerable attention on thecentral statistical agency, statistics sweden. an early ruling of the boardprevented statistics sweden from using imputation for persons not responding tothe swedish labor force survey. another ruling prohibited the use of proxyrespondents in the same survey; in other words, persons asked to participate inthe survey could respond to the questions only for themselves, not for othermembers of their families or households. this ruling was appealed and it wasdecided that proxies could be used for objective data items only, provided theproxy respondent was closely related to the data subject (dalenius, 1979).other rulings requiring the removal of identifiers placed severe constraintson the conduct of longitudinal surveys and record linkages for statisticalpurposes. in the early 1980s, a widely publicized debate between the heads of thedata inspection board and statistics sweden about proposed uses ofadministrative records in the national census of population eventually led to agovernment decision to conduct a more traditional census. according to flaherty(1989), the two agencies are by now able to reach understandings on most issues,but some minor ones remain outstanding.like the u.s. privacy act, the swedish data act allows individuals toinspect their own records in government record systems. unlike the u.s. act,however, the swedish act does not allow any exceptions for statistical recordsystems. as a consequence, statistics sweden has "faced a major financial andadministrative burden of replying to requests for access from individuals. therewere 67,000 such requests during the first four years" (flaherty, 1989:152).in the mid1980s important privacy issues were raised by projectmetropolitan, a longitudinal research data base maintained at the university ofstockholm that linked information from many sources, much of it highlysensitive, for 15,000 persons born in the stockholm area in 1953. about 1980,after the researchers had adopted recommended data protections, the swedishdata inspection board licensed the data base, showing "a high degree of tolerancefor themanaging confidentiality and data access functions212private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.linkage of a large amount of sensitive personal information" (flaherty,1989:154). however, in 1986 the project came to the attention of the datasubjects and the general public, and a major debate ensued. the debate finally ledto the board's requiring the removal of all identifiers from the system, so that nofurther data from other sources could be linked to the existing records.it is more difficult to define the role of the german data protectioncommissioners in connection with the controversies that led to a fouryear delayin carrying out the scheduled 1983 census of population for the federal republicof germany. the federal commissioner's office had warned the federal statisticaloffice that potential problems with data protection were associated with thecensus procedures, but the statistical office did little to respond. nevertheless, inmarch 1983 the commissioner's office issued a press release stating that "people'sfears about the census were unfounded, and that adequate safeguards were inplace" (flaherty 1989:81). continued public concern and legal challenges to thecensus, however, forced postponement, and it was not until after the passage ofnew census legislation in 1986 that the census was finally undertaken in 1987,still in a very controversial atmosphere. according to flaherty, these difficultiesoccurred, at least in part "because the strong data protection laws and statisticallaws currently in place are not well enough known to the general public, andbecause public anxieties about surveillance practices using administrative data areso great" (p. 83).flaherty does not detail any specific instances of actions by the privacycommissioner of canada having direct effects on the programs of statisticscanada. however, he does describe measures that have been introduced to reducesubstantially the administrative uses of canada's social insurance number(comparable to the social security number in the united states). as aconsequence, there may be a reduction in the number and scope of administrativerecord systems that can readily be used for research studies and statisticalanalyses that require linking of records from different sources. nevertheless,statistics canada has an active and successful program to produce currentdemographic data from administrative sources, and it is possible that this systemmay at some time take the place of the more traditional kind of populationcensus.from other sources, it is clear that the former privacy commissioner ofcanada, john grace (in an interesting change of hats, he became the informationcommissioner in 1990), had serious doubts about record linkages andlongitudinal studies for researchmanaging confidentiality and data access functions213private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.purposes, although he did not entirely rule them out (grace, 1988, 1989). hebelieved that they should be limited in scope and only undertaken with strongjustification and full knowledge by the data subjects. statistics canada, perhapsdue in part to grace's views, has taken a cautious approach to record linkageactivities. a formal policy statement (statistics canada, 1986) describes thepotential benefits of such activities, but it also lists a fairly rigorous set ofconditions that must be satisfied before they can be undertaken. a series ofagency guidelines issued over the past few years has set out requirements fornotifying survey respondents of plans to link administrative record data with theirsurvey information or to release nonpublicuse microdata to other agencies. theguidelines provide specific examples of language that can be used in thenotifications, taking into account the mode of data collection.u.s. proposals for an independent privacyprotection boardalthough most drafts of the privacy act of 1974 provided for theestablishment of a permanent privacy protection commission, the provision waseliminated just prior to final passage of the act. consequently, responsibility foroversight of the act's fair information provisions devolved on omb.recently, however, there has been growing interest among u.s. privacyadvocates in the possible application of at least some features of the canadian andeuropean models in the united states (see rotenberg, 1991). bills to establish anindependent data protection board in the executive branch of the governmentwere introduced by representative robert wise in 1989 and 1991. the 1991 bill,which would have taken the form of an amendment to the privacy act, providedfor a board whose functions would have been largely advisory. the board wouldhave been required to prepare guidelines under the privacy act and otherinformation statutes and to issue periodic compilations of agency record systemnotices. it would have had authority to investigate compliance with the privacyact and report on violations, to review existing and proposed data protectionlegislation, investigate complaints about violations of data protection rights, andrequest agencies to take action on matters affecting data protection. although nolegislation had been passed by early 1993, there is sufficient interest in theseissues that future enactment is possible.there does not seem to be any corresponding interest or activity,managing confidentiality and data access functions214private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at least in any organized sense, aimed at furthering the ability of data users to gainaccess to federal data for research and statistical purposes. paul reynolds (1993),in a paper prepared for the panel's conference on disclosure limitationapproaches and data access, presented a detailed proposal for the issuance of"federal data base research certificates," which would be issued to organizationspresenting worthy research proposals to a "federal data base review board." thecertificates would provide access to data maintained by any federal agency (withtheir approval), immunity from any legal subpoena, and substantial penalties forresearcher disclosure of individual information.findings and recommendationsagency staffing and management ofconfidentiality and data access functionsthe panel has noted several instances, some of them recent or current, offederal agency practices that reflect inadequate knowledge of and attention toconfidentiality and data access issues. as discussed in chapter 3, some informedconsent and notification statements have been inadequate in terms of accuracy,completeness, and comprehensibility. and as noted in chapter 6, some agencystandards for statistical disclosure limitation are rudimentary and do not take fulladvantage of current knowledge and experience in this area.recommendation 8.1 each federal statistical agency should review itsstaffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, withparticular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities forthese functions and the background and experience needed for persons whoexercise these responsibilities.currently, there is a dearth of opportunities (such as the seminars that wereconducted following the 1978 publication of statistical policy working paper 2)for federal statisticians to obtain training in fair information practices and relatedsubjects.recommendation 8.2 statistical agencies should take steps to provide stafftraining in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,confidentiality laws and policies,managing confidentiality and data access functions215private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and related topics.possible sites for such training include the new joint university ofmarylanduniversity of michigan program in survey methodology (nationalresearch council, 1992a; university of maryland et al., 1993) and the u.s.department of agriculture graduate school.the panel believes that it is highly desirable for data providers and datausers to participate in or have greater input into agency decisions on dataprotection and data access policies and procedures. the existing institutions andmechanisms that we have described are useful, but not entirely adequate.especially for data users, there are inadequate means to appeal adverse decisionsby federal statistical agencies.recommendation 8.3 statistical agencies should establish mechanisms forallowing and encouraging greater external inputs into their decisions onconfidentiality protection and data access.one possibility would be to establish data review boards, with externalmembers representing data subjects and data users, in all federal statisticalagencies that release substantial amounts of data to the public. tradeoffsbetween confidentiality protection and data access exist whether data releases arein aggregate or microdata form, and thus both kinds of releases should be subjectto review by such boards.alternatively, existing agency advisory committees could be askedperiodically to review agency policies and practices for confidentiality protectionand data access. for the latter approach to be effective, committee membershipshould be balanced to provide representation of data subjects and data users.interagency coordinationthe office of management and budget and, in particular, its statisticalpolicy office, have an important role in coordinating federal data protection andaccess activities. the statistical policy office, although handicapped by having avery small staff, has recently undertaken some important initiatives, such as itsefforts to promote and facilitate business list sharing for statistical purposes andto bring agency officials together to review and evaluate new data accessprocedures.managing confidentiality and data access functions216private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the omb circular, guidelines for federal statistical activities, which isbeing revised, has the potential to provide an impetus for improved agencypractices in such areas as informed consent and notification statements,application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques, and record linkages forstatistical purposes.recommendation 8.4 the statistical policy office should give high priorityto proceeding with the development and issuance of the omb guidelines forstatistical activities, with the full participation of the federal statistical agenciesand the public.the policy directives and memorandums issued by statistics canada mightprovide useful models for the treatment of such topics as informed consent andrecord linkage.data protection boardunlike other advanced industrial societies, the united states does not havean independent advisory board or commission charged with promoting effectiveimplementation of the privacy act and other information legislation. there havebeen recent proposals by privacy advocates and legislators to create such a body.recommendation 8.5 the panel supports the general concept of anindependent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhancedprotection for all federal data about persons and responsible data disseminationfor research and statistical purposes. any such advisory body should promotethe principle of functional separation and have professional staff with expertisein privacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research usesof federal data.the experience of other countries has shown that data protection agenciescan be a source of additional oversight for statisticians and researchers, subjectingtheir activities to greater scrutiny, promoting balance in data protection and datadissemination, and generating public debate. in some instances, new restrictionshave been imposed on practices that do not appear to pose a threat to theconfidentiality of individual data. nevertheless, the panel believes that creating apositive climate for enhanced data protection and data dissemination requiresassurances from many differentmanaging confidentiality and data access functions217private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.quarters that legitimate protective policies and procedures are in place and arebeing followed.an independent advisory board, with appropriate professional staffing, couldconstitute a regular source of expertise on a wide spectrum of privacy issues,including those related to research and statistics. it could give advice, serve as asounding board for data protectors and data users, and offer legitimacy toresponsible initiatives by both groups. the advisory board could provide supportfor responsible access to personal data as needed to realize the fundamental goalsof democratic accountability and constitutional empowerment, which weintroduced in chapter 1. a professionally competent, respected advisory bodycould also act as a mediator when there are differences of opinion among dataproviders, privacy advocates, data users, and statistical agencies. orderlyevaluation and resolution of such differences by an impartial ombudsman couldreduce the likelihood of their escalating to the point at which they seriouslydisrupt key data collection and dissemination activities.data protectors can and should be important allies of official statisticians andthe general public in the achievement of an appropriate balance between theprivacy interests of individuals and societal needs for research and statistical dataabout a complex society. in particular, data protectors can help statisticalagencies resolve difficult issues in the areas of informed consent, confidentiality,data access, and record linkage.an advisory body could also promote harmonization of disparateinterpretations of federal regulations under the privacy act of 1974 or otherlegislation covering all or part of the federal statistical system. it coulddisseminate information about innovative techniques to permit the exchange ofdata for statistical uses without diminishing the protection offered to individuals,and it could provide oversight of agency practices in maintaining anddisseminating sensitive information.managing confidentiality and data access functions218private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendationsfor the reader's convenience, we present all the panel's recommendations,keyed to the chapters in which they appear.chapter 3recommendation 3.1 federal statistical agencies should follow a flexible,multilayered approach to informing data providers of the conditions under whichthey are being asked to provide information.recommendation 3.2 basic information given to all data providersrequested to participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all privacy actrequirements. similar information is recommended for data onorganizations, except that the requirement to inform providers aboutroutine uses (as defined by the privacy act) is not applicable.(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,including the expected time required to provide the data (arequirement of the office of managementrecommendations219private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and budget) and, if applicable, the nature of sensitive topics includedin the survey and plans for possible followup interviews of some orall respondents.(c) no false or misleading statements. for example, a statement thatimplies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.(d) information about any planned or potential nonstatistical uses of theinformation to be provided. there should be a clear statement of thelevel of confidentiality protection that can be legally ensured.(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages forstatistical or research purposes. for persons, this notification willusually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject'ssocial security number.(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of thedata for statistical or research purposes.(g) information about the length of time for which the information willbe retained in identifiable form.recommendation 3.3 in keeping with the objective of giving individualscontrol over their own information whenever societal needs do not clearly takeprecedence, data subjects or data providers should be allowed to waive certainaspects of confidentiality protection that would usually be accorded to theinformation they provide. agencies should take special care to ensure that anysuch waivers are based on fully informed consent.recommendation 3.4. statistical agencies should undertake and supportcontinuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitorthe views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, responseburden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, andrelated issues.recommendation 3.5 federal statistical agencies should continue todevelop systematic informational activities designed to inform the public of theirability to maintain the confidentiality of individually identifiable information,including use of legal barriers to disclosure and physical security procedures, andtheir intentions to minimize intrusions on privacy and the time and effort requiredto respond to statistical inquiries.recommendations220private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 3.6 agencies should be prepared to deal quickly andcandidly with instances of ''moral outrage" that may be directed at statisticalprograms from time to time as a result of actual or perceived violations ofpledges of confidentiality given to data providers by data collectors. the agenciesshould be prepared to explain the purpose of specific data collection activities andthe procedures used to protect confidentiality. they should accept fullresponsibility if a violation occurs and should announce measures to preventfuture violations.recommendation 3.7 as part of the communication process, statisticalagencies should work more closely with appropriate advocacy groups, such asthose concerned with civil liberties and those that represent the rights ofdisadvantaged segments of the population, and with specialists on ethical issuesand human rights.chapter 4recommendation 4.1 greater opportunities should be available for sharingof explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies forstatistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records canbe properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations aboutindividual data subjects. greater access should be permitted to key statistical andadministrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and otherstatistical uses. additional data sharing should only be undertaken in thoseinstances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel'srecommendations for informed consent or notification (see recommendations 3.2and 3.3).recommendation 4.2 federal statistical agencies should seek to improvethe access of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and thedevelopment and greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of testedadministrative procedures.recommendations221private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 4.3 all federal statistical agencies should establishsystematic procedures for capturing information on a continuing basis about userrequests for data that have been denied or only partially fulfilled. suchinformation should be used for periodic reviews of agency confidentiality anddata access policies.recommendation 4.4 all users of federal data, regardless of the formalconditions of access, should subscribe to the following principles for responsibledata use:(a) conscientiously observe all conditions agreed to in order to obtainaccess to the data. allow access to the original data set only by thosepermitted access under the agreed conditions of recipiency andensure that all such persons are aware of the required conditions ofuse.(b) make no attempt to identify particular individuals or other unitswhose data are considered to be confidential.(c) in the event that one or more individuals or other units are identifiedin the course of research, notify the organization that provided thedata set, and do not inform anyone else of the discovered identities.recommendation 4.5 to promote knowledge of and adherence to theprinciples of responsible data use,(a) federal statistical agencies should ask all recipients of federalmicrodata sets to submit to the releasing agency, in writing, theiragreement to observe the above principles, plus any other conditionsdeemed necessary for specific data sets.(b) professional societies and associations that have ethical codes,standards, or guidelines should incorporate these principles in them.(c) the principles and the justifications for them should be included inacademic and other training for disciplines whose members are likelyto be users of federal statistical data.recommendations222private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chapter 5recommendation 5.1 statistical records across all federal agencies shouldbe governed by a consistent set of statutes and regulations meeting standards forthe maintenance of such records, including the following features of fairstatistical information practices:(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle offunctional separation as defined by the privacy protection studycommission,(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data,(c) a requirement of informed consent or informed choice whenparticipation in a survey is voluntary,(d) a requirement of strict control on data dissemination,(e) a requirement to follow careful rules on disclosure limitation,(f) a provision that permits data sharing for statistical purposes undercontrolled conditions, and(g) legal sanctions for those who violate confidentiality requirements(see recommendation 5.3 for further discussion of this requirement).recommendation 5.2 zerorisk requirements for disclosure of statisticalrecords are, in practice, impossibly high standards. regulations and policiesunder existing statutes should establish standards of reasonable care. new statutesshould recognize that almost all uses of information entail some risk of disclosureand should allow release of information for legitimate statistical purposes thatentail a reasonably low risk of disclosure of individually identifiable data.recommendation 5.3 there should be legal sanctions for all users, bothexternal users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain theconfidentiality of data.recommendations223private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chapter 6recommendation 6.1 the office of management and budget's statisticalpolicy office should continue to coordinate research work on statisticaldisclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadly amongstatistical agencies. major statistical agencies should actively encourage andparticipate in scholarly statistical research in this area. other agencies shouldkeep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosurelimitation techniques.recommendation 6.2 statistical agencies should determine the impact onstatistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. they should be surethat the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typical researchers.if the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statistical software, theagency should make appropriate consulting and software available.recommendation 6.3 each statistical agency should actively involve datausers from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques aredeveloped and applied to data.recommendation 6.4 statistical agencies should continue widespreadrelease, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detailthan currently provided.recommendation 6.5 federal statistical agencies should strive for a greaterreturn on public investment in statistical programs through carefully controlledincreases in interagency data sharing for statistical purposes and expandedavailability of federal data sets to external users.recommendation 6.6 statistical agencies, in their efforts to expand accessfor external data users, should follow a policy of responsible innovation.whenever feasible, they should experiment with some of the newer restrictedaccess techniques, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodicreviews of the costs and benefits of each procedure.recommendations224private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 6.7 in those instances in which controlled access atagency sites remains the only feasible alternative, statistical agencies should doall they can to make access conditions more affordable and acceptable to users,for example, by providing access at dispersed agency locations and providingadequate user support and access to computing facilities at reasonable cost.recommendation 6.8 significant statistical data files, in their unrestrictedform, should be deposited at the national archives and eventually made availablefor historical research uses.chapter 7recommendation 7.1 the principle of functional separation, which thepanel endorsed in recommendation 5.1 (a), should apply equally to data forpersons and data for organizations.recommendation 7.2 legislation that authorizes and requires protection ofthe confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for allfederal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federalstatistical agencies that may be created (see also recommendation 5.1).recommendation 7.3 data providers, whether persons or organizations,should have ready access to as much information as they want about the uses ofthe information they are requested or required to provide to federal statisticalagencies. they should be told who will have access to their data in individuallyidentifiable form. statements of the collecting agency's intentions should beclearly distinguished from statements describing what is authorized and requiredby statute.recommendation 7.4 there should be increased sharing of business listsfor statistical purposes by federal and state agencies.recommendations225private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 7.5 new legislation on sharing of business lists forstatistical purposes should provide that government agencies that are now unableto guarantee protection against nonstatistical uses can have access to businesslists if they acquire statutory authority for such protection in the future.recommendation 7.6 the office of management and budget's statisticalpolicy office should develop uniform guidelines for federal statistical agenciescovering the purposes for which waivers of confidentiality protections byorganizations are considered acceptable and the methods of obtaining waiversfrom respondents. efforts should be made to amend the confidentiality statutes offederal statistical agencies that would otherwise be prevented from using waiversfor generally accepted statistical purposes.recommendation 7.7 federal statistical agencies that collect data onorganizations should make a special effort to improve access for statisticalresearch and analysis by external users and, if necessary, should seek legislationthat will permit them to develop licensing arrangements that allow such users tohave access at their work sites, subject to penalties for violating the conditionsunder which they are allowed access to the data.chapter 8recommendation 8.1 each federal statistical agency should review itsstaffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, withparticular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities forthese functions and the background and experience needed for persons whoexercise these responsibilities.recommendation 8.2 statistical agencies should take steps to provide stafftraining in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,confidentiality laws and policies, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, andrelated topics.recommendations226private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 8.3 statistical agencies should establish mechanisms forallowing and encouraging greater external inputs into their decisions onconfidentiality protection and data access.recommendation 8.4 the statistical policy office should give high priorityto proceeding with the development and issuance of the omb guidelines forstatistical activities, with the full participation of the federal statistical agenciesand the public.recommendation 8.5 the panel supports the general concept of anindependent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhancedprotection for all federal data about persons and responsible data disseminationfor research and statistical purposes. any such advisory body should promote theprinciple of functional separation and have professional staff with expertise inprivacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research uses offederal data.recommendations227private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendations228private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesadam, n.r., and j.c. wortman 1989 security control methods for statistical databases: acomparative study. acm computing surveys 21:515œ556 .allison, j., and w.w. cooper 1991 data disclosure and data sharing in scientific research. paperpresented at a conference on research policies and quality assurance, rome, italy.american statistical association 1977 report of ad hoc committee on privacy and confidentiality.the american statistician 31(2):59œ78 .1980 business directories: findings and recommendations of the asa committee on privacy andconfidentiality. the american statistician 34(1):8œ10 .1983 ethical guidelines for statistical practice: report of the ad hoc committee on professionalethics (with comments). the american statistician 37(1):5œ20 .1989 ethical guidelines for statistical practice. amstat news 1989(154):24œ25 .1991 surveys and privacy . committee on privacy and confidentiality. washington, d.c.: americanstatistical association.andrussier, s.e. 1991 the freedom of information act in 1990: more freedom for government; lessinformation for the public. 1991 duke law journal : 753œ801 .aziz, f., and w. buckler 1992 the status of death information in social security administrationfiles. paper presented at the annual meeting of the american statistical association,boston.references229private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.babcock, l., and j. engberg 1990 are local labor market statistics appropriate for policy? paperpresented at the annual meeting of the association for public policy and management, sanfrancisco.bachi, r., and r. baron 1969 confidentiality problems related to data banks. bulletin of theinternational statistical institute 43:225œ241 .bailar, b.a. 1990 contributions to statistical methodology from the u.s. federal government. surveymethodology 16(1):51œ61 .barabba, v.p., and d.p. kaplan 1975 u.s. census bureau statistical techniques to preventdisclosurešthe right to privacy vs. the need to know. paper presented at the 40th sessionof the international statistical institute , warsaw.beauchamp, t.l., r.r. faden, r.j. wallace, and l. walters, eds. 1982 ethical issues in socialscience research . baltimore: johns hopkins university press.bethlehem, j.g., w.j. keller, and j. pannekoek 1990 disclosure control of microdata. journal of theamerican statistical  association 85:38œ45 .black, h.c., j.r. nolan, and j.m. nolanhaley 1990 black's law dictionary . st. paul, minn.: westpublishing.boorstin, d.j. 1973 the americans: the democratic experience . new york: random house.boruch, r.f., and j.s. cecil 1979 assuring the confidentiality of social research data .philadelphia: university of pennsylvania press.boruch, r.f., and w. kehr 1983 on use of the doctorate records file and the survey of doctoraterecipients: privacy and research utility. report prepared for the national sciencefoundation. university of pennsylvania, philadelphia.brackstone, g.b. 1990 comment on "contributions to statistical methodology from the u.s. federalgovernment." survey methodology 16(1):58œ61 .bureau of the budget 1961 brief history of the movement in the federal government for a centraldirectory and of related efforts aimed at improving quality and comparability ofeconomic statistics. unpublished paper. washington, d.c., bureau of the budget.bureau of the census 1982 evaluating the public information campaign for the 1980 census: results of the kap survey . preliminary evaluation results memorandum (perm) no. 31.washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1985 how the census bureau keeps your information strictly confidential . washington, d.c.: u.s.department of commerce.bureau of labor statistics 1980 responsibility for safeguarding sensitive information. blsdirective system . washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.burnham, d. 1983 the rise of the computer state . new york: random house.references230private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.butz, w.p. 1985a data confidentiality and public perceptions: the case of the european censuses.american statistical association 1985 proceedings  of the section on survey researchmethods . washington, d.c.: american statistical association.1985b the future of administrative records in the census bureau's demographic activities. commenton jabine and scheuren, "goals for statistical uses of administrative records: the next 10years." journal of business and economic statistics 3(4):393œ395 .carroll, j.j. 1985 uses of administrative records: a social security point of view. comment on jabineand scheuren, "goals for statistical uses of administrative records: the next 10 years."journal of business and economic statistics 3(4):396œ397 .cassel, c.m. 1976 probability based disclosures. in t. dalenius and a. klevmarken, eds., personalintegrity and the need for data in the social sciences . stockholm: swedish council for thesocial sciences.cecil, j.s. 1989 regulation of federal research records: fifteen years since the privacy act and thefreedom of information act. paper presented at the annual meeting of the americanstatistical association, washington, d.c.1993 confidentiality legislation and the united states federal statistical system. journal of officialstatistics 9(2):519œ535 .cigrang, m., and l. rainwater 1990 balancing data access and data protection: the luxembourgincome study experience. paper presented at the joint statistical meetings of the americanstatistical association, anaheim, calif.coles, t.r. 1991 does the privacy act of 1974 protect your right to privacy? an examination of theroutineuse exemption. american university  law review 40:957œ1001 .collins, m. 1992 the case for samples of anonymized records from the 1991 census. letter to theeditor. journal of the royal statistical society 155(1):165œ166 .commission on federal paperwork 1977a confidentiality and privacy . 052œ003œ00458œ5.washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.1977b statistics . 052œ003œ00454œ2. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.committee on national statistics and social science research council 1989 collaborative research:a proposal for a panel on confidentiality and data access. committee on nationalstatistics and social science research council, washington, d.c.conference of european statisticians 1991 resolution on the fundamental principles of officialstatistics in the region of the economic commission for europe. international  statisticalinformation newsletter 15(2):8 .council of economic advisers (executive office of the president) 1991 fy 1992 economicsstatistics initiative: improving the quality of economicsreferences231private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistics. press release. executive office of the president, washington, d.c.1992 economic report of the president . washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.courtland, s. 1985 census confidentiality: then and now. government information  quarterly 2(4):407œ418 :cox, l.h. 1980 suppression methodology and statistical disclosure control. journal of the americanstatistical association 75:337œ385 .1986 confidentiality issues at the united states bureau of the census. journal of official statistics 2(2):135œ160 .1987 a constructive procedure for unbiased controlled rounding. journal  of the american statisticalassociation 82(398):520œ524 .1991 comment on duncan and pearson. social sciences 6(3):232œ234 .cox, l.h., b. johnson, s. mcdonald, d. nelson, and v. vazquez 1985 confidentiality issues at thecensus bureau. proceedings of the first annual research conference . washington, d.c.:u.s. department of commerce.dahl, r.a. 1982 dilemmas of pluralist democracy: autonomy vs. control . new haven: yaleuniversity press.dalenius, t. 1977 towards a methodology for statistical disclosure control. statistisk  tidskrift5:429œ444 .1979 data protection legislation in sweden: a statistician's perspective (with comments). journal ofthe royal statistical society 142(3):285œ298 .1988 controlling invasion of privacy in surveys . stockholm: statistics sweden.david, m.h. 1980 access to data: the frustration and utopia of the researcher. review of public datause 8(4):327œ337 .1991 the science of data sharing: documentation. in j.e. sieber, ed., sharing social science data:advantages and challenges . newbury park, calif.: sage.david, m.h., and a. robbin 1981 the great rift: gaps between administrative records and knowledgecreated through secondary analysis. review of public data use 9:153œ166 .denning, d.e. 1980 secure statistical databases with random sample queries. acm  transactions ondatabase systems 5:291œ315 .denning, d.e., and t.f. lunt 1988 a multilevel relational data model. proceedings of the 1988  ieeesymposium on research security and privacy . los alamitos, calif.: ieee computersociety.desky, j. 1991 government information and privacy: who controls the data? pa  times 14(12):1,12 .duncan, g.t., and d. lambert 1986 disclosurelimited data dissemination. journal of the american statistical association 81(393):10œ28 .references232private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1989 the risk of disclosure for microdata. journal of business and  economic statistics 7(2):207œ217 .duncan, g.t., and s. mukherjee 1991 microdata disclosure limitation in statistical databases: querysize and random sample query control. proceedings of the 1991 ieee  symposium onresearch in security and privacy . los alamitos, calif.: ieee compute society.1992 confidentiality protection in statistical databases: a disclosure limitation approach. paperpresented at the international seminar on statistical confidentiality, dublin.duncan, g.t., and r.w. pearson 1991 enhancing access to microdata while protectingconfidentiality: prospects for the future. statistical science 6(3):219œ239 .duncan, j.s., and w.c. shelton 1978 revolution in united states government statistics 1926œ1976 .003œ005œ00181œ6. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1992 u.s. government contributions to probability sampling and statistical analysis. statisticalscience 7(3):320œ338 .durbin, j. 1979 statistics and the report of the data protection committee (with comments). journalof the royal statistical society 142(3):299œ306 .economic policy council 1987 report of the working group on the quality of economic statistics .washington, d.c.: economic policy council.ellenberg, j.h. 1983 ethical guidelines for statistical practice: a historical perspective. the americanstatistician 37(1):1œ5 .equifax inc. 1990 the equifax report on consumers in the information age . a national opinionsurvey conducted for equifax inc. by louis harris and associates and alan f. westin.atlanta, ga.: equifax inc.federal committee on statistical methodology 1978 report on statistical disclosure anddisclosureavoidance techniques . statistical policy working paper 2. subcommittee ondisclosureavoidance techniques. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1980 report on exact and statistical matching techniques . statistical policy working paper 5.washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1993 untitled draft statistical policy working paper dated july 1993. subcommittee on disclosurelimitation methodology. office of management and budget, executive office of thepresident, washington, d.c.fellegi, i.p. 1972 on the question of statistical confidentiality. journal of the  american statisticalassociation 67:7œ18 .fienberg, s., and j.m. tanur 1989 combining cognitive and statistical approaches to survey design.science 243:1017œ1022 .flaherty, d.h. 1978 final report of the bellagio conference on privacy, confidentiality, and the useof government microdata for research and statistical purposes. statistical reporter 78(8):274œ279 .references233private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1979 privacy and government data banks: an international perspective . london: mansellpublishing.1989 protecting privacy in surveillance societies: the federal republic  of germany, sweden,france, canada, and the united states . chapel hill: the university of north carolinapress.frank, o. 1976 individual disclosures from frequency tables. in t. dalenius and a. klevmarken,eds., personal integrity and the need for data  in the social sciences . stockholm: swedishcouncil for the social sciences.1979 inferring individual information from released statistics. bulletin of the international statisticalinstitute: proceedings of the 42nd  session (book 3). nedaapo production unit.philippines: philippine organizing committee.frankfurter, f. 1930 the public and its government . new haven: yale university press.fuller, w.a. 1993 masking procedures for microdata disclosure limitation. journal of officialstatistics 9(2):383œ406 .gates, g.w. 1988 census bureau microdata: providing useful research data while protecting theanonymity of respondents. american statistical association  1988 proceedings of the socialstatistics section . alexandria, va.: american statistical association.general accounting office 1993 energy security and policy: analysis of the pricing of crude oiland petroleum products. report to congressional requesters, gao/rced9317.washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.govoni, j.p., and p.j. waite 1985 development of a publicuse file for manufacturing. american statistical association 1985 proceedings of the business and economic  statistics section .washington, d.c.: american statistical association.grace, j.w. 1988 annual report, privacy commissioner, 1987œ88 . ottawa: minister of supply andservices canada.1989 the use of administrative records for social research. notes for an address to the statisticscanada workshop, ottawa.greenberg, b. 1990 disclosureavoidance research at the census bureau. proceedings, 1990 annualresearch conference . washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1991 disclosureavoidance practices at the census bureau. statistical policy working paper 20.washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.greenberg, b., and l. voshell 1990a the geographic component of disclosure risk for microdata .census/srd/rr9013. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1990b relating risk of disclosure for microdata and geographic area size. american statisticalassociation 1990 proceedings of the section  on survey research methods . alexandria,va.: american statistical association.greenberg, b., and l.v. zayatz 1992 strategies for measuring risk in publicuse microdata files.statistica neerlandica 46(1):33œ48 .references234private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hauser, r.m. 1991 what happens to youth after high school? focus 13(3):1œ13 .heitjan, d.f., and rubin, d.b. 1991 ignorability and coarse data. annals of statistics 19(4):2244œ2253 .hwang, j.t. 1986 multiplicative errorsinvariables models with applications to recent data releasedby the u.s. department of energy. journal of the american statistical association81:680œ688 .internal revenue service 1984 taxpayer attitudes study final report . prepared for the statistics ofincome division, by yankelovich, skelly and white, inc. washington, d.c.: u.s.department of treasury.1987 1987 taxpayer opinion survey . document 7292(1œ88). conducted for the internal revenueservice by louis harris and associates, inc. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of thetreasury.international statistical institute 1986 declaration on professional ethics. international statistical review 54(2):227œ242 .jabine, t.b. 1986 selected guidelines for notification to survey participants. american statisticalassociation 1986 proceedings of the section  on survey research methods . washington,d.c.: american statistical association.1993a procedures for restricted data access. journal of official  statistics 9(2):537œ589 .1993b statistical disclosure limitation practices of united states statistical agencies . journal ofofficial statistics 9(2):427œ454 .jabine, t.b., j.a. michael, and r.h. mugge 1977 federal agency practices for avoiding statisticaldisclosure: findings and recommendations. american statistical association 1977 proceedings of the social sciences section . washington, d.c.: american statisticalassociation.juster, f.t. 1991 discussion. american statistical association 1991 proceedings  of the socialstatistics section . alexandria, va.: american statistical association.kamlet, m.s., and s. klepper 1985 mixing individual and grouplevel data. working paper.department of social sciences, carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh.kamlet, m.s., s. klepper, and r.g. frank 1985 mixing micro and macro data: statistical issues andimplication for data collection and reporting. in proceedings of the 1983 public  healthconference on records and statistics . hyattsville, md.: u.s. department of health andhuman services.kellermcnulty, s., and e.a. unger 1993 database systems: inferential security. journal of official statistics 9(2):475œ499 .kilss, b. and f. scheuren (with f. aziz and l. delbene) 1978 1973 cpsirsssa exact matchstudy: past, present, and future. in social security administration, office of policy, policyanalysis with social security research files: proceedings of a workshop held  march1978 at williamsburg, virginia. research report no. 52, office of researchreferences235private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and statistics. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of health, education and welfare.1984 the 1973 cpsirsssa exact match study. in statistical uses  of administrative records:recent research and present prospects . vol. 1 . washington, d.c.: u.s. department oftreasury.kim, j. 1990 masking microdata for national opinion research center. final project report. bureauof the census, washington, d.c.lambert, d. 1993 measures of disclosure risk and harm. journal of official statistics 9(2):313œ331 .lave, l.b. 1990 does the surgeongeneral need a statistics advisor? chance:  new directions forstatistics and computing 3(4):33œ40 .lewis, p.h. 1991 why the privacy issue will never go away. the new york times , april 7:f4 .little, r.j.a. 1993 statistical analysis of masked data. journal of official statistics 9(2):407œ426 .little, r.j.a., and d.b. rubin 1987 statistical analysis with missing data . new york: john wiley &sons.locke, j. 1690/1988 two treatises of government . cambridge: cambridge university press.lodge, f.z. 1984 damages under the privacy act of 1974: compensation and deterrence. fordhamlaw review 52(4):611œ636 .louis harris and associates 1981 the dimensions of privacy . a survey conducted for the sentryinsurance company. new york: garland publications.1983 the road after 1984: the impact of technology on society . a survey conducted for southernnew england telephone. new haven, ct.: southern new england telephone.macrae, j.b. 1990 provision of standard industrial classification information to the census bureau.memorandum to the director of the bureau of the census and the commissioner of laborstatistics. december 20. office of management and budget, washington, d.c.marsh, c., a. dale, and c. skinner 1991b safe data versus safe settings: access to customized resultsfrom the british census. proceedings of the 48th international statistical  institute .voorburg, netherlands: international statistical institute.marsh, c., c. skinner, s. arber, b. penhale, s. openshaw, j. hobcraft, d. lievesley, and n. walford1991a the case for a sample of anonymized records from the 1991 census: a request fromthe economic and social research council working party on the 1991 census. journal ofthe royal statistical society 154(2):305œ341 .1992 authors reply to letter to the editor by martin collins. journal of the royal statistical society155(1):166œ167 .references236private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.martin, m.e. 1974 statistical legislation and confidentiality issues. international  statistical review42(3):265œ281 .marx, g.t. 1988 undercover: police surveillance in america . berkeley, calif.: university ofcalifornia press.1990 technology and privacy. the world and i. september:523œ541 .matloff, n.s. 1986 another look at noise addition for database security. proceedings of the ieeecomputer society symposium on research in security and  privacy . los alamitos, calif.:ieee computer society.mcguckin, r.h. 1992 analytic use of economic microdata: a model for researcher access withconfidentiality protection. discussion paper for the center of economic studies, u.s.department of commerce, washington, d.c.mcguckin, r.h., and s.v. nguyen 1990 publicuse microdata: disclosure and usefulness. journalof economic and social measurement 16:19œ39 .mcguckin, r.h., and g.a. pascoe, jr. 1988 the longitudinal research database: status and researchpossibilities. survey of current business july .mugge, r.h. 1984 issues in protecting confidentiality in national health statistics. review of publicdata use 12:289œ294 .1993 informed consent in u.s. government surveys. journal of official  statistics 9(2):345œ360 .national academy of public administration 1991 the archives of the future: archival strategies forthe treatment  of electronic database . a report for the national archives and recordsadministration. washington, d.c.national agricultural statistics service 1989 policy and standards memorandum number 12œ89.u.s. department of agriculture, washington, d.c.national center for education statistics 1989 policies and procedures for public release of data.draft. u.s. department of education, washington, d.c.1992 nces statistical standards . nces 92œ021. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of education.national center for health statistics 1978 policy statement on release of data for individualelementary units and special tabulations . dhew no. (phs)78œ1212. washington, d.c.:u.s. department of health, education and welfare.1984 nchs staff manual on confidentiality . dhhs no. (phs) 84œ1244. washington, d.c.: u.s.department of health and human services.1992a catalog of electronic data products from the national center  for health statistics . dhhspub. no. (phs)92œ1213. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of health and humanservices.1992a new publicuse data tape distribution policy in nchs' division  of vital statistics .washington, d.c.: u.s. department of health and human services.references237private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national research council 1979 privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response . panelon privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response, committee on nationalstatistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington,d.c.: national academy press.1985 sharing research data , s.e. fienberg, m.e. martin, and m.l. straf, eds. committee onnational statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, d.c.: national academy press.1991 computers at risk: safe computing in the information age . system security study committee,computer science and telecommunications board, commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applications. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1992a center for survey methods: summary of a workshop . f.e. wolf, ed. committee on nationalstatistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington,d.c.: national academy press.1992b principles and practices for a federal statistical agency , m.e. martin and m.l. straf, eds.committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, d.c.: national academy press.newton, k.b., and d.c. pullin 1990 reconciling a policy favoring dissemination of informationwith the privacy rights of individuals and institutions. paper commissioned by the nationalcenter for education statistics, u.s. department of education, washington, d.c.1991 the impact of section 252 of the excellence in mathematics, science and engineering act of1990 on the policies and practices of the national center for education statistics. papercommissioned by the panel on confidentiality and data access, committee on nationalstatistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education, national researchcouncil, washington, d.c.norwood, j.l. 1990 statistics and public policy: reflections of a changing world. presidentialaddress. journal of the american statistical association 85(409):1œ5 .office of federal statistical policy and standards 1978 a framework for planning u.s. federalstatistics for the 1980's 1980's. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.office of technology assessment (u.s. congress) 1989 statistical needs for a changing u.s.economy . background paper. otabpe58. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.o'neill, h.v., and j.p. fanning 1976 the challenge of implementing and operating under the privacyact in the largest public sector conglomeratešhew. bureaucrat 5:171œ188 .president's commission on federal statistics 1971 federal statistics: report of the president'scommission on  federal statistics . vol. 1 . washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.president's reorganization project for the federal statistical system 1981 improving the federalstatistical system: issues and options. statistical reporter 81œ5:133œ221 .prewitt, k. 1985 public statistics and democratic politics. in j.j. smelser and d.r. gerstein,references238private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.eds., behavioral and social science: fifty years of discovery . washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.privacy protection study commission 1977a personal privacy in an information society . 052œ003œ00395œ3. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office1977b the privacy act of 1974: an assessment . 052œ003œ00424œ1. washington, d.c.: u.s.government printing office1977c technology and privacy . washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.rainwater, l., and t.m. smeeding 1988 the luxembourg income study: the use of internationaltelecommunications in comparative social research. the annals of the american academy of political and social science 495:95œ105 .reynolds, p.d. 1993 privacy and advances in social and policy science: balancing present costs andfuture gains. journal of official statistics 9(2):275œ312 .the roper organization, inc. 1980 roper reports research service . issue 80œ5, april 26may 3 .rotenberg, m. 1991 in support of a data protection board in the united states. governmentinformation quarterly 8(1):79œ93 .rubin, d.b. 1976 inference and missing data. biometrika 63:581œ592 .1987 multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys . new york: john wiley & sons.1993 comments on confidentiality: a proposal for satisfying all confidentiality constraints throughthe use of multipleimputed synthetic microdata. journal of official statistics , forthcoming.rubin, p. 1990 applying the freedom of information act's privacy exemption to requests for lists ofnames and addresses. fordham law review 58:1033œ1051 .sagarin, e. 1973 the research setting and the right not to be researched. social  problems 21:52œ64 .sande, g. 1983 automated cell suppression to preserve confidentiality of business statistics.statistical journal of the united nations 2:33œ41 .sartori, g. 1962/1972 democratic theory . westport, conn.: greenwood press.scheuren, f. 1989 statistical research problems in government. in b. kilss and b. jamerson, eds.,statistics of income and related administrative  record research: 1988œ1989 .washington, d.c.: u.s. department of treasury.singer, e. 1978 informed consent: consequences for response rate and response quality in socialsurveys. american sociological review 43:144œ162 .1979 informed consent procedures in surveys: some reasons for minimal effects on response. inm.l. wax and j. cassel, eds., federal regulations:  ethical issues and social research .boulder, colo.: westview press.references239private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1993 informed consent and survey response: a summary of the empirical literature. journal ofofficial statistics 9(2):361œ375 .singer, e., h. hippler, and n. schwarz 1990 the effect of confidentiality assurances on surveyresponses. paper presented at the international conference on measurement errors insurveys, tucson, ariz.smith, c.m. 1989 the social security administration's continuous work history sample. socialsecurity bulletin 52(10):20œ28 .smith, j.p. 1991 data confidentiality: a researcher's perspective. american statistical  association1991 proceedings of the social statistics section . alexandria, va.: american statisticalassociation.social security administration 1978 policy analysis with social security research files:proceedings of a workshop held march 1978 at williamsburg, virginia . research reportno. 52, office of research and statistics. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of health,education and welfare.spruill, n. 1983 the confidentiality and analytic usefulness of masked business microdata. americanstatistical association 1983 proceedings of the  section on survey research methods .washington, d.c.: american statistical association.statistics canada 1986 policy on record linkage. policy manual . ottawa: statistics canada.steinberg, j., and l. pritzker 1967 some experiences with and reflections on data linkage in theunited states. bulletin of the international statistical institute 42:786œ808 .sullivan, g., and w.a. fuller 1989 the use of measurement error to avoid disclosure. americanstatistical  association 1989 proceedings of the section on survey research methods .alexandria, va.: american statistical association.tanur, j.m., ed. 1992 questions about questions: inquiries into the cognitive bases  of surveys . newyork: russell sage foundation.tendick, p. 1991 optimal noise addition for the preservation of confidentiality in multivariate data.journal of statistical planning and inference 27:342œ353 .turn, r. 1990 information privacy issues for the 1990's. proceedings of the  ieee symposium onresearch in security and privacy . los alamitos, calif.: ieee computer society.u.s. bureau of labor 1889 fourth annual report of the commissioner of labor, 1888: working women in large cities . washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.u.s. code congressional and administrative news 1976 legislative history , p.l. 94œ455. 4:2897œ4284 . st. paul, minn.: west publishing co.u.s. department of health, education, and welfare 1973 records, computers, and the rights ofcitizens . report of the secretary's advisory committee on automated personal datasystems. dhew no.references240private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(os)73œ94. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of health, education and welfare.u.s. department of labor 1972 control of data and information collected by the bureau of labor statistics . secretary's order 39œ72. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.u.s. department of transportation 1992 card establishes statistics bureau: knisely will be deputydirector. u.s. department of transportation news . press release, october 20 .university of maryland, university of michigan, and westat, inc. 1993 the joint university ofmarylanduniversity of michigan program  in survey methodology . college park:university of maryland.van meliswright, m., d. stone, and d. herrmann 1992 the semantic basis of confidentiality .bureau of labor statistics, statistical note series: statistical note 34. washington, d.c.:bureau of labor statistics.wallman, k.k. 1988 losing count: the federal statistical system . washington, d.c.: populationreference bureau.wilson, o.h., and w.j. smith, jr. 1983 access to tax records for statistical purposes. americanstatistical  association 1983 proceedings of the section on survey research methods . washington, d.c.: american statistical association.wolf, m.k. 1988 microaggregation and disclosureavoidance for economic establishment data.american statistical association 1988 proceedings of the business  and economic statisticssection . alexandria, va.: american statistical association.wright, d., and s. ahmed 1990 implementing nces' new confidentiality protections. american statistical association 1990 proceedings of the section on survey  research methods .alexandria, va.: american statistical association.references241private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references242private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix astudy proceduresthis appendix describes the organization of the panel study and theprocedures used by the panel to gather relevant background information, explorethe issues, and develop its recommendations. this description covers two casestudy workshops that were held prior to the formal convening of the panel, butmade important contributions to the panel's work.panel organization and activitiesthe panel was jointly convened in 1989 by the committee on nationalstatistics (cnstat) of the national academy of sciencesnational researchcouncil and the social science research council (ssrc). its goal was to providerecommendations to federal agencies to aid them in their stewardship of data forpublic policy decisions and research. the panel was comprised of experts in thefields of ethics, privacy, respondent issues, public policy, legislation, the historyof the federal statistical system, and statistics. supporting the panel's work was astaff consisting of a study director, two consultants, a senior project assistant, and astaff liaison from the social science research council. (see appendix b forbiographical sketches of panel members and staff.)funding for the study was provided by the national science foundation, thebureau of the census of the u.s. department ofappendix a243private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commerce, the bureau of labor statistics of the u.s. department of labor, theinternal revenue service statistics of income division of the u.s. department oftreasury, the national institute on aging of the u.s. department of health andhuman services, the national center for education statistics of the u.s.department of education, and, through their general contributions to the work ofthe committee on national statistics, several other federal agencies.the panel accomplished its work in several different ways. prior to the firstmeeting of the panel, and as a foundation for the panel's work, the committee onnational statistics and the social science research council sponsored twoworkshops: the longitudinal retirement history workshop, held in september1987, and the workshop on confidentiality of and access to doctorate records,held in november 1988. in january 1991 the panel sponsored a workshop onconfidentiality of and access to national center for education statistics data. aconference on disclosure limitation approaches and data access was held in march1991. the panel held nine deliberative meetings from november 1989 throughjanuary 1992. the panel also met with representatives from the federal statisticalcommunity, privacy advocates, and other concerned individuals andorganizations. finally, the panel commissioned papers to inform its deliberations,including several papers that served as background for the workshop onconfidentiality of and access to national center for education statistics dataand the conference on disclosure limitation approaches and data access (seebelow).the panel held nine meetings in washington, d.c., between november 1989and january 1992. through presentations by agency representatives at thesemeetings, the panel was informed about the complexities and realities of themissions of the agencies and the role that those missions and environment play inagencies' efforts to protect confidentiality while permitting access to data forresearch. agency representatives identified important aspects of confidentialityand data access and provided information on the subtleties of some of theproblems they face in dealing with these issues. in addition, the panel heldlengthy discussions with researchers, privacy advocates, and others about datasharing and record linkage, statistical disclosure limitation, administrativepolicies of the agencies, legislative problems and solutions, the needs ofresearchers, and the needs of the federal statistical agencies. the length, duration,and number of meetings was intended to encourage debate and ultimately developconsensus on the issues. throughoutappendix a244private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these meetings, the panel was mindful of its goal to provide helpfulrecommendations to the federal statistical agencies.at a june 1991 meeting, several privacy advocates were invited. themeeting focused on the public's interest, ethical issues, and cognitive research oninformed consent and notification in relation to confidentiality and data accessconcerns.case studieslongitudinal retirement history workshopthe longitudinal retirement history workshop, chaired by jerry a.hausman and held on september 18œ19, 1987, was conducted at the request ofthe national institute on aging (nia) and the census bureau. the nationalcenter for health statistics provided additional support for the workshop.the national institute on aging requested the workshop to help answer aquestion of whether its proposed reinterview of surviving panel members andspouses of decedents from the longitudinal retirement history survey wasfeasible. additional goals of the workshop were to learn some of the problemsand issues in protecting confidential data, discuss the disclosure limitationpractices of the census bureau, develop suggestions for methods to accessconfidential data for research, and provide information to nia on how to achieveits goals while maintaining adequate protection of the data. workshopparticipants were particularly interested in the legal, ethical, and policy questionssurrounding the issues of recontacting the panel members, linking the data fromthe reinterview with the old data, and making the linked data files available toresearchers for analysis.after considering the questions above, the workshop participants outlinedthree possible courses of action. two were deemed useful in a broad context:allowing access of researchers to microdata through their appointments as specialsworn employees of the census bureau and the establishment of data resourcecenters where census bureau employees could process researcher requests. athird proposed course of action, one that was thought to be the most feasible forthe followup of the longitudinal retirement history survey, involved obtainingconsent from the survey respondents to transfer data in existing files to anotheragency whose data are not subject to the conditions of title 13 (see chapter 5).the workshop participants also developed some ideas to help guideappendix a245private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the panel on confidentiality and data access, which at the time had not yet beenconvened.workshop on confidentiality of and accessto doctorate recordsthe workshop on confidentiality of and access to doctorate records,chaired by george t. duncan and held november 4œ5, 1988, was convened bycnstat and ssrc. the purposes of the workshop were to determine if and howmechanisms for allowing greater researcher access to data from the doctoraterecords file and the survey of doctorate records could be developed withoutcompromising the confidentiality of the data and to identify issues that would beimportant for the proposed panel on confidentiality and data access to address.workshop participants discussed various approaches for providing increasedaccess to the doctorate records file and the survey of doctorate records.topics discussed included the creation of publicuse data files with allinformation that would allow identification of the respondent removed;modification of statements of use; providing respondents an opportunity toapprove or disapprove of the proposed uses of the data; development of signedagreements that clearly define users responsibilities in maintaining theconfidentiality of the data; and providing remote access to the data through a''gatekeeper," who would monitor access requests and ensure adherence to anyconfidentiality provisions associated with the remote access. the generalconclusion of participants was that the tension between confidentiality and dataaccess could not be resolved by any one action.workshop on confidentiality of and accessto national center for education statisticsdatathe panel's workshop on confidentiality of and access to national centerfor education statistics data, chaired by william m. mason, was held in january1991. the purposes of the workshop were to investigate confidentiality andaccess issues as they apply to the national center for education statistics(nces) and to obtain information for the panel's deliberations. participants fromthe educational research community, federal government, education associations,and state departments of education were invited to attend the workshop. panelmembers also attended the meeting.appendix a246private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.during the workshop, participants discussed the evolution of confidentialitylegislation covering the nces particularly section 3001(m) of the augustus f.hawkinsrobert t. stafford elementary and secondary school improvementamendments of 1988 (the hawkinsstafford act, p.l. 100œ297) and section 252of the excellence in mathematics, science and engineering act of 1990 (p.l.101œ589), which amended the confidentiality provisions of the general educationprovisions act (p.l. 90œ247). in a paper commissioned by the panel, diana c.pullin and kenneth b. newton discussed the impact of section 252 on thepolicies and practices of nces in permitting access to their data while respectingthe confidentiality of respondents' identities. discussion focused on the variousdata systems maintained by nces, including the sources of the data and the typeof data items in the data sets; nces's confidentiality provisions; users'experiences before and after the hawkinsstafford act; and nces's statisticaland administrative procedures to prevent the disclosure of individuallyidentifiable information. finally, participants assessed the issues and discussedpossible changes in procedures, legislation, regulations, and interpretations thatcould increase access to data and protect the confidentiality of the data.information gatheringrequest for documentationin fall 1990, the panel contacted approximately 40 federal agencies,requesting documentation of their policies and practices for ensuring theconfidentiality of data that they collect and disseminate. the agencies wereselected based on the number of their statistical activities and budgets forstatistical programs. information was requested on agencies' statutes, regulations,and internal guidelines; privacy act notices describing the nature of systems ofrecords that it maintains (title 5 u.s.c. § 552a(e)(4)); informed consent andnotification procedures (for individuals and establishments); disclosure limitationtechniques; access to nonpublicuse data, including the type of arrangementsmade for the access; instances of denied access; and other organizationalarrangements and guidelines used to establish policies for protecting theconfidentiality of data and reviewing requests for access to data. the panel alsoasked the agencies to provide information on their experiences as users ofidentifiable data.the panel received extensive information on agencies' practices.appendix a247private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the documentation was invaluable to its work in assessing the agencies'confidentiality and access practices and their future needs. the panel and staffconducted many followup contacts with the agencies. in addition,representatives from the agencies attended panel meetings. the text of therequest appears as attachment 1.invitation for commentsin fall 1990, the panel also published an "invitation for comments" in avariety of professional journals and newsletters. the panel requested commentsfrom users of federal statistics on access problems, suggestions for improvingaccess, and information on persons or businesses harmed by disclosure ofidentifiable data. the "invitation" provided an opportunity for concernedindividuals to submit their comments, suggestions, and experiences for thepanel's consideration. approximately 20 responses were received. the text of the"invitation for comments" is included as attachment 2.conference on disclosure limitationapproaches and data accessidentification and examination of methods to maximize access to federalstatistical data while maintaining the confidentiality of the respondents' identitieswere the foci of the conference on disclosure limitation approaches and dataaccess, held in march 1991. researchers, federal government employees, andpanel members attended the conference, chaired by george t. duncan. tounderstand the underlying issues, participants reviewed data disseminationpolicies of federal agencies and the effect of increasingly powerful technologieson the agencies' efforts to provide data and maintain confidentiality. to facilitatethe discussion of the issues, the conference was divided into four sessions: basicissues, statistical disclosure limitation, computer issues, and assessment ofcurrent legislation and restricted access procedures.the panel commissioned several papers to serve as background informationfor the conference. these papers were presented at the conference and arediscussed in chapter 6 of the report. they are published in a special issue of thejournal of official statistics (1993(2)).appendix a248private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commissioned papersthe panel commissioned 11 papers to help its deliberations.paper commissioned for the workshop on confidentiality of and access tonational center for education statistics datakenneth b. newton and diana c. pullin, "the impact of section 252 of theexcellence in mathematics, science and engineering act of 1990 on the policiesand practices of the national center for education statistics"papers commissioned for the conference on disclosure limitationapproaches and data accesssession 1: basic issuesdiane lambert, "measures of disclosure risk and harm"paul d. reynolds, "privacy advances in social and policy science:balancing present costs and future gains"discussants: william butz, thomas plewes, eleanor singersession 2: statistical disclosure limitationwayne a. fuller, "use of masking procedures for disclosure limitation"roderick j.a. little, "statistical analysis of masked data"discussants: brian v. greenberg, donald b. rubinsession 3: computer issuessallie kellermcnulty and elizabeth a. unger, "database systems:inferential security"discussants: gerald gates, teresa f. luntsession 4: creative solutions to the disclosure problem under the statusquojoe s. cecil, "confidentiality legislation and the federal statistical system"thomas b. jabine, "procedures for restricted data access"discussants: john p. fanning, f. thomas juster, nancy j. kirkendallappendix a249private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other papersthomas b. jabine, "statistical disclosure limitation: current federalpractices and research"robert h. mugge, "informed consent in u.s. government surveys"eleanor singer, "summary of informed consent literature for nationalresearch council panel on confidentiality and data access"most of the papers and discussants' comments appear in revised form in aspecial issue of the journal of official statistics (9(2)).appendix a250private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.attachment 1committee on national statisticsnational academy of sciences2101 constitution avenue, n.w., washington, d.c. 20418panel on confidentiality and data accesscnstat: (202) 334œ2550ssrc: (212) 661œ0280request for documentation of policies and practicesfrom: george t. duncan, chairdate: october 31, 1990federal agencies differ with respect to their statutes, regulations, andorganizational arrangements that pertain to the confidentiality of and the access tostatistical data that they collect and disseminate. the review of policies andprocedures related to confidentiality and data access is one of the most importantactivities of our panel study. therefore, we are asking you to assist the panel onconfidentiality and data access in obtaining documentation on your agency'spolicies and practices.the panel plans to collect information in two steps: from a broad crosssection of federal statistical agencies and units, thepanel will request that each agency provide documentation related to itsconfidentiality and data access policies and practices; and following the review of these materials, the panel and staff will requestmeetings with key officials of a few agencies. the meetings will servethe purpose of adding to or clarifying information provided in thedocuments. they will also provide the panel an opportunity to obtaininformation on topics for which there was no documentation.the purpose of this memorandum concerns the first step: a request from thepanel to provide documentation about your agency's policies and practices. thepanel is primarily interested in obtainingappendix a251private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.documentation on policies and practices that pertain to the data your agencyproduces. in addition, the panel would like to learn about your agency'sexperiences as a user of identifiable data from federal and nonfederal sources.for instance, has your agency experienced difficulties or delays in accessing dataproduced by another federal agency? if so, what were the problems and how werethey resolved? examples of the relevant types of documentation are given below.please note that the panel is asking your agency to provide copies ofexisting documents. we are not asking your agency to prepare additional writtenstatements at this time. since the documents collected from each federal agencywill be used to develop the panel's report and may be summarized in ways thatcan lead to the identification of an agency, they cannot be considered to beconfidential.to assist you in collecting this documentation, please consider the scope ofthis study: it includes publiclysupported statistical data collection activities suchas censuses, surveys, administrative record data (when used for statisticalpurposes), and epidemiological studies. we are interested in statistical data forboth individuals and establishments. data from clinical trials, while veryimportant, will not be considered in this study. there are some special issuesassociated with clinical trial data that would require a separate study focusing onthe bioethical aspects of confidentiality and data access.i. documentation for data produced by your agencyfor data produced by your agency, we ask that you provide relevantdocumentation of your agency's confidentiality and data access policies andpractices. we use the word "documentation" to refer to a broad array of existingmaterials, such as published technical papers, standards manuals, copies ofconsent forms, memoranda, policy statements, statutes, interagency agreements,etc., that are relevant to each of the topics below. please remember that the panelis interested in data collected from both individuals (except in clinical trials) andestablishments. note that the panel has copies of all documents listed in theappendices and does not require additional copies.1. statutes, regulations, agency guidelines: statutes, regulations,appendix a252private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.agency guidelines (ex., national center for health statistics' staff manual on confidentiality), etc., that pertain to the confidentiality ofand access to your agency's data. please note that we are notinterested in governmentwide statutes and guidelines pertaining todata used for statistical purposes, such as the privacy actšthe panelwill contact the office of management and budget for governmentwide documents. however, if your agency has its own regulations orguidelines for compliance with governmentwide statutes, we areinterested in those.2. privacy act system of records notice: we would like to obtainsystem of records notices for two or three of your agency's majorsystems that are used for statistical purposes. in addition, noticesfrom other systems that have features of special interest for the panelstudy would also be appreciated.3. respondent notification and consent procedures for bothindividuals and establishments: the panel would like to obtainexamples, from questionnaires or other survey forms, of therespondent notification and consent procedures (rncps) used byyour agency to collect data from both individuals andestablishments. note that the term rncp, as used in thismemorandum, refers to a wide range of notices provided by federalagencies to individuals and businesses. it includes, but is not limitedto, informed consent statements or agreements, confidentialitynotification statements, and privacy act notifications. some topics ofinterest follow: how rncps differ for individuals and establishments, especially foragencies that collect information from both. the rncp(s) used by your agency when it plans to link survey data withadministrative record data (for example, when your agency plans to usesocial security number for the linkage).in addition, the panel also requests agency documents that containinstructions for staff on how to write rncps.4. disclosure limitation techniques: statistical methods andprocedures are sometimes used to limit disclosure risk in the releaseof tabulations and microdata to the public, for example,appendix a253private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not releasing separate data for geographic areas with smallpopulations. some topics of interest are: the procedures that are used by your agency to limit disclosure risk. if relevant, how procedures differ for individuals and establishments.5. facilitating access to nonpublicuse data: some agencies haveimplemented special procedures to facilitate access to data that havenot been released for publicuse. some topics of interest to the panelfollow: whether your agency has ever provided access to data that were notreleased for publicuse. if so, the type of arrangements used by your agency and its experiencewith such "special arrangements." some examples include:  allowing controlled access to specially sworn employees who arerequired to relocate to the principal office of your agency;  allowing controlled access to specially sworn employees who work inregional offices of the agency; and  employing special licensing agreements.6. inability to facilitate access: documents from your agency of caseswhere access has been denied and the reason for denial.documentation might be contained in correspondence or in publishedpapers, e.g., g. gates, "census bureau microdata: providing usefulresearch data while protecting the anonymity of respondents" in theproceedings  of the survey research section (american statisticalassociation, 1988).7. organizational arrangements: existing documentation thatdescribes organizational arrangements in your agency that are used(1) to establish confidentiality guidelines and (2) to review requestsfor access (for example, the census bureau's microdata reviewpanel). essentially, the panel is interestedappendix a254private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in tracing the "standard flow" of a request for access to unpublisheddata through your agency.ii. documentation for accessing identifiable datafrom federal and nonfederal sourcesthe second area of interest to the panel concerns your agency's experiencesin accessing identifiable data from other federal agencies and nonfederalsourcesšdata to be used for statistical purposes. specifically, we are interested inthose experiences that concern access to microdata which would not meetpublicuse criteria.federal agencies may require identifiable data from other agencies to (1) useas a frame for their surveys; (2) link with their own survey data; (3) do analyses.the panel is interested in the extent to which your agency had difficulty inobtaining such data (documentation might be letters or published papers). thepanel is also interested in knowing if special treatment was required for thesedata, above and beyond the standards applied to microdata produced by your ownagency.1. data from other federal agencies: we are requesting informationabout your agency's experiences in accessing data from other federalagencies, especially the barriers encountered. topics of interestinclude: the extent to which your agency uses data for statistical purposes thatare produced by other agencies. cases in which your agency experienced "difficulties" in accessing thefederal data that it needed. for instance, barriers that a federal agencymight experience are:an agency sponsors surveys but is unable to get fully detailed files from thecollecting agency; ora federal agency or program experiences delays in getting administrativedata or business lists from other agenciesšdata that are needed for usein its own statistical programs.2. confidentiality and access issues for nonfederal data: a federalagency sometimes serves an important role as a repositoryappendix a255private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of nonfederal survey and/or administrative data. these nonfederaldata provide valuable sources of statistical information thatsupplement federal data. some issues of interest to the panel includethe following: the extent to which your agency uses identifiable, nonfederal recordsfor statistical purposes (e.g., administrative data produced on the statelevel). the provisions that exist concerning confidentiality to and access ofthese data, especially where agency policies for data that it producesdiffer from its policies covering nonfederal data.finally, agency papers and/or publications that describe the preceding items,but which might also include the history of access to unpublished data or thehistory of changes to relevant confidentiality laws and regulations, would bemost helpful.if there is someone else the panel should contact in your agency or programto obtain the documentation that we are requesting, please provide virginia dewolf, study director, (202œ334œ2550) with the name and telephone number. ifyou have any questions, please direct them to virginia. we would appreciatereceiving your agency's documentation by december 3, 1990. thank you verymuch for your efforts in helping the panel.appendix a256private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.attachment 2 panel on confidentiality and dataaccessmany users of federal statistics are aware of the balance that must be struckbetween protecting the confidentiality of information provided by persons andbusinesses for statistical purposes and the need to make publiclycollected datawidely available for legitimate research and statistical uses.in search of new ways to deal with this issue, the committee on nationalstatistics and the social science research council, with support from severalfederal agencies, have convened a panel on confidentiality and data access. aspart of its twoyear study, the panel, which had its first meeting in december oflast year, will be compiling relevant information from both producers and usersof federal statistics.the scope of this panel study includes publiclysupported statistical datacollection activities on individuals and establishments, such as censuses, surveys,administrative record data (when used for statistical purposes), andepidemiological studies. data from clinical trials, while very important, will notbe considered in this study. there are some special issues associated with clinicaltrial data that would require a separate study focusing on the bioethical aspects ofconfidentiality and data access.readers of this notice are invited to submit short statements on any or all ofthe following subjects:access problems. specific examples of instances where federal agencyconfidentiality laws or policies have made it impossible for you or yourcolleagues to obtain data needed in your work or caused excessive delays inarranging for access to the data. please indicate the sources and specific kinds ofdata desired and the purposes for which the data were needed.suggestions for improving access. have you had any experience inobtaining access to data not disclosed for general publicuse? how was thisarranged? do you have suggestions for improving data access with appropriatesafeguards to maintain confidentialityappendix a257private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and without undue risk of adverse effects on public cooperation with censusesand surveys?persons or businesses harmed by disclosure. do you know of anyinstances in which persons or businesses were harmed by unlawful or unintendeddisclosure of information they provided to the government under the conditionthat the information was to be used only for statistical purposes? how did thishappen? what were the consequences? (this category differs from the first two inthat statements need not be based on your own personal experience.)please submit your statements to me c/o committee on national statistics,national research council, 2101 constitution avenue, nw, washington dc20418. if you have any questions, please call virginia de wolf, study director,on 202/334œ2550. we look forward to hearing from you.george t. duncan, chairpanel on confidentiality and data accessappendix a258private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bbiographical sketchesgeorge t. duncan is professor of statistics in the h. john heinz iiischool of public policy and management and in the department of statistics atcarnegie mellon university. he previously held an academic appointment at theuniversity of california, davis, and was a peace corps volunteer in thephilippines in 1965œ1967, teaching at mindanao state university. his currentresearch work centers on the decision processes of conflict resolution as theyapply to privacy and information issues. he is a fellow of the americanstatistical association. he has been editor of the theory and methods section ofthe journal of the american statistical association. he received b.s. and m.s.degrees from the university of chicago and a ph.d. degree from the universityof minnesota, all in statistics.james t. bonnen is professor of agricultural economics at michiganstate university. his current research interests include information systemstheory, the design and management of statistically based policy decision systems,and agricultural research policy. bonnen has served as chair of the nationalresearch council panel on statistics for rural development policy (1979œ1980),director of the president's reorganization project for the federal statisticalsystem (1978œ1980), president of the american agricultural economicsassociation (1975), member of the president's nationalappendix b259private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advisory commission on poverty, and as senior staff economist with thepresident's council of economic advisers (1963œ1965). in 1981 he received theamerican statistical association's washington statistical society's julius shiskinaward for outstanding achievement in economic statistics. he is a fellow of theamerican agricultural economics association, the american statisticalassociation, and the american association for the advancement of science. hereceived a b.a. degree from texas a&m university, an m.a. degree from dukeuniversity, and a ph.d. degree from harvard university, all in economics.joe s. cecil is a project director at the federal judicial center. he is theauthor of numerous publications concerning legal standards affecting exchangeof information for research purposes. other areas of research interest include theuse of scientific and technical evidence in litigation, variations in proceduresemployed by federal courts of appeals, and management of mass tort litigation.he received a j.d. degree from northwestern university school of law and aph.d. degree in psychology and evaluation research from northwesternuniversity.michele l. conrad is a senior project assistant with the committee onnational statistics. previously she was the senior project assistant for the panel toreview evaluation studies of bilingual education, and she is currently workingwith the panel on census requirements in the year 2000 and beyond. shereceived a b.a. degree from the university of pittsburgh.martin heidenhain david is professor of economics at theuniversity of wisconsinmadison. his research has explored a variety ofproblems relating to taxation and transfer programs, involving extensive work incollecting, analyzing, and managing complex data and the design of informationsystems to support such data. his books include two that report on major datacollection efforts, income and welfare  in the united states (mcgrawhill, 1962)and linkage and retrieval  of microeconomic data (lexington books, 1974). hehas served on the national research council (nrc) panel on statistics forfamily assistance and on the panel on research strategies in the behavioral andsocial sciences on environmental problems and policies. he is a fellow of theamerican statistical association. he serves as adviser to the statistics of incomedivision of the internal revenue service; a member of the committee onnational statistics of the nrc; andappendix b260private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a member of the advisory board of the german socioeconomic panel study,which is conducted by the deutsches institut fur wirtschaftsforschung. hereceived an a.b. degree from swarthmore college and m.a. and ph.d. degreesfrom the university of michigan.virginia a. de wolf, who served as the panel study director, iscurrently a mathematical statistician at the bureau of labor statistics. previouslyshe worked at the national highway traffic safety administration, the u.s.general accounting office, and the university of washington (seattle). shereceived a b.a. degree in mathematics from the college of new rochelle, and aph.d. degree from the university of washington (seattle) in educationalpsychology with emphases in statistics, measurement, and research design.ruth r. faden is professor of health policy and management anddirector of the program in law, ethics, and health in the school of hygiene andpublic health of the johns hopkins university, and she is also a senior researchscholar at the kennedy institute of ethics, georgetown university. she serves as aconsultant to numerous government and private agencies and is the author ofbooks and journal articles on health policy, biomedical ethics, and healthbehavior. she also works on procedurebased rationing in medical care. she holdsan m.a. degree in humanities from the university of chicago, a m.p.h. degreefrom the university of californiaberkeley, and a ph.d. degree in attitudes andbehavior from the university of california, berkeley.david h. flaherty is a professor of history and law at the universityof western ontario, london, canada. he has had a long involvement with issuesof personal privacy and information policy and has written several books on theissues of privacy and confidentiality, including privacy and government databanks: an international perspective (mansell, 1979) and protecting privacy insurveillance societies: the federal  republic of germany, sweden, france,canada, and the united states (university of north carolina press, 1989). hehas testified before many u.s. and canadian legislative committees on computermatching, the privacy implications of computer crime, and bills on freedom ofinformation and protection of individual privacy. he also participated in the firstoversight hearings on the privacy act of 1974, held by the house subcommitteeon government information ofappendix b261private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the u.s. congress. in 1992œ1993 flaherty held appointments as a fellow at thewoodrow wilson international center for scholars, a canadau.s. fulbrightfellow, a visiting scholar at georgetown national law center, and a fellow of thekennedy institute for ethics at georgetown university. he received a b.a.degree from mcgill university and m.a. and ph.d. degrees from columbiauniversity.thomas b. jabine is an independent statistical consultant whospecializes in sampling, survey research methods, and statistical policy. he wasformerly a statistical policy expert for the energy information administration ofthe u.s. department of energy, chief mathematical statistician for the socialsecurity administration, and chief of the statistical research division of thebureau of the census. he is a member of the international statistical institute and afellow of the american statistical association, and he served as president of thewashington statistical society. he is the author of several articles on theconfidentiality and data access policies and practices of federal statisticalagencies and served as chair of the american statistical association committeeon privacy and confidentiality. with richard p. claude, he edited statistics andhuman rights: getting  the record straight (university of pennsylvania press,1992). he has a b.s. degree in mathematics and an m.s. degree in economics andscience from the massachusetts institute of technology.f. thomas juster is a research scientist at the survey research centerand professor of economics at the university of michigan, ann arbor. hisresearch includes the design of economic and social accounting systems, theanalysis of saving and wealth accumulation patterns among u.s. households, theanalysis of time allocation among households, and the development of measuresof economic wellbeing. he has served on a number of national researchcouncil (nrc) committees, including the committee on national statistics, andhe has chaired the nrc committee on the supply and demand for mathematicsand science teachers and the american economic association committee on thequality of economic data. he is a fellow of the american statistical associationand of the national association of business economists. he received a b.s.degree in education from rutgers university and a ph.d. degree in economicsfrom columbia university.appendix b262private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gary t. marx is professor and chair of the sociology department at theuniversity of colorado at boulder and director of the center for the social studyof information technology. previously he taught at the university of california,berkeley, harvard university, and the massachusetts institute of technology. heis the author most recently of undercover: police surveillance in america(university of california press, 1988) and of academic and popular articles on thesocial implications of information technology. his work has been translated intomany languages, including japanese and chinese. he has worked on privacy andtechnology issues for the u.s. office of technology assessment, the u.s.general accounting office, senate and house subcommittees, state and localgovernments, the canadian house of commons, and the council of europe. hiscurrent work focuses on technologies for extracting personal information andresearch on crossborder forms of social control. he received a ph.d. degree fromthe university of california, berkeley.william m. mason is professor of sociology at the university ofcalifornia, los angeles. he has held academic appointments at the university ofmichigan, duke university, and the university of chicago. his research has beenin the areas of research design, multilevel models, social demography, andpolitical sociology; he is currently studying infant mortality in china. he has beena john simon guggenheim foundation fellow and a fellow at the center foradvanced study in the behavioral sciences. he received a b.a. degree fromreed college and a ph.d. degree from the university of chicago.wlodzimierz okrasa is a staff associate at the social scienceresearch council. he is currently developing a social science research laboratoryfor collaborative, comparative research in and about eastern and central europe.he specializes in the methodology of social investigation, social statistics, andmicroeconomics. he has held appointments as an american statisticalassociation research fellow and as a fellow of the british academy and thefriedrich ebert stiftung. previously he served as head of a research unit at theinstitute of economic science at the polish academy of sciences and as adviserto the president of the polish central statistical office. he has written and editedseveral books, including social welfare in britain and poland, with julian legrand (london school of economics, 1988). he received a ph.d. degree in 1977from the university of warsaw.appendix b263private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.robert w. pearson is director of corporate and foundation relationsat barnard college. he previously served as assistant survey director at thenational opinion research center at the university of chicago and as staffassociate at the social science research council (ssrc). while at ssrc, heworked with the panel and with committees on cognition and survey research, thecomparative evaluation of longitudinal surveys, and research on the urbanunderclass. he received a b.a. degree from the university of missouri,columbia, and a ph.d. degree in political science from the university ofchicago.donald b. rubin is professor of statistics and chair of the departmentof statistics at harvard university. previously he was professor of statistics andof education at the university of chicago and chair of the statistics researchgroup at the educational testing service. his research has dealt with causalinference in experimental and observational studies, missing data andnonresponse in surveys, and applied bayesian statistics, including computationalmethods. he has been coordinating and applications editor of the journal of the american statistical association and is a past member of the national researchcouncil committee on national statistics. he is a fellow of a number ofprofessional associations, including the american academy of arts andsciences, the american association for the advancement of science, the instituteof mathematical statistics, the american statistical association, and theinternational statistics institute. he received an a.b. degree from princetonuniversity and an m.s. degree in computer science and a ph.d. degree instatistics, both from harvard university.eleanor singer is a senior research scholar at the center for the socialsciences at columbia university. her primary areas of work include publicopinion and survey methods research, and she has conducted several studies ofthe impact of informed consent procedures and confidentiality assurances onsurvey participation rates and response quality. she is a past president of theamerican association for public opinion research and a former editor of publicopinion quarterly. with stanley presser, she edited survey research methods: areader (university of chicago press, 1989). she received a b.a. degree fromqueens college and a ph.d. degree from columbia university.appendix b264private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david l. szanton is executive director of international and areastudies at the university of california, berkeley. he is an anthropologist withresearch interests in contemporary southeast asia. from 1975 to 1991 heorganized and staffed numerous area and research planning committees at thesocial science research council in new york. he received a b.a. degree fromharvard college and a ph.d. degree from the university of chicago.w.h. williams is professor of mathematics and statistics at huntercollege in new york city. his current research interests are in the statistics ofemployment discrimination and the influence of language factors in mathematicslearning. previously he was in the mathematics and statistics research center atbell laboratories, murray hill, new jersey, and he later headed a division ofa.t.&t. responsible for econometric analysis of corporate financial structures.he has also been executive vicepresident of louis harris and associates, thepublic polling firm, and president of strategic comaps, a firm that developssoftware for the credit and collections industry. he has had visiting appointmentsat the university of california, berkeley, the university of michigan, and thecensus bureau. he has published more than 50 papers and three books onstatistical methods applicable to economic and business problems. he waseducated at mcmaster and iowa state universities.appendix b265private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indexaaccountability, see democratic accountabilityad hoc committee on privacy and confidentiality, 50, 6566, 104, 105, 209. see also committee on privacy andconfidentialityad hoc committee on professionalethics, 66, 209administrative agencies, 2, 18, 30, 40administrative procedures, 2, 1819, 141archiving, 174176, 177, 225data protection, 3, 4, 12, 203205for disclosure limitation, 1011, 8687,152, 154, 155informed consent, 9, 6971, 75, 219nongovernment data access, 7, 97,99100, 221public information activities, 10, 88, 220 see also restricted accessadministrative records, 1, 45, 17, 24,2728, 34, 4041, 47, 48, 67, 68, 74,172, 173, 178historical use, 47, 48and notification, 63, 65, 70, 7175,7780, 220public views on statistical uses, 61, 8385risk of privacy violations, 9, 88statutes on, 50, 110, 114115, 135 see also continuous work historysample;interagency data sharing;linkages of records;lists of respondents;tax records;vital statisticsadvisory agency, 13, 5051, 79, 214215,217, 227. see also review boards and mechanismsadvocacy groups, 17, 36, 92and privacy violations, 10, 8687, 89, 221agencies, see administrative agencies;administrative procedures;interagency data sharing; names of specific agenciesaid to families with dependent children,78american civil liberties union (aclu),8687american society for access professionals, 209american statistical association (asa),46, 50, 6566, 87, 97, 104 , 105, 206,209210fellowships, 94, 101, 165166, 200index266private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.analysis, see policy and program analysis; statistical disclosure limitationanonymization, 142, 145archiving procedures, 174176, 177, 225association for public data users, 17, 97,210attribute disclosure, 2324, 143144australia, 194authorization, see informed consent andnotificationautonomy, see individual autonomybbaldridge v. shapiro , 119120behavioral sciences research group,bls, 82bellagio principles, 104, 105bias, 30, 147birth certificates, 96, 163blurring, 146. see also statistical disclosure limitationboskin initiative, 49, 181, 196burden on data providers, 32, 36, 75, 219and barriers to interagency data sharing,6, 9899, 221and data linkage, 41, 53bureau of economic analysis, 21, 128,164, 170, 171, 191, 192, 194bureau of environmental statistics, 132,188bureau of justice statistics, 15, 20, 39, 40,137bureau of labor statistics (bls), 2, 15,20, 21, 29, 40, 165cognitive research, 55, 82and current population survey, 94, 159data policies and statutes, 183, 188organizational data, 129131, 191,192193, 194, 198bureau of the census, 12, 4, 20, 21, 41,109, 113, 118121, 136, 183address lists, 37, 9596, 119120, 134,191administrative data use, 96, 140 n,162163archived material, 175176cognitive research, 55, 82confidentiality statutes, 37, 41current population survey, 94, 159,160162, 175, 181disclosure limitation procedures, 8687,98, 146, 148, 205, 206exact match study, 160162external user access, 38, 39, 165history of, 4647, 48and irs, 127, 128, 162163microdata releases, 120121organizational data, 183, 191194, 198and public opinion, 35, 83, 8687reimbursable surveys, 120121special sworn employees, 38, 101, 119,159, 164, 166waiver use, 6869, 73, 198, 199bureau of transportation statistics, 20,131132, 140 n, 188businesses, see organizationsccanada, 46, 194195, 211, 213214cdrom data releases, 87, 92, 102encrypted formats, 7, 94, 123, 167168,200cell suppression, 98, 144, 148. see also statistical disclosure limitationcensus bureau, see bureau of the censuscensuses, 1, 17nonstatistical uses, 56, 89, 3334, 71 see also decennial censusescenter for economic studies, 200201central state planning board, 31certificates of research, 215child support data, 159160cognitive research, 9, 30, 52, 55, 82,8586, 220committee on privacy and confidentiality, 87, 209communications technology advances,52, 150computerassisted surveys, 70computer matching and privacy protection act, 111, 160index267private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer professionals for socialresponsibility, 17computer technology, 15, 17, 52, 93,149151data base access, 56, 144145, 150151concentration rule, 147, 148. see also statistical disclosure limitationconferences, for data users, 35, 36, 54confidentialitydefinition of, 2223historical overview, 47, 4849violations of, 7, 38, 100, 101, 119, 138,223congress, 16, 21, 30congressional budget office, 21constitutional convention of 1787, 45constitutional empowerment, 2, 3, 18,2627, 29, 33, 78consultation, 11, 157, 224consumer expenditure survey, 21consumer price index, 30continuous work history sample, 95,128, 169171, 173, 191, 200cooperation, see voluntary survey participationcosts of data collection, 2930, 32and data linkage, 41cotton gin reports, 198council of economic advisers, 21, 48, 49council of professional associations onfederal statistics, 9798criminal records, 74current industrial reports, 198, 199current population survey (cps), 94,159, 160162, 175, 181ddata protection, definition of, 23staff training for 12, 215216, 226death information, 68, 172, 178 ndecennial censuses, 29, 30, 36, 72, 8788,98address lists, 119120history of, 4547, 48use of administrative data, 40, 83, 84,96, 162163declaration on professional ethics , 66,210definitions, 2224of records, 24, 113, 139 ndemocratic accountability, 2, 3, 18,2526, 29, 3133, 36, 78denials of user requests, 95, 98, 158,169173monitoring of patterns, 78, 96, 100, 222department of agriculture, 48department of defense, 159160department of health and human services, 112, 114, 159160department of justice, dispute withenergy information administration ,34, 129, 185188department of the treasury, 128, 164disclosure risk, 88, 136137, 223. see also attribute disclosure;identity disclosure;inferential disclosure;restricted access;restricted data;statistical disclosure limitationdefinition, 2324notification of, 8, 66, 76, 136, 156, 220dissemination, see disclosure risk;microdata files;restricted access;restricted data;statistical disclosure limitation;tabulations;users of federal dataeeconomic data, 181, 189190economic policy working group, 49economic research service, 21, 201economics of data and data collection,2627, 2930, 43 n, 184education data, 31, 121123education statistics, see national centerfor education statisticselectronic data formats, 92archiving of, 175176, 177, 225 see also cdrom data releases ;microdata files;online data accessemployer identification number, 170, 190employment data, 129131, 169171, 173,182, 184, 200index268private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.encryption, 143cdroms, 7, 94, 123, 167168, 200end uses of data, 92energy information administration (eia),20, 38data policies and statutes, 205, 206dispute with justice department, 34,129, 185188proprietary data collection, 34, 129, 185,191, 193environmental protection agency, 43 nepidemiology, 40, 95, 128, 171173equifax, inc., 83, 87ethical guidelines for statistical practice , 66ethical principlesfor agencies, 23, 1819, 2529for data users, 105107, 222evaluation studies, 7071, 92exact match study, 160162experimental research, 1, 1718, 63, 107export data, 183ffacetoface interviews, 62, 8081false statements, to data providers, 8, 76,220. see also informed consent and notificationfarm costs and returns survey, 201federal aviation administration, 2, 18federal committee on statistical methodology, 11, 143federalstate cooperative arrangements, 18federal trade commission, 3334fellowship programs, 94, 96, 101,165166, 200financial data, 76, 116117, 182, 184finland, 194, 195fish and wildlife service, 2021followup interviews, 8, 76, 220food and drug administration, 116food security act, 135food stamp program, 45, 78, 149foreign trade data, 183framework for planning u.s. federalstatistics for the 1980's , 51, 7273france, 195, 211212freedom of information act, 4, 27, 37,98, 109, 111, 112113, 115117and organizations, 116117, 130, 182183functional separation, 46, 3435, 50,5354, 73, 134, 135, 223advisory body promotion of, 13,217218, 227and organizational data, 189, 225future use of data, notification on, 9, 76,220. see also informed consent and notificationggeneral accounting office, 113general education provisions act, 121,122generalpurpose data sets, 12, 17geocoding, 8788, 149germany, 211, 213grantees, statistical activities, 18great depression, 48great society programs, 48guidelines for federal statistical activities , 208, 217, 227hhawkinsstafford amendments, 121, 122,137health and retirement study, 69health care financing administration(hcfa), 18medicare lists, 172, 178 nhow the census bureau keeps yourinformation strictly confidential  , 86iidentity disclosure, 23, 143144, 145, 153. see also statistical disclosure limitationillegal behavior, 76income tax, 47income tax act, 47independent advisory agency, 13, 5051,79, 214215, 217, 227. see also review boards and mechanismsindex269private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.individual autonomy, 2, 3, 18, 2729, 33,4647, 58, 78individually identifiable data, see administrative records;disclosure risk;interagency data sharing;statistical disclosure limitation;tax recordsindividual master file, 162infant formula data, 115inference channel, 150151inferential disclosure, 24, 144, 145, 151informational privacy, 22informed consent and notification, 89,113, 115, 134, 135, 204, 223administrative data, 36, 62, 63, 65, 70,7175, 74, 7780, 220definitions of, 23, 63guidelines, 6369, 7577, 219220and interagency data sharing, 6, 99, 112,221methods of data collection, 62for nonstatistical uses, 56, 89, 7677,133, 220proxy procedures, 74, 203research on, 9, 52, 55, 8082routineuse exemption, 113115, 133survey participants, 89, 52, 5657, 65 see also waiversinstitutional brokers estimate system(ibes), 44 ninstitutional review boards, 107interagency data sharing, 6, 21, 4041, 58,74, 92, 93, 94, 9899, 101, 111112,113, 158165, 176, 203, 221, 224administrative records, 6, 48, 58, 73, 74,8384, 94, 9899, 159163, 221barriers, 6, 37, 9899, 100, 111112,134, 158, 221business lists, 191, 195196, 225226statutes, 6, 98, 99interagency technical cooperation, 10, 11,216217intercensal surveys, 96, 162163, 191, 198intermediate uses of data, 92, 93, 101intermodal surface transportation efficiency act, 131, 188internal revenue service (irs), 2, 18, 21data policies and statutes, 41, 94, 117,127128organizational data, 191193and public opinion, 35, 55, 82, 8385taxpayer lists, 161163, 164, 172international statistical institute (isi), 65,6667, 210interuniversity consortium for politicaland social research, 39jjapan, 194jefferson, thomas, 45joint economic committee, 48llawyers, 1617legislation, 46, 3638, 50, 51, 98,109111, 135. see also freedom of information act;computer matching and privacy protection act ;income tax act;paperwork reduction act;privacy act;public health service act;tax reform actagencyspecific, 117136on data sharing, 6, 98, 99, 192on external use, 7, 114115on organizational data, 182183, 189,196, 225, 226licensing agreements, 7, 3839, 94, 96,100, 101, 102104, 123, 200microdata, 168169linkages of records, 8, 4041, 52, 5355,74, 111, 159163and informed consent, 9, 65, 67, 7071,76, 220in microdata files, 94lists of respondents, 37, 9596, 119120,171173business, 6, 95, 128, 190196, 203,225226local government, 21, 182, 183longitudinal research database, 38, 154longitudinal retirement history survey(lrhs), 6869, 73, 96, 206lotus marketplace: households, 87louis harris and associates, surveys, 55,8283luxembourg income study, 150, 166167index270private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mmail surveys, 37, 62management, see administrative proceduresmandatory disclosure, 45, 3334, 36mandatory participation, 23, 2829,5657, 61, 62and notification, 63, 67, 7175by organizations, 184manufacturing energy consumption survey, 38maryland motor vehicles administration,2728masking of data, see statistical disclosurelimitationmatching, see linkages of recordsmatrix masking, 152media, 17, 21, 92medical records, 40medicare, 78, 178 nmicrodata files, 48, 52, 64, 92, 94, 97,107, 119, 124125, 157, 203, 222denied use of, 95disclosure limitation, 7, 10, 11, 12,101102, 104, 141142, 144146,148149and informed consent, 65, 6869licensing agreements, 168169luxembourg income study, 166167organizational data, 184, 200201microdata review panel, census bureau,48, 97, 148, 205misleading statements, to data providers,8, 76, 220. see also informed consent and notificationmultiple imputation, 153multipurpose statistical programs, 12, 18,2930nnational agricultural statistics service(nass), 20, 21, 94, 164data policies and statutes, 41, 110, 134,135, 164, 165166organizational data, 191, 194, 197199,201national archives and records administration (nara), 113, 174176, 177,225national assessment of educationalprogress (naep), 121national center for education statistics(nces), 2, 15, 20, 21, 31 , 40, 110,121123cdrom encryption, 94, 167, 201data policies and statutes, 136, 137, 205,206restricted access, 3839, 102, 165,168169national center for health statistics(nchs), 15, 20, 21, 3031, 43 n, 70,9596, 172cognitive research, 55, 82data policies and statutes, 4, 28, 110,123127, 204205informed consent procedures, 70national death index, 68, 172national educational longitudinal study,40national health interview survey (nhis),9596national income accounts, 29, 170national institute for occupational safetyand health, 128, 164, 172national institute of standards and technology (nist), 165national institute on aging (nia), 6869,96, 206national institutes of health, 43 n, 107national justice data archive, 39national longitudinal survey of youth,102national science foundation (nsf),3839, 206fellowships, 94, 101, 165166, 200needstested entitlement programs, 74, 78netherlands, 194, 195new zealand, 194noise introduction, 144, 152, 178 n. see also statistical disclosure limitationnonresponse, 80, 81north, s.n.d., 46notification, see informed consent andnotificationooffice of federal statistical policy andstandards (ofps), 49, 51, 73office of management and budget(omb), 8, 21, 32, 111, 192193,196 , 207209, 211, 217, 227index271private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.confidentiality rulings, 69, 73, 96, 198,199disclosure limitation research, 11, 155,224offsite data access, 96, 100, 102, 123,168169oil company data, 34, 129, 185188online data access, 7, 92, 166167, 200onsite data access, 7, 96, 101, 173organizations, 16, 21, 52, 54, 62, 181182access to data on, 7, 51, 57, 116117,199202, 226and confidentiality, 2, 5, 18, 23, 51, 57,62, 64, 75, 182, 188190, 219, 225as data collectors, 15informed consent of, 8, 184, 197lists of, 6, 95, 128, 190196, 203, 225226proprietary data, 57, 116117, 182183,184related legislation, 182183, 189, 196,225, 226waivers, 197199, 226ppanel study of income dynamics, 102paperwork reduction act, 4, 109, 111passive consent, 77, 78, 80, 81, 203permanent census act, 46personal privacy in an information society , 50personal records, see administrativerecordspledges of confidentiality, 5, 10, 34, 37,40, 55, 66and data users, 104, 105interpretation of, 8082policy and program analysis, 3, 1516,2527, 32, 92, 96, 99and data quality, 2627, 31, 56historical overview, 48by outside researchers, 52, 53, 97, 99and subject notification, 74, 78, 7980president's reorganization project for thefederal statistical system , 48, 140 nprivacy, definition of, 22privacy act, 4, 24, 35, 37, 41, 48, 62, 109,111115, 132133, 135 , 137, 139 n,211informed consent under, 8, 6465,6970, 75, 219and organizations, 122, 135, 182privacy protection study commission, 5,35, 49, 5051, 140 nprivate sector data collection, 15, 2930,31, 35government maintenance of, 115116risk of privacy violations, 9, 8788use of government data, 8788professional organizations, 17, 6567,9798, 105, 107, 209210, 222project metropolitan, 5455, 212213proprietary data, 57, 116117, 182183, 184eia collection of, 34, 129, 185, 191, 193protected enclaves, 51, 73providers of data, 9, 16, 2021, 22, 2829,35, 3536, 46, 5657, 57, 6162, 6263 see also cognitive research;informed consent and notification;mandatory participation;organization;pledges of confidentiality;proxy respondents;voluntary survey participation;waiversproxy respondents, 22, 74, 203public health data, 4344 npublic health service act, 28, 124public information activities, 36, 56, 88,220about privacy violations, 10, 8689, 221public opinion on data activities, 35, 55,61, 8286, 206, 220publicuse microdata files, see microdatafilesqquality improvement initiative, 49, 181,196query restriction, 151, 200questionnaires, notification statements, 70index272private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rrace and ethnicity, 9, 8687, 96, 163random digit dialing, 15random error, 144, 152randomized responses, 82records, see administrative records;definitions of records;linkages of records ;tax recordsreidentification problem, 162, 168reimbursable surveys, 120121respondents, see providers of dataresponse modification, 151random error, 144, 152restricted access, 7, 32, 3839, 9293,9497, 99102, 141, 142, 165169,177, 221, 224225archived materials, 174176, 177178conditions of, 100101, 104, 106,157158, 222restricted data, 141142. see also statistical disclosure limitationretention of survey datanotification on, 9, 76, 220revenue act, 47review boards and mechanisms, 36, 73,7879, 107, 214215, 216, 217 , 227for disclosure limitation, 1011, 97,148149, 205206foreign, 211214routineuse exemption, 113115, 133ssampling frames, 6, 40, 92, 9596, 99, 221business, 190191scope of federal statistical system, 12,1718security classification, 150151sensitive data itemsand disclosureavoidance policies, 12,156and notification, 8, 7576, 8081, 219signature requirements, 80, 81simulated data, 146, 153, 154sixteenth amendment, 47smallarea data, 8788, 163small business, 184, 191small business administration (sba),191, 193social security administration (ssa), 96,205administrative lists, 68, 172, 173 see also continuous work historysample;exact match studysocial security data, 6, 30, 7172, 74, 78,84, 88social security numbers, 9, 67, 69, 70, 76,96, 161162, 163, 169, 220software, 11, 93, 157, 224special sworn employees, 38, 101, 119,121, 159, 164, 166st. regis paper company, 3334standard industrial classification (sic),190, 191, 193standard statistical establishment list(ssel), 37, 191192, 193state governments, 21, 182, 183cooperation with federal government, 6,18, 96, 164, 196, 198, 225vital statistics data collection, 46, 125,126127statistical disclosure limitation, 1012, 39,66, 147149, 178 n, 209techniques, 144149, 151153, 179 nuser impacts, 11, 12, 99, 155157, 209statistical policy office, omb, 21, 196,207209disclosure limitation research, 11, 155,225statistical records, definition, 24, 113, 139nstatistics canada, 46, 194195, 213214statistics of income division, irs, 82, 94,127statistics sweden, 54, 212statutes, see legislationsummary tape files, 98surveillance, 3, 27survey of fishing, hunting, and wildliferelated recreation, 2021survey of income and program participation, 149surveys and privacy , 87swapping techniques, 146, 153. see also statistical disclosure limitationsindex273private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statisticscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sweden, 54, 194, 211, 212213synthetic data, 146, 153, 154ttabulationsdisclosure limitation, 7, 10, 12, 48, 144,146147, 148of early census data, 46, 48organizational data, 197198taxexempt organizations, 57taxpayer opinion survey, 8385tax records, 40, 47, 48, 62, 71, 8385, 95,127128, 161, 164and notification, 70tax reform act, 48, 95, 110, 117,127128, 164, 170171, 172telemarketing, 15telephone surveys, 37, 62, 70, 81, 204topcoding, 144, 162training of researchers, 105, 107, 222uunited kingdom, 194unlawful disclosure, see violations ofconfidentialityusers of federal data, 78, 16, 21, 35, 46,9193denials, 78, 95, 96, 98, 100, 222government interaction with, 3536, 51,52, 53, 58, 91, 9798legal and ethical responsibilities,100107, 222sanctions against for misuse, 7, 57, 100,101, 104and statistical disclosure limitation, 11,12, 39, 98, 99, 101, 155 157, 209, 224vviolations of confidentialitypenalties, 4, 7, 3839, 57, 100, 102, 104,112, 135, 137139, 157, 223and public opinion, 8, 910, 87, 88, 138,221vital statistics, 46, 96, 125127, 172, 181voluntary survey participation, 28, 50, 52,5455, 57, 61, 62and informed consent, 89, 3637, 56,63, 67, 71voting records, 71wwaivers, 37, 6869, 7780, 96, 196, 197,203, 220by organizations, 197199, 226watergate scandal, 48world almanac , 21index274