detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/2237information technology in the service society: atwentyfirst century lever288 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309048767 | doi 10.17226/2237committee to study the impact of information technology on the performance ofservice activities, national research councilinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.informationtechnology in theservice societya twentyfirst century levercommittee to study the impact of information technology on theperformance of service activitiescomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1994iinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance ofscience and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federalgovernment on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomousin its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineeringalso sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. robert m. white is presidentof the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to thenational academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services tothe government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robert m.white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the following organizations: the alfred p. sloan foundation (under grant no. 90104) and apple computer inc., international business machines corporation, the at&t foundation, digital equipment corporation, and xerox corporation, underunnumbered contracts.library of congress catalog card number 9285596international standard book number 0309048761copyright 1994 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.available from: national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, d.c. 20418b132printed in the united states of americaiiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee to study the impact of information technologyon the performance of service activitiesj. brian quinn, dartmouth college, chairmartin baily, mckinsey & co., vice chairjordan baruch, jordan baruch consultingtora bikson, rand corporationdavid carlson, kmart corporationdennis chamot, aflciokenneth coates, ford motor credit companywilliam curtis, carnegie mellon universityrobert elmore, arthur andersen & co.charles gold, ernst & youngmax hopper, american airlinesellen knapp, coopers & lybrandhenry lichstein, citibankjerome mark, bureau of labor statistics (retired)stephen roach, morgan stanley & co.irwin sitkin, aetna life and casualty (retired)michael zubkoff, dartmouth medical schoolspecial advisorsjohn opel, ibm corporation (retired)morris tanenbaum, at&t (retired)walter wriston, citibank (retired)staffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerleslie m. wade, project assistantiiiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boardwilliam wulf, university of virginia, chairruzena bajcsy, university of pennsylvaniajeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems inc.james gray, digital equipment corporationjohn l. hennessy, stanford universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleyken kennedy, rice universitybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyrobert l. martin, bell communications researchdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyabraham peled, ibm t.j. watson research center (until august 1993)william press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, california institute of technologyedward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationlawrence t. tesler, apple computer inc.leslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames mallory, staff officergreg medalie, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria bemah, administrative assistantjanet quarles, project assistantleslie m. wade, project assistantivinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofscience, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studyjohn a. armstrong, ibm corporation (retired)sylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyavner friedman, university of minnesotasusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationhans mark, university of texas at austinclaire e. max, lawrence livermore national laboratorychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyjames w. mitchell, at&t bell laboratoriesjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradocharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratorynorman metzger, executive directorvinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein the spring of 1991, the computer science and telecommunicationsboard (cstb) of the national research council (nrc) convened thecommittee to study the impact of information technology on the performanceof service activities. asked initially to assess the impact of informationtechnology (it) on productivity in the service sector, the committee met fivetimes over a 16month period, deliberating over concepts and the analyses ofsubgroups convened to assess specific issues.in addition to using the standard macroeconomic data collected anddeveloped by government agencies, the committee drew on observations frommanagers and executives in industry (a group including some of the committee'sown members, as well as numerous others). these observations were obtainedthrough interviews that were used to develop and check insights, not to generatequantitative data. appendixes a through d provide methodological andsupporting details about the committee's sources of information and itsapproach to using this information. appendix e lists the interviewed executives,whose observations helped the committee to understand the processes by whichit projects are planned, implemented, and evaluated.at the macroeconomic level, the committee was concerned about theconstraining effects of looking at services from the traditional perspectives ofgoodsproducing industries (chapter 1). at present, most of the terminology,methodology, and data for analyzing productivity (and performance) derivefrom earlier studies in the goodsproducing industries, but to theprefaceviiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee, most of these seemed inadequate for understanding trends in theservice sector. for example, whereas productivity in goodsproducing activitiesis measured in terms that refer to relatively concrete units of output, dollarsales, or profits, performance in services may relate best to more subjectivequalities such as timing, quality, comfort, or convenience. measurementdifficulties are a theme that runs through the entire report.in refining its approach to reflect its initial findings, the committee choseto investigate the full range of impacts of the use of it on performance in theservice sector. thus, the committee examined the nature and measurement ofperformance in services at progressively less aggregated levels of analysis: themacroeconomic level (chapter 1), the industry level (chapter 2), the enterpriselevel (chapter 3), and the activity level (chapter 4). chapters 1 through 4culminate in chapter 5, which discusses implications for managers inorganizations wishing to improve their management of information technology,and chapter 6, which presents issues and recommendations for public policy.to put this report in perspective, some observations on the committee'soperation and scope of concern are appropriate. first, this report was shaped byinteractions within a multidisciplinary committee that included businessexecutives, economists, behavioral scientists, management theorists, andtechnologists. second, the committee considered the context of internationalcompetitiveness in conducting its analysis, but detailed investigation ofinternational conditions was beyond its scope. third, although smallercompanies were represented in the data that supports industry andmacroeconomiclevel analyses, the committee's resources did not permit asystematic examination of the distinguishing characteristics of smallerenterprises.many parties outside the committee contributed to this report. first andforemost were the executives of major service companies who participated inthe committee's extensive series of interviews. the time, thoughtfulness, andcandor of these executives were invaluable to the committee in understanding avariety of complex and otherwise hidden experiences. the anonymousreviewers convened by the nrc also played a key role; their probing commentson the initial draft resulted in a much stronger final report. the contributions ofpatricia higgins (dartmouth college) in providing research, moral, and logisticsupport throughout the project were essential to its successful completion.penny paquette and scott anfinson of dartmouth college, debbie perrault ofkmart, and ashley maddox (intern at arthur andersen) also contributed to thisreport.the committee chair, james brian quinn, integrated the contributions fromthose inside and outside the committee. he also demonstrated a significantpersonal involvement in shaping the ideas, the concepts, and even the detailedwording of this report. as importantly, his involvement demonstratedprefaceviiiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a central finding of the studyšthat good work and high performance demandstrong and enlightened management and leadership.cstb is grateful for the support of the alfred p. sloan foundation, applecomputer inc., international business machines corporation, the at&tfoundation, digital equipment corporation, and xerox corporation, whichmade this project possible. in accordance with nrc policy, the majority of thefunding for this study did not come from private industry.william wulfchaircomputer science and telecommunications boardprefaceixinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents summary and overview 11 introduction and impact of information technology at the macroeconomic level 24 this studyšapproach, scope, and terms 29 current data and measures of productivity 30 national income and product accounts prepared by thebureau of economic analysis 31 industryspecific measures of productivity developed bythe bureau of labor statistics 40 alternate measures of productivity and performance 44 observations and conclusions 45 many factors influence productivity: it affects manyaspects of performance 45 organization and scope of this report 47 notes and references 49 bibliography for chapter 1 512 impacts of information technology at theindustry level 52 air transport 57 telecommunications 62 retail and wholesale trade 69 health care 75contentsxiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. banking 80 insurance 86 observations and conclusions 91 notes and references 933 impacts of information technology at theenterprise level 97 why firms invest in it 98 how companies use and invest in it 100 types of applications 100 decision making about investing in it and the rigor ofprogram evaluation 118 crosscutting observations regarding all uses of information technology 122 controlling the costs of it 122 enhancing technological sophistication and developingstandards 124 problems in assessing enterprise performance 125 summary and conclusions 132 notes and references 1334 impacts of information technology at theactivity level 136 introduction 136 what is an activity? 139 some observations about service activities 141 service activities are everywhere 141 service activities are increasingly important 141 service activities are generic and elemental 142 roles for information technology in the evolution of activities 143 new tools and tasks 144 new linkages and transformations in firms 148 outsourcing and industry transformation 153 consequences for employees 155 conclusions 160 notes and references 1635 improving decision making about informationtechnology 165 common problem areas in the management of informationtechnology 168 lack of competition 168 inadequate planning and followup 169contentsxiiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. resistance and inefficiencies in work practices 170 excessive project scope 171 technologydriven investments in it 172 difficulties in software development 172 critical issues in the management of information technology 173 information and it strategy seeking competitive advantage 174 crossfunctional reengineering and reorganization 175 continuous user and customer involvement 181 customerdriven measures of quality 182 compressing project scope and payback time 185 postproject audits 186 benchmarking against specialized outside providers 187 customer and knowledgedriven performance evaluationand reward systems 190 summary and conclusions 191 notes and references 1926 information technology in services: implications for public policy 193 implications for macroeconomic and fiscal policy 194 background on employment issues raised by informationtechnology in services 195 the need for policy intervention to ease employment transitions 199 the need for additional research to guide policy making 201 improving federal macroeconomic data gathering andanalysis 203 improving data and accounting principles related toinvestments in information technology 205 increasing awareness of and investments in researchrelated to information technology in services and service quality measurements 206 other policy issues identified by this study 207 notes and references 209 appendixes a selected research on economic and strategic impacts ofinformation technology 217b methods for deriving bureau of economic analysis measuresof output 228c procedures for deriving bureau of labor statistics measuresof productivity for service industries 234d how the committee conducted its study 247e list of executives interviewed 266contentsxiiiinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. xivinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology in theservice societyxvinformation technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and overviewthe use of information technology (it) has revolutionized the structure ofmanagement and the nature of competition in a variety of industries.1 it isespecially important in the service sector, which now accounts for about 74percent of the value added in the u.s. gross domestic product (gdp) and about76 percent of national employment (table s.1) and enjoys a healthy $52 billiontrade surplus. estimates indicate that about 85 percent of all measuredinvestments in it hardware are in services. contrary to the widespreadmisconception of services as predominantly simple, laborintensive activities,the service industries include many large, technologyintensive and technicallysophisticated firms in transportation, financial services, banking, insurance,retail and wholesale trade, telecommunications, health care, and professionaland personal services. as it becomes less expensive, more portable, betterintegrated and interconnected, and embedded in a wider variety of devices, newapplications in these fields and whole new industriesšsuch as interactivemultimedia systems for business, home entertainment, and communicationspurposesšare likely to evolve and to have profound effects on industrystructures, employment, and economic growth.moreover, the u.s. economy revolves increasingly around variousimportant whitecollar service activities (e.g., research, design, financing,education, accounting, marketing, logistics planning, communications, andinformation management) rather than bluecollar shop floor production. theseactivities are central to the individual service industriessummary and overview1information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and are critical in producing value within manufacturing and other goodsproducing companies. the effectiveness with which it is deployed in servicesthus strongly influences u.s. standards of living and competitiveness in worldtrade.table s.1 the scale of services and investments in it in 1991industryvalue added(billions of1991 dollars)employment(millions of ftejobs)investment in it(billions of 1991dollars)nation4,587.5103.3agriculture, forestry,fisheries90.91.6mining36.70.70.9construction210.14.50.5manufacturing841.018.025.3total goods sector1,178.724.8transportation140.83.33.8communicationsa95.31.221.1utilitiesb99.00.98.0wholesale trade266.05.917.0retail trade403.316.217.9firec685.06.538.7other servicesd1,002.426.120.3government699.418.6total service sector3,391.278.7note: all figures presented are for calendar year 1991.a includes telephone, telegraph, and broadcasting.b includes electric, gas, and sanitary services.c includes financial services, insurance, and real estate.d includes health care and delivery, business services, legal services, hotels, and recreation.sources: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1992. survey of currentbusiness, july. data on value added are from table 6.1c (national income without capitalconsumption adjustment), p. 82. the relationship between national income without capitalconsumption adjustment and gross domestic product (or gross product originating by industry) isspecified in table 1.9, p. 52, and is essentially gross domestic product without capital consumptionor property and sales tax. data on employment are from table 6.5c, p. 84.data on investment in it include hardware costs only and are from stephen roach, morgan stanley& co.the information technology paradoxthe magnitude of the investment in it in the past decade (as measuredroughly by investment in hardware; figure s.1) has prompted questions aboutpayoff for both the nation and individual enterprises. because it issummary and overview2information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.often used to automate processes (that is, to perform tasks that might otherwiserequire substantial human intervention), and because automation is popularlyassociated with efficiency and cost reduction, questions about payoff haveusually centered on productivity. productivity is a concept that relates the levelof outputs to the level of inputs used in their production. in particular, someeconomic studies have suggested that the large investment in it by the servicesector has not been associated with substantial gains in productivity asmeasured by national macroeconomic statisticsšthe socalled it paradox.while some studies indicate that u.s. productivity levels themselves comparequite favorably with those of international competitors in several importantservice industries, others suggest little correlation between investments in itand productivity, profitability, or return on investment at the industry orenterprise level.figure s.1 growing investment in information technology (it) by theservice sector. the only systematic data available on it expenditures accountfor hardware components but exclude software and services. thus this figureshows expenditures only for office, computing, and accounting equipment,communications equipment, instruments, and photocopy and relatedequipment; it does not include expenditures for software, electronicinformation services, data processing and network services, computerprofessional services, custom programming, systems integration, consulting, ortraining services. source: stephen roach, morgan stanley & co.summary and overview3information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee concluded, however, that these studies by themselvesprovide an overly narrow picture of what is happening in services.macroeconomic data and traditional measures of productivity do not capturemany of the crucial performance elements that are important to customers andare critical to service industry executives when they invest in it. for mostservice companies, the use of it now appears more essential than optional,because it is often an integral part of the infrastructures on which suchorganizations depend. obvious elements of such information infrastructures arethe telephone and transactionprocessing systems without which mostbusinesses could not function, the electronic navigation and control systemswithout which airlines could not operate, and the interconnected networks ofcomputers that are increasingly necessary to compete at all in financial services,wholesale and retail distribution, transportation, entertainment, and health care.in addition, highly sophisticated systems can provide some innovators withimportant strategic leadership positions.the committee believes that understanding the impact of it on the overallperformance of service activities, not simply determining how the use of itaffects productivity in services, is the real challenge. and in contrast to whatone would conclude based on the results of studies mentioned earlier, manyobservers of the service industries (including several members of thecommittee) and many service industry executives (including the majority ofthose interviewed in the course of this study) believe that it has had and willcontinue to have a real and significantly positive impact on overall servicesector performance.analyzing the impacts of informationtechnologyto understand more fully how it has changed the service sector and whatthe societal impacts of that transformation have been, the committee examinedthese issues at four different levels of analysis and considered both quantitativeand qualitative observations (primarily collected during an extensive series ofinterviews with industry executives).macroeconomic analysisfrom the standpoint of readily available government statistics on the u.s.economy, during the 1980s the service sector showed limited gains inproductivity despite an extraordinary burst of spending on it. the servicesector spent over $750 billion on it hardware alone in that decade (figure s.1)šenough to result in the virtual doubling of the it endowment of the averagewhitecollar worker. at the same time, government economic statistics point toonly a 0.7 percent average growth in productivity in thesummary and overview4information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.service sector during this periodša distinct slowdown compared to that ofprevious years and far short of the average gains in the manufacturing sectorduring the same period.however, as mentioned earlier, there are various reasons why the readilyavailable government statistics may not accurately reflect the full impact of iton performance in the service sector. it is well known, for example, that theexisting data on productivity do not capture important elements of servicequality, e.g., how well a hospital, airline, restaurant, hotel, or bank has satisfiedits customers. in addition, statistics on industry productivity are available foronly a limited set of service industries that accounts for only 42 percent of allservice workers. for some major service industriesšnotably banking and otherfinancial services, education, health care, and governmentšoutput is imputedsolely on the basis of input; thus, by definition, output divided by input is aconstant for these industries. this imputation affects measurement of output inabout 25 to 30 percent of the service sector. data collected at the industry levelalso tend to understate or ignore the influence of whole new service markets,even though a primary use of it is to enable new services.another factor that may distort the macroeconomic picture of it's impacton performance in service industries (particularly telecommunications,transportation, and finance) is the fact that such impacts may be reflected morein measurements of the productivity of customers of these service industries(often manufacturing) than in those of the service industries themselves.competitive pressures often constrain service pricing, with the result thatbenefits enjoyed by customers may not appear in the revenue measures of theserviceproviding industry, while the costs of providing such benefits (e.g., thecosts of it) always will appear. for example, margins and prices in thewholesale trade, finance, and transportation industries have dropped in realterms, although companies now provide a much more complex array of servicesto customers.two other factors should be recognized when interpreting macroeconomicdata on productivity and the use of it. first, the effects on productivity ofinvesting in and using it cannot be isolated from other things that significantlyinfluence productivity, such as the quality of the work force and management,training efforts, and most importantly, investment in other (nonit)technologies necessary to achieve a desired result. second, although the same istrue for any other type of investment, macroeconomic data cannot account forthe alternative costs and potential risks that companies and industries mighthave encountered if they had not invested in it.however, the central limitation of macroeconomic analysis is the fact thatthe usual measure of productivityšindustry or sector output (usually assummary and overview5information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessed by some dollar measure such as deflated revenue or price) divided byinput (often as assessed by hours of work or number of employees)šignoresimportant dimensions of performance in service industries (and goodsproducing ones as well) that are critical to customers and to the managers ofindividual businesses making decisions about investments in it. high amongthese dimensions of performance is the availability of new service functionsthat would be impossible without itšsuch as the rapid deployment of hospitalemergency services or 24hourperday securities trading. of perhaps greaterimportance are the handling of increased complexity and the provision of thegreater quality, convenience, reliability, timeliness, safety, flexibility, andvariety that use of it makes possible in services. as firms begin to competealong these dimensions, the very nature of a service often changes in ways thatmake comparisons of service outputšand hence productivity measuresšincreasingly problematic.because of the above limitations, generalizing from macroeconomic dataabout the impact of it on overall service sector performance is likely to bemisleading. significant improvements have been made in macroeconomic dataand analysis techniques relative to measuring it's impacts on performance inthe service sector. however, major challenges remain. chapter 1 is devoted toexploring these issues.industry level analysisnearly all service industries make substantial use of it. however, patternsof it's use and impact vary widely across industries, in part because ofdifferences in and limitations posed by industry structures, degrees ofregulation, the timing of it's introduction, and the adaptability of processes andproducts to change. in some service industries like transportation,communications, utilities, and wholesale trade, growth in productivity (in gdpper laborhour) from 1948 to 1973 led that of the construction, durable goods,and nonelectrical machinery manufacturing industries; in other serviceindustries, it did not (table s.2). nevertheless, since 1973, measured growth inproductivity in most services appeared to drop despite large investments in it,although there were still great variations among industries.within the major service industries, increases in productivity (as measuredby gdp per laborhour) ranged from a very respectable 4.6 percent per year incommunications to an anemic 0.17 percent in the finance, insurance, and realestate segment from 1973 to 1989 (table s.2). the committee examined theimpact of it on service performance in six more disaggregated serviceindustries: air transport, telecommunications, retail and wholesale trade, healthcare, banking, and insurance. within these industries, some showed stronggrowth in gdp per laborhour. others,summary and overview6information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notably insurance and health care, showed negative growth in gdp per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 (table s.3). many service industries are currentlyundergoing significant restructuring at least partially enabled by their it systems.table s.2 average annual growth in gross domestic product per laborhour formajor sectors of the u.s. economy, 1948 to 1989industry194873197389businessgoods producingfarming4.642.04mining4.020.82construction0.581.20manufacturing2.872.75durable goods excluding nonelectrical machinery2.562.05nonelectrical machinerya2.036.01nondurable goods3.402.37service producingtransportation2.310.65communication5.224.63utilities5.872.46trade2.741.18wholesale3.141.18retail2.401.13fireb1.440.17other services2.170.32government enterprise0.150.26general government0.210.34a nonelectrical machinery hours from bureau of labor statistics.b finance, insurance, and real estate.source: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1991. survey of currentbusiness, april, tables 6.2 and 6.11.however, available data on industry level productivity do not conveyimportant aspects of the ways it has affected these industries and their overallperformance: in airlines, innovations using it have been associated with competitiveleadership and with survival as complexity has increased. airlinesdepend on it within aircraft and airports, in air traffic control systems,and for sales, marketing, maintenance, and safety systems, as well asfor capacity, load management, and logistics planning. computerizedsummary and overview7information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table s.3 a comparison of various u.s. service industries in 1991industryrevenues(billionsofcurrentdollars)employment(millions offteemployees)itcapitalstock(billionsofcurrentdollars)averageannualrate ofchangein gpoperlaborhour,1981 to1989(% peryear)acompoundannualrate ofgrowth ininvestmentin it,1981 to1989 (%per year)air transport87.50.711.13.114.1telecommunications129.7b0.9114.05.75.1wholesale trade469.55.960.22.811.0retail trade884.5c16.258.82.39.6health care475.0b7.419.61.39.3bankingd209.5b2.128.50.127.9insurance (carriersplus agents)226.7b2.217.11.430.8a labor productivity is often measured in terms of gross product originating (gpo) per hour oflabor input. the gpo of an industry is a value added measure of that industry's contribution tothe gross domestic product.b 1990 figure.c includes restaurant trade.d includes depository institutions only; excludes federal credit agencies, security commoditybrokers, and mortgage bankers.sources: unpublished data on revenues are from the bureau of labor statistics. employmentdata are from u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis, 1992, survey ofcurrent business, july, table 6.5c (fulltimeequivalent employees by industry), p. 84. it capitalstock data are from stephen roach, morgan stanley & co. reservation systems have changed the entire pattern of competition andprofit making in the airlines industry, although in the 1980s, airlineprofits were highly erratic in the shakeout that resulted from thederegulation of the industry. competition has forced airlines to pass onto customers the savings gained through increased efficiency, but newroute structures enabled by the use of it have also allowed airlines topass certain costs (notably inconveniences caused by the ''hubandspoke" system) on to customers. telecommunications companies depend on it for operationsmanagement, billing and customer service, product differentiation, andnewproduct development. these companies further provide theinfrastructures of telephone, cable television, satellite, microwave, andfiberopticcable connections that enable other industries to operateeffectively. they provide the pathways over which a variety of newconcepts and products havesummary and overview8information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.been (and can be) introduced by the financial services, entertainment,data services, software, direct distribution, education, travel, and healthcare industries, among others. deregulation in the 1980s increased thevariety of services available and decreased their costs for mostcustomers. improved communications have allowed companies tomanage materials and services purchased anywhere in the world,control inventories on a justintime basis, gather information, andmanage diversified producing locations in ways that have changedbasic premises about industry boundaries, the organization ofenterprises, and many traditional management techniques. at the sametime, the use of it has enabled telecommunications companies to shiftto the consumer much of the labor of placing calls, althoughconsumers themselves often find selfservice dialing a convenience. retailers and wholesalers have used it to collect and analyze salesdata more quickly and effectively, to plan purchasing and marketingactivities better, to communicate more rapidly with their suppliers, andto offer more differentiated services to customers. to improve the cost,quality, and timeliness of their offerings, many maintain worldwidesourcing and logistics systems that use it. the variety of items carriedand the hours retail stores remained open increased substantiallyduring the 1980s. however, the industry found it difficult to convert itsinvestments in it into financially measurable gains in productivitybecause of heavy and rapidly changing competition. the basicstructure of retail competition, sourcing of products, inventorymanagement, and retailers' power relative to that of manufacturersshifted during the 1980s. in some cases, wholesaling and retailingmerged. in addition to powerful general merchandise and supermarketchains, highly specialized "categorykiller" chains (e.g., toys "r" usor foot locker), warehouse clubs, superstores, and chain boutiquesemerged as new forms of competition. all were highly dependent onit and broad geographical sourcing. in health care, the use of it has become increasingly important indiagnosis and therapy (e.g., medical imaging, radiation therapy, andpatient monitoring). for business operations, it has generally been lesswell used in health care than in other industries, and there may be greatuntapped potentials for its use in such operations as well as in newclinical applications, outpatient care, and monitoring of outcomes.measures of economic output in health care are extremely tenuousbecause of the presence of many nonmarket forces and problems indefining quality. although numerous new and improved cures,therapies, and diagnostics have been introduced since 1970, there iswide consensus that measured productivity in health care has beendropping. yet few would like to do without the potentially betterdiagnosis and treatment that electronic devices permit in health caretoday. and the costs of dealing with today's complex reportingrequirements would soar further without electronic systems.summary and overview9information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the banking industry has used it to enable increases in the volume oftransactions as well as the development of new products; applicationshave ranged from backoffice (check and accounts) processing,mortgage and loan application processing, and electronic funds transferto more strategic innovations such as automated teller machines andnew kinds of securities. it has been used to interlink financial services,banking, and investment systems worldwidešthus decreasing anation's capacity to control its currency value or its economy byconventional policy interventions. it has also been used to managetrillions of dollars in daily transactions by the securities markets of theworld, functions that physically could not be handled without it. yetdespite the fact that customers have benefited from the greater variety,convenience, and accuracy of services as the result of expanded use ofit in the 1980s, measured productivity in banking has grown onlyslightly, although this is at least partly because the output of banking isdifficult to measure. banks now compete with many other (nonbank)enterprises to provide credit card, investment, and other services.systems for personal savings, credit extension, and management offinancial transactions have been substantially improved. insurance companies have relied on it for backoffice claimsprocessing and account updating and now use it to enhance links toagents, to customize policies, to manage risks globally, and to developnew services (e.g., managed health care systems) nationally. althoughindustry level data indicate that the insurance industry did not capturemeasurable productivity benefits during the 1980s from its use of it(table s.3), the industry did introduce a variety of complex newservices much more specifically tailored to individual customers'needs. the use of it also radically improved in the cycles of newproduct introduction in the insurance industry, and increased the scaleand accuracy of the services provided.it has been associated with growing complexity and customization in eachof these different industries. at the same time, growth in the volume oftransactions, in the number, variety, and linkages among enterprises, and in thekinds of equipment available has led to demands for greater technicalstandardization. across all industries studied, lags in the development ofstandards, software, and management systemsšrather than hardware limitationsšhave been the main constraints to progress. cycle times for the introductionof products in all major service industries have dropped, and greater controlover the mix and size of inventories (whether of airline seats, financial holdings,or distributed products) has become essential to success.the economies of scale offered by backoffice automation have led towaves of mergers and acquisitions and increased concentration in financialservices, health care, and air transport. it has been used effectively to centralizesummary and overview10information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these new larger enterprises and also to facilitate later geographicaldecentralization into networks of local affiliates and branch offices. chapter 2discusses the impact of it at the industry level in greater detail.enterprise level analysisthe enterprise level is where most of the decisions are made about the useof it. executives who actually make such decisions find that measures relatedto revenue, profitability, alternative costs, growth potentials, market share, andreturn on investment (roi) are more relevant than the more abstract measuresof "productivity" used at the industry and macroeconomic levels. whenmeaningful financial measures are not available, executives use engineering orquality metrics such as response time, reliability, and customer satisfaction toestimate it's impact. for most investments in it, executives interviewed by thecommittee tended to use decision making processes (such as capital budgeting)similar to those used for investments in any other type of advancedtechnology.but, as for investments in r&d and other new technologies, their decisionmaking relied on intuitive and nonfinancial measures as well as formal roianalyses and financial justifications. the committee found that the companies itinterviewed were not consistent in their use of postproject audits to determinebenefits received from it investments and projects.for some uses of it, results are readily measurable. for others they arenot. companies interviewed by the committee often reported great difficultiesin predicting strategic effects precisely, measuring certain types of output (suchas increased flexibility), assessing benefits that might be diffuse or delayed(such as those made possible by desktop communications, spreadsheets, andword processing), and separating the contributions of it from those of otherfactors.it has often been used (especially in early applications) to reducepersonnel costs in large paperintensive departments such as accounting orpurchasing, and in some cases even to eliminate or consolidate certain backoffice operations. better informationhandling capabilities have also helpeddecrease other costs such as excessive capital float or inventories, billing orpayment errors, logistics costs, and customer complaints. in addition, it hasbeen used to create new or improved services that a firm can offer to the public,such as the call waiting service made available to residential telephonecustomers or the new "synthetic securities" offered by the investment bankingcommunity. providing more customized insurance policies to customers withspecial needs or reducing the time needed for a retail store cashier to tally acustomer's total purchase are examples of improved services.summary and overview11information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.although such benefits are often captured by available data, the committeefound that managers invest in it to achieve a variety of impacts that are notreflected in industry level or macroeconomic measures of productivity. theseinclude: preserving or expanding market share. while aggregate industryoutput is a key issue for national policymakers, individual companiescare more about their individual firm's performance than about that ofthe industry as a whole. market share is a key measure of competitivesuccess and a basis for gaining relative marketing or purchasing poweras well as improved economies of scale or scope. to maintain theirmarket share, all companies in an industry may be forced to install anit system even though it does not increase their own or the industry'soutput. thus investments increase, but company or industry volumeand profits may not. avoiding risks or alternative costs. executives often invest to avoidrisks, for example, malpractice suits in health care or accidents in theairline industry. the benefits of avoiding losses by using betterprocesses or controls are very real to a company, but only the costs ofachieving them show up in company or national accounts. it is difficultto imagine how most companies in industries such as financialservices, largescale retailing and wholesaling, airlines, lodging andrestaurant chain operations, health care, or communications couldoperate without the benefit of it. yet the losses they would incur ifthey did not use it appear nowhere in company or national accounts. creating flexibility for changing business environments. changes inthe business environment (e.g., increased regulation, marketing, oroperational complexity) may require unforeseeable changes in the waya company operates. as many financial services and banking firmshave learned, a flexible it system may be essential to the very survivalof the company as it attempts to cope with rapidly changingenvironments. in other cases, companies invest in it to provide aflexible future platform for creating new products that may not yethave been planned or even conceived. improving the internal environment. firms often invest in it to obtainand analyze information that will provide a greater degree ofpredictability or stability for their operations. such investments helpcompanies to avoid undue fluctuations in sales or profitability as wellas catastrophic failures caused by inadequate information. other firmsinvest in it to improve employee relations. properly installed, it canbe used to eliminate burdensome tasks, make jobs more attractive,shorten the training cycles needed before an employee becomesproductive, and improve worker morale. improving the quality of products and interactions with customers .companies increasingly compete on the quality of their customerservice and have used it to serve customers more rapidly, accurately,efficiently,summary and overview12information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and with more customized service products. such improvements helpto generate longterm loyalty among customers. it has been especiallyimportant in helping to improve reliability, ensuring more consistentlevels of performance, minimizing errors, and improving customers'and employees' perceptions about companies and their products. it isalso a powerful tool for companies with lifecritical operations inwhich realtime systems help to improve the safety of employees,customers, and the public.an important common finding was that, in the companies surveyed,decision making processes for it projects were comparable to those used forother complex advancedtechnology projects. in many instances, decisionsabout investments in it are like decisions about r&d. payoffs from both r&dand it are likely to be uncertain in both scale and timing. companies readilyadmitted that they had made investment errors. expected value is often notquantifiable or even estimable, let alone predictable. it is not surprising that theexperience of firms investing in it varies considerably within an industry andby type of investment.when it is used to reduce costs or to provide a specific new service,managers are often able to calculate rates of return and payback times withrelative accuracy. however, for many other investments in itšlike thestrategic and infrastructure expenditures noted abovešit is nearly impossible toestimate such figures. strategic uses of it can change a firm's entirecompetitive or risk posture within an industry, affecting many differentelements of customer, cost, and competitive relationships simultaneouslyšnotjust revenues or costs. programs or systems such as mci's friends and familyprogram, american airlines' sabre computerized reservations system,morgan stanley's taps system for integrated trading, and mckesson'seconomost system for ordering and inventory control affect those firms'quality of customer service, flexibility, reliability, breakeven points, responsetimes, and market positioning in ways that cannot be measured in precisefinancial terms.when it is used in this fashion, a firm's most valuable assets may becomethe professional knowhow, flexible response and capabilities for innovation,information and management systems, and knowledge about customers andmarkets embodied in its it and supporting systems. these assets also are notreflected in the firm's accounting statements or in the nation's accountingsystem. when successful, such companies can redefine the standard to whichother firms in the industry (and all crosscompeting industries) are held byconsumers of their services. a firm's use of it may affect the entire structure ofthe firm's industry, its competitiveness with other industries, and even thenation's international competitiveness. competitors may be forced to choosebetweensummary and overview13information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making similar investments or being forced out of the business. entirely newsubindustries can result from particularly fortuitous strategic changes, ascellular telephone, overnight package delivery, "swaps" and synthetic securities,and facsimile services demonstrate. but, as the failed experiments of zapmail,videotext, and amris's confirm system also show, favorable outcomes arefar from assured. chapter 3 deals in depth with these issues.finally, it has become a significant element in the cost structure of manycompanies. even the service sector's $750 billion expenditure on it in the lastdecade understates by a substantial amount the total cost of it, since it includesonly hardware and excludes essential elements such as software, training andsupport, and maintenance and upgrading; the costs of these excluded elementsmay well be substantially greater than the costs of the hardware. the costs of asignificant it infrastructure become more fixed than variable in nature and areespecially burdensome when revenues and margins are squeezed by recessionsor competitive pressures and overcapacity results. in some cases, this problemleads to sizable financial losses even though the services being provided usingthe it infrastructure may be of higher absolute value to the customer. theproblem of overcapacity applies to entire industries and not just individualenterprises, since it systems, especially large, complex ones, must bepurchased in predetermined sizes that are not in direct proportion to demandand therefore usually provide more capacity than warranted by average levels ofdemand.activity level analysisalthough it is perhaps easiest to evaluate it's impact on performance inservices at the enterprise level by considering a firm's profitability, growth inmarket share, or survival, many of the impacts of it can be understood only byan examination of it's application in specific activities within enterprises, suchas customer service, product design, image creation, quality and cost control,and r&d. these activities may be performed within one functionalorganization or cut across several functional areas within one enterprise.moreover, these activities may not all be performed within a single enterprise,but may be spread between the enterprise, its suppliers, and its customers.because measures of performance at the enterprise level aggregate the effects ofall activities within an enterprise, they may frequently miss critical shifts instructure or performance occurring at the activity level. those shifts, however,may affect the structure and performance of many enterprises and industries.examining the use of it at the activity level allows more penetratinginsight into why and how it has been associated with major changes in jobsummary and overview14information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.content, forms of internal organization, industry structures, and crossindustrycompetition. for example, most overhead functions are merely services anenterprise has chosen to produce internally. if desired, many could easily bepurchased externally. in fact, this is the way many service industries started.important tasks in services and manufacturing often resemble each other somuch that the lines separating the two sectors are becoming arbitraryšif notmisleadingšfor policy purposes.within companies, an obvious impact of using it in service activities is inproviding specialized tools that enable more effective performance of particularactivities (e.g., substituting online databases for paper records). firms may alsoinvest in itbased systems that lower internal costs and prices but require moreeffort by the customer, a concept fundamental to many of the doityourself"services" provided by businesses (e.g., credit card gas pumps, longdistancedialing, machineoperated parking facilities, automated teller machines). sincethese firms gain at the expense of the customer, the net performance gains(taking the customer into account) are clearly less than the gains to the firmsthemselves. in other instances, firms have used it to rework how they performservice activities such as logistics activities that cut across individual functionalorganizations such as purchasing, inventory control, manufacturing, anddistribution.it is also used to facilitate the separation, reorganization, andrecombination of activities without regard to their location in space or time.this had led to the widespread development of "network" organizations.flexibilities enabled by it may also result in the flattening of organizations orthe decentralizing of decision making authority, thereby allowing moreautonomy at lower levels and broadening the mix of tasks for which individualsare responsible. at the same time, managers have used it to enhancedimensions of performance that depend on greater centralization (e.g., theconsistency of fast foods or the accuracy of bank reports).itbased linkages now allow managers to separate out many traditionalactivities (like payroll or accounting) from their core operations, procure themfrom outside suppliers, and still integrate them with important activities thatcontinue to be performed internally. decisions to use "outsourcing" often reston the fact that outside providers of highly specialized service activitiesšwhomay have invested in or developed specialized it technology and applicationsšcan often perform them more effectively or at less cost than firms that do notspecialize in that activity. itbased linkages often provide an opportunity toexpand such choices by facilitating the monitoring and integration of serviceactivities provided offsite with those kept inhouse. not only are largeenterprises reorganizing or shedding entire departments and divisions, but theyare also in some instances selling some of their skills in internal activities tooutsiders, becoming the external service providers for other firms (as federalexpress has done with itssummary and overview15information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telephone answering service). electronic data interchanges now bind manyfirms in a web of worldwide purchasing, shipping, billing, and receivingconnections.itbased linkages have also been used to establish broader and morecomplex patterns of interconnections or alliances among different firms (whichthemselves may or may not be in the same industry). entire industries such astelecommunications and investment banking compete largely as networks ofindependent enterprises temporarily linked to accomplish a specific task, forexample, building a new telecommunications system for a country. suchinterconnections are frequently established to improve the performance of tasksby taking advantage of each enterprise's expertise in performing particularactivity level tasks.as the use of it alters the nature and location of activities, it also alters thenature and location of work. use of it is one important force facilitatingrealignment of work flows, job redesign, organizational restructuring, and workrelocation. as a result, the nature of jobs, skill requirements, and requirementsfor training are changing rapidly.radically revised organizational structuresšentailing different lines ofmanagerial authority and different flows of informationšhave emerged.restructurings affect the tasks of personnel at all organizational levels, butmiddlelevel technical and administrative managers may face the greatestchallenges in retraining and adjusting to faster, less bureaucratic decisionmaking structures. these trends have been the focus of much commentary inbusiness publications. the committee's analysis underscores how using it hasamplified these trends. chapter 4 expands on these vital issues.key findingsin the course of its deliberations, the committee examined the impact of iton performance in the service sector not only from the standpoint ofunderstanding the it paradox, but also in terms of broader implications fordecision making by business executives and government policymakers.detailed below are the committee's overall findings. the broader implicationsof these key findings as well as more specific findings as they relate tomanagement and policy decision making are described in the remainder of thissummary. traditional macroeconomic data collected to date do not capture many important benefits or costs that accrue to firms fromdeploying it. accordingly, it is not appropriate to use these data as abasis for judging the impact of service sector investments in it on thesector's performance. even if growth in service sector productivitywere uniformlysummary and overview16information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.poor, which it is not, traditional measures rarely take into accountimprovements in quality, convenience, and reliability for customers, orlosses that using it has helped avoidšall important issues toindividual firms. moreover, as with other important technologicaladvances (such as electrification and telephones), it may take decadesbefore aggregated measures fully reflect the results achieved by the useof it. the use of it has had a direct and positive operational impact onthe performance of services by many individual firms, but the financial impact of the use of it has not always been as positive.although it is often difficult to isolate the effects of it use from otherfactors that may influence operational performance in service activities(e.g., quality of the work force), individual firms have used it toimprove efficiency by reducing costs (e.g., through better logisticsscheduling in airlines or more efficient routing in deliveries fromsuppliers to retail stores). in nearly all of the service industries,including those examined by the committee, firms have used it tohandle tremendous volumes of transactions. it has been used toprovide timely information that can substantially influence profits(e.g., investment bankers capture and analyze stock and bond pricemovements instantaneously; retail executives track sales from hour tohour; airlines perform realtime yield management). there are avariety of reasons why the use of it has not always had a positivefinancial impact on service firms. one reason is that many applicationshave used new technologies and other applications of it have beenexperimental, and a basic characteristic of innovation is thatexperiments and new technologies sometimes fail. a second reason isthat the range of problems to which it can be applied continues toexpand so quickly that some companies are forced to invest in newtechnologies to obtain new capabilities even before they have capturedthe full anticipated benefits of their installed it infrastructures. the use of it has had important customersupplier effects. for thecustomers of service providers, it has been used to help improve thequality and variety of services in many industries, especially throughits ability to amass, analyze, and control large quantities of specializeddata. such improvements include error reduction or increased precision(e.g., more reliable medical diagnostics and procedures, more accuratebilling on checkout activities); faster or more convenient service (e.g.,computeraided repair services, credit card purchases, automated tellermachines); improved security, safety, and reliability (e.g., automatedmaintenance protocols, monitoring systems, or online audits). on theother hand, some important costs have been passed on to customers(e.g., while the hubandspoke routing systems and complex yieldmanagement strategies now used by airlines lower airline operatingcosts and sometimes the cost of tickets, they also may vastly increasesummary and overview17information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the inconveniences associated with air travel; while certain users findautomated communications systems and direct dialing proceduresmore convenient and private and they lower the price per call foreveryone, many users are greatly frustrated by them) and on tosuppliers (e.g., it systems such as electronic data interchange have ledto closer relationships and working partnerships between companiesand their suppliers but also to greater costs for suppliers in terms ofinventory carrying and coordination). the net effect of these changes isnot always calculable. it has been an important element in promoting many broadrestructuring and strategic changes in service industries. it hasbeen used to create new industries (e.g., the cellular telephonebusiness) and has contributed to changes in traditional relationshipsbetween industries (e.g., retailers dictating designs, packaging, andspecifications to manufacturers). entirely new lines of business haveappeared, such as interest swaps, securitized mortgages, and indexedmutual funds. the economies of scale offered by backofficeautomation have supported some mergers and acquisitions, leading toreductions in the work force and increased concentration in someindustries such as financial services or airlines. in other cases, thefalling cost of it has often facilitated the entry of relatively smallbusinesses into new markets and the development of efficient localbranches, franchises, or affiliates through which larger companies canservice broader geographical areas or remote locations moreeffectively. it has been used to increase crosscompetition amongvarious industries and among individual activities within companies indifferent industries. it has been an enabling force in creating entirelynew forms for economic activity (e.g., worldwide research networks,global sourcing arrangements, largescale development and sharing ofnew databases, new training and educational capabilities, fasterresponse innovation systems, and competition through disaggregatedalliances or networks of companies). the widespread use of it in services has a profound effect onemployment patterns. the committee's analysis of it's roles at theactivity and enterprise levels revealed changes in production processes,products, and lines of business that will produce substantial changes inemployment patterns. when an industry's productivity increases and itsoutput remains constant, jobs in that industry are of course lost. if thatindustry is committed to enhancing productivity through downsizingalone, those jobs will be lost permanently. however, if past patternscontinue, total output is likely to grow, though jobs may well shift todifferent firms and industries or between geographical regions.forecasts indicate that the new jobs created and old jobs restructuredwill demand a new mix of skills. emerging new forms of organizationoften require a wider range of skills than traditional forms. future jobsare predicted to be more knowledgebased than in the past. forecastingsummary and overview18information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.specific skill needs is complicated by the fact that the jobdisplacements and skill changes that typically accompany any majortechnological change will unfold at the same time that internationalcompetitive pressures, deregulation, and other factors are causingmajor changes in the overall economy. compounding analyses of thesechanges is the fact that many service activities can easily be physicallyseparated from their producing clients. as it has in software, thecreation of domestic demand for other services might well result insubstantial export of certain jobs overseas.management implicationsthe use of it can have a significant impact on the performance of servicefirms, both strategically and operationally. however, successfully applying itand reaping maximum payoffs from it investments require good management.the question is not, is it useful? but rather, how can it be successfully appliedto enhance service performance? the committee's interviews with seniorexecutives revealed several specific areas that affect the likelihood ofsuccessfully managing applications of it. while not completely new, eachprovides an important focal point for concern and attention by managersinvesting in and using it. the committee concludes that for maximumeffectiveness: there needs to be a comprehensive itbased strategy designed not onlyto support the basic business but to create competitive advantage. topmanagement must understand this strategy, be deeply involved in itsgeneration, and be committed to its implementation if the strategy is tohave companywide significance and transcend divisional boundaries. business processes should be examined and when appropriateredesigned before it is installed, paying special attention to functionsthat cross existing organizational boundaries. new managementtechniques and performancereward structures are generally needed tosupport crossfunctional systems. and internal activities and formalorganizations should be explicitly restructured to make the best use ofthese systems. customer and user needs (especially those of external customers)should normally drive the design, installation, and evaluation of itsystems. users and customers should be involved whenever possible insystem designs, and customerdriven metrics of quality should be usedwhenever possible to assess the impacts of using it. customerdrivenperformance measurement systems (as opposed to hierarchicallydriven systems) should be important elements in evaluating crossfunctional team performance. most it projects should focus on relatively shortterm payoffs andshould have welldefined goals within a longterm strategicframework. while ''betthecompany" it projects have at timesresulted in revolutionarysummary and overview19information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.changes that have benefited their initiators, megaprojects are likely tobe overly complex, over budget, delayed, and mismatched to customerneeds by the time they are implemented. the goals and desired outcomes of it projects should be establishedusing benchmarks for service performance established by extensiveexamination of possible "bestpractice" processes as implemented inother firms, including specialized external service providers.restricting searches for bestpractice processes to peer firms may limitmanagement perspectives severely.as reported by executives interviewed by the committee, most of theproblems in achieving payoffs from investment in it came not from theinvestment decisions themselves but from inadequate planning andimplementation of it applications by management. inadequate retraining andfailure to continuously upgrade worker skills were a major problem. anotherwas a failure to followup installations of it with appropriate organizationalstructures, performance measurement systems, and reward and incentive plans.details of the management implications of the committee's findings are found inchapter 5.policy concernswhile the committee believed that it was beyond its scope and expertise todevelop major policy or action recommendations, four primary areas of concernto policymakers were identified: enhancing the diffusion of it throughout theservice sector, dealing with the impacts of it on employment patterns,obtaining better data as well as a better understanding of organizational andstructural changes occurring in the economy as a result of it, and reassessingthe impact of these changes on the effectiveness of traditional policy measures.detailed recommendations on how to address these areas of concern areexplored in chapter 6.diffusing the benefits of it in servicesin general, market mechanisms have worked well in developing it forservices. many individual companies have reaped substantial economic benefitsfrom using it, notwithstanding the fact that these benefits are frequently notreflected in traditional economic data and that certain attempts to use it havebeen undeniable failures. there are two key areas where policy stimuli mightaffect future economic benefits from investments in it.the first is it's potential inclusion inšor exclusion fromšinvestmentincentives. to the extent that public policies are used to stimulate furtherinvestment (whether in new capital spending or in r&d), such policiessummary and overview20information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should treat investment in it in services as they would any other capital orr&d investment. preference should not be accorded to other types of capitalinvestment or process experimentationšsuch as those for manufacturing orfixed equipmentšover it applications. since service activities are integral toboth service and manufacturing industries, it applications that lower servicecosts or improve service performance are likely to have a significant positiveimpact on competitiveness in both sectorsšdespite the low measuredproductivity increases seen to date. moreover, given their importance, thenonhardware aspects of it such as software and training should be includedalong with hardware in any definition of it for investment and/or tax purposes.the second relates to continued support for the development ofinformation infrastructures, whether through public investment in certaincritical areas (such as advanced r&d) or through changes in laws andregulations. the experiences of many large service enterprises illustrate thevalue of broad access to interactive computing systems connected bytelecommunications and data communications systems or integrated voice anddata communications between different facilities, localities, and countries.large u.s. firms have often been world leaders in the development and use ofinformation infrastructures, especially for their own multinational networks.increasingly, however, the emergence of relatively inexpensive desktop it canbring sophisticated information processing capabilities into the reach of theprivate home, as well as small and mediumsize enterprises. such enterprises(and home users) will require affordable access to public informationinfrastructures if they are to develop to their fullest extent. in somegeographical areas, selectively stimulating the growth of informationinfrastructures, particularly for small businesses and for homes, could enhanceinteractions among all enterprises, promote expansion in both the number andtypes of jobs in the service sector, and lead to the creation of entirely newservice industries. enabling homes to have broad access to it may alsostimulate markets for many affordable products (e.g., multimedia devices orservices).coping with the impact of it on employment patternslargescale changes in employment patterns have already occurred, andfurther changes seem inevitable. the real issue is how best to facilitate thecontinuing shift in job mix. extensive retraining, education, and job creation areessential tools for such facilitation. in a humane society, steps should also betaken to minimize the disruption and hardship of displaced individuals. as inthe past, the volume of training and education needed is likely to exceed thecapabilities of private industry. in addition, the rapid evolution of it and othernew technologies suggests that the need for retrainingsummary and overview21information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.during a person's lifetime will be periodic. all this supports the broadbased callfor strengthening the literacy and numeracy provided by public k12 education.past studies indicate that education in general skills is likely to prove morebeneficial in times of uncertainty and rapid change than education inspecifically targeted and narrowly focused skills.obtaining improved data and conducting research onstructural changesthe rapid growth of services and changes in the nature of service activitiesin the last two decades underscore the need for a better understanding ofchanging conditions. the analyses on which such understanding hastraditionally rested have relied on statistical data collected by the bureau oflabor statistics and the bureau of economic analysis. however, these datasuffer from significant deficiencies. efforts such as the boskin initiative toincrease the disaggregation of federal data and statistics and to improve thescope of coverage (in terms of both price and quality measurements and theindustries measured) were begun, and these efforts should continue.better statistical data is not the only need. specific research and continuousmonitoring are also needed to better understand (1) the nature of structuralchanges occurring within enterprises and industries, (2) those issues that arepeculiar to small businesses, and (3) the largescale impacts of it onemployment patterns at the activity and enterprise levels. ironically, the unitedstates funds research that addresses organizational and institutional changesoverseas (e.g., change as the result of political or economic shifts in othernations), but funding for this kind of research tends to be difficult to finddomestically.reassessing the effectiveness of traditional policy measuresfurther research is also needed on the way information technologies affectthe impact of traditional policy instruments. some unintended results arepossible, and their likelihood should be assessed. for example, because ofintegrated financial markets, interest rates lowered for policy reasons in theunited states may merely (1) enable domestic or foreign companies to invest atlower costs overseas or (2) change the exchange rates for u.s. currency.because of outsourcing abroad, increases in government purchases orgovernment stimulation of consumer demand may simply increase imports andcreate jobs overseas. enhanced data and communications networks generallyhave international connections that increase access by foreign competitors tou.s. markets as well as u.s. access to foreign resources, potentially increasingthe pressure on and lowering returns for u.s. innovatorssummary and overview22information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and suppliers. the internationalization of financial markets spurred byworldwide it networks makes it increasingly difficult to control a domesticeconomy using the standard macroeconomic levers and brings into question theentire concept of national sovereignty. such subjects are worthy candidates forinvestigation.additional conclusions and suggestions of the committee may be found inthe body of the report.note1. throughout this report, unless otherwise specified, the term information technology includescomputer and communications hardware, as well as the software and associated services required toeffectively use that hardware.summary and overview23information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introduction and impact of informationtechnology at the macroeconomic levelinformation technology has changed the way that most companies dobusiness. it is hard to imagine returning to an era in which payroll accounting,check processing, airline reservations, or stock exchange trades were handledwithout computer technology. in a typical business day now, over 200 millionshares are traded on the new york stock exchange alone; in 1989, u.s.commercial banks processed almost 58 billion payment transactions.1transaction volumes of this magnitude would have been impossible to handlewith the technology of 50 years ago. innovations in electronics made over thepast 40 years have been incorporated into new computers, office automationequipment, communications equipment, and their associated software systems.information technology has revolutionized services both in service sectorindustries and in the service activities that are an increasingly integral part ofgoodsproducing industries.for purposes of this report, the service industries consist primarily oftransportation, communications, wholesale and retail trade, financial services,insurance, real estate, utilities, and personal and professional services; unlessotherwise specified, information technology (it) includes computer andcommunications hardware, as well as the software and associated servicesrequired to exploit that hardware.despite the obvious and dramatic changes in the economy brought aboutby use of it, a strange paradox emerges from analysis of aggregate u.s.economic data. according to standard methods of calculation, productivity inthe business sector has grown slowly since the widespread introductionintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level24information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of it. however, the slow growth of measured u.s. productivity has not beenoccurring uniformly throughout the economy. measured productivity in themanufacturing sector, after slowing in the 1970s, has been growing at a rate ofabout 3 percent a year, as gauged by the average annual rate of increase inmeasured output per laborhour over the past 10 years. the farming sector hasalso achieved solid growth in productivity. much of the rest of the economy,however, has lagged behindšespecially construction and elements of theservice sector. the result is that business as a whole has achieved only about a1percentayear improvement in output per hour in recent years. particularlypuzzling is the weak measured performance of the service sector, which hasaccounted for the bulk of the nation's expenditures in it.the dilemma is this: although data show that over $750 billion has beeninvested in it hardware alone in the 1980s (figure 1.1), and althoughfigure 1.1 growing investment in information technology (it) by theservice sector. the only systematic data available on it expenditures accountfor hardware components but exclude software and services. thus this figureshows expenditures only for office, computing, and accounting equipment,communications equipment, instruments, and photocopy and relatedequipment; it does not include expenditures for software, electronicinformation services, data processing and network services, computerprofessional services, custom programming, systems integration, consulting, ortraining services. source: stephen roach, morgan stanley & co.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level25information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1.1 one assessment of the informationtechnology paradoxstephen roach's assessment of the information technology (it)paradox hinges on what he believes are the unique characteristics of theservice sector's competitive environment. while u.s. manufacturing firmsfaced intense competition in the 1980s, service companies were protectedby regulation, he says, and by the lack of foreign competitionšin effectshielding them from the harsh realities of market pressures. in response,he maintains, service companies became complacent and allowed theircosts to become increasingly bloated, leading to a most disappointingrecord of productivity growth that is consistent with the macroeconomicevidence presented in chapter 1.roach points out that the service sector's lagging efficiencies areparticularly disturbing because it is the segment of the economy that hasinvested most heavily in it. indeed, over the past 10 years, the servicesector spent $862 billion on it hardware alonešaccounting for about 85percent of the nation's total it expenditures. this surge of spending hasbeen enough to equip the average whitecollar worker in the servicesector with about $10,000 worth of it hardware in 1991šessentiallydouble the endowment that existed in 1980. such extraordinarycommitments to it have not yielded measurable benefits for productivity.roach maintains, because service companies have had little incentive tostrive for efficiencies, given the unique protection they enjoyed fromcompetitive realities.as a result of this rapid spending on it, roach argues, the servicesector has experienced an ominous transformation of its cost structure.service companies used to be largely variablecost producers, with thesalaries of whitecollar workers constituting the bulk of overall expenses.when business conditions toughened, whitecollar job attrition was aneffective means of cost control. now, however, courtesy of the massiveinfrastructure of installed it, service companies have a new layer of fixedcostsšin effect transforming them from variableto increasingly fixedcosts producers. the commitment to it has, therefore, crimped the abilityof service managers to adapt to changing business conditions.roach also stresses that this lack of flexibility has come at a mostinopportune moment for servicesša point in time when competitivepressures have intensified dramatically. regulation has been replaced byderegulation. moreover, the pressures of foreign competition have beenincreasingly evident in the form of a dramatic increase in foreign directinvestment in the u.s. service sectoršinflows of capital that havedeepened the pockets of many players battling for market share in theworld's richest and deepest service market.in response to this intensified competition, a new wave ofrestructuring has been unleashed in the vast service sectoršhighlightedin theintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level26information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.last 2 years by nearly a dozen megabank mergers, the failures of anumber of major airlines, and dramatic downsizing in retailing,telecommunications, accounting, advertising, and the legal profession. ineach of these industries, whitecollar jobs are now being permanentlyeliminated. roach maintains that this development would not be occurringif it were delivering what it was intended to deliveršincreased outputthrough meaningful improvements in whitecollar productivity. thus, heviews the reality of service sector restructuring as an independentconfirmation of the it paradoxša growing recognition by managers thatthere is, in fact, considerable validity to the disturbing results conveyedthrough the macroeconomic data on measured productivity. at the sametime, he also views restructuring as a powerful catalyst that is now forcingmanagers to rethink applications of itšsetting in motion a process thatcould well culminate in the longawaited macroeconomic payback fromthe use of it.source: stephen roach, morgan stanley & co.experienced executives and observers of business note that it hascontributed to important positive changes in the way that business is conducted,standard measures of productivity at the macroeconomic level still reveal fewbenefits of such changes over the past two decades.2 what are some possibleexplanations?3 one possibility is that there has been wasteful or inefficient use ofinformation technology in the service sector. although it provides apowerful tool, it can be used well or badly. the view thatmismanagement has kept the new technology from providing muchimpetus toward improving productivity has been expressed in the pastby stephen roach, a member of the committee (box 1.1).4 an alternative view is that the use of it has in fact raised productivitysignificantly and that other problems have caused the slowdown inproductivity growth. it is only one of several factors that affectproductivity. thus the slow growth of measured productivity inservices may be the result of such problems as poor performance inu.s. schools, weaknesses in technology development in areas otherthan it, changed energy prices, generally inadequate investment incapital equipment or structures, including infrastructure, and/or a shiftin employment to sectors that present limited opportunities forincreasing productivity. or perhaps a slowing of growth in measuredproductivity was inevitable as the economies of industrializedcountries matured and the relatively easily obtained gains in productivityintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level27information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.were realized. in fact, most other industrialized countries have alsoslowed in measured growth at about the same time as the u.s. economy.5 a third perspective on this issue is that it may have been used totransform business activities but that these changes are being missedby current methods of measuring productivity.6 in this view, the use ofit is bringing about real increases in productivity that are not capturedin the data. thus the slowdown in productivity growth may be partly orwholly the result of errors in measurement. a fourth view argues that itbased systems have the potential to raisethe productivity of the economy significantly, but that this result willtake time. economic historians have pointed out that major changes intechnology, such as the introduction of steam power or electrification,have affected productivity only after many years.7 thus, the payofffrom investments in it hardware may have been delayed becausesoftware development and systems reengineering have lagged behindand because it takes many years to train people to use new technologyproductively. this optimistic view of the potential for future growth inproductivity suggests that payoffs can be expected in the years aheadas u.s. service industries learn to use it more effectively. a fifth view underscores the importance of examining the impact of itat much lower levels of aggregation than is possible usingmacroeconomic data. a 1993 study by erik brynjolfsson and lorinhitt8 found that information technology "has made a substantial andsignificant contribution to the output of firms," with a return oninvestment for it that is significantly greater than that of other capitalinvestments.these various alternative approaches to explaining the it paradox are notmutually exclusive. it could well be that some mistakes were made in earlyadoptions of it, leading to wasteful investment, but that as softwaredevelopment, worker retraining, and management understanding progress,investments will payoff in measurable forms. for example, it may be appliedinitially to increase information about markets, whereas productivity mayincrease only later as the information is used to improve operations.in considering these alternatives it may be useful to keep in mind thedifference between the average and the marginal contribution of using it. theaverage contribution of using it can be determined, in principle if not inpractice, by asking how much lower productivity in the economy might be ifthere had been no electronics revolution to bring down computing costs: whatwould the level of productivity be if companies did not have access to it at all?determining the marginal contribution of using it requires asking a differentquestion: given the existing stock of it capital, what increment to productivityis gained by adding another dollar of investment in additional it? it is possiblein principle that using it has contributedintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level28information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.greatly to productivity on average, but that over investment at the margin hasled to a low return on the last dollar. often without explicitly stating so, somediscussions of the productivity paradox focus on the average contribution ofusing it, whereas others actually address the question of over investment at themargin.this studyapproach, scope, and termsmotivated by questions concerning how the use of information technologycontributes to productivity in u.s. service industries and whether the potentialbenefits of information technology are being full realized, the committeeinitially sought to assess the impact of it on productivity in the service sector.however, the committee soon determined that this was the wrong issue.although it attempted to investigate key factors in each of the fiveapproaches to explaining the productivity paradox, the committee found no wayto determine with precision the relative significance of the various alternativesas they pertain to use of it. there was general agreement that existing methodsfor measuring productivity at the aggregate level do not entirely capture thechanges taking place in the u.s. economy as a result of using it and thatfocusing on the apparent productivity paradox gives an overly narrow picture ofwhat is happening in services. indeed some committee members argued that thewhole concept of productivity, as it is currently measured, may be outmodedand that other measures of performance provide a better indication of thecontribution of it. there was a consensus that the use of it has changed theway that businesses operate, and that the locus of innovation and of theproduction of value has shifted away from traditional manufacturing activitiesand toward service industries and service activities.based on its assessment of current knowledge, the committee concludedthat productivity is an important but not a sufficient measure of benefit. asmeasured, productivity does not capture other important elements ofperformance such as the quality, flexibility, convenience, variety,responsiveness, reliability, and new opportunities that the use of it in servicescan permit. in addition, data on assessments of service sector productivity oftendo not reflect the substantial benefits customers or suppliers have received fromservice sector investments in it. if captured at all, these benefits have shown upin measures of the customer or supplierindustries' productivity.finally, the use of it in services has often transformed the structures ofboth manufacturing and service industries, created crosscompetition amongdifferent industry segments, allowed development of global supplier andcustomer networks, created whole new industries, and changed the very way inwhich commerce and management are performed.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level29information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition, it is a relatively new technology, and hence long delays canbe expected before its effective deployment. many of the service industries intowhich it has been deployed have not traditionally managed major technologicalchanges. even in industries inured to such changes, introduction of a newtechnology typically takes significant time and is accompanied by mistakes inimplementation and evaluation and by lags in profitability increases.in the course of its deliberations, the committee recognized thatunderstanding and improving the impact of it on the overall performance ofservices activities, not simply determining the productivity of it in services, isthe real challenge. moreover, the committee came to believe that the primaryimpediments to the full exploitation of it to improve service sector businesspractices and performance were not as much issues of inadequate technology asthey were issues of management. for this reason, the report focuses primarilyon the roles of management in the exploitation of it, although the remarkabledynamism that characterizes the evolution of information technology itself hasnot gone unnoticed.to better understand these complex issues, the committee chose toinvestigate the full range of impacts of it use on performance in the serviceindustries, including measured productivity as only one element in overallperformance. to do so, the committee analyzed the impacts of it use at fourlevels: the macroeconomic level, the industry level, the enterprise level, and theactivity level within the enterprise. the purpose of these inquiries was not somuch to critique past studies or results as to offer practical insights toexecutives and policymakers concerning the utility of available data and theapplication of practices that might improve it's impact on the performance ofservice activities in the future.current data and measures of productivitybased on existing data, it is impossible to determine exactly what payoffthe u.s. economy has achieved from use of it. to understand this point onemust look at the ways in which productivity is currently measured, particularlyin the service industries. there are both strengths and weaknesses in the currentstatistical base. the recently updated productivity series developed by thebureau of labor statistics for selected industries shows strong growth in manyservice industries. the aggregate data from the bureau of economic analysisalso offer useful insights about the productivity of the service sector. but bothseries may ignore or understate some key factors that contribute to productivityin several service industries. alternative measures of performance may beuseful to supplement measures of productivityšor to substitute altogether forthemšas indicators of economic performance.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level30information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national income and product accounts prepared by thebureau of economic analysisthe bureau of economic analysis (bea) of the u.s. department ofcommerce has responsibility for preparing the national income and productaccounts (nipa). the data in these accounts are comprehensive, coveringeconomic activity throughout the u.s. economy. when the framework of theaccounts was developed after world war ii, the concern of public policy was toavoid a return to the disastrous period of the great depression. the data that areprepared are used when monetary and fiscal policy are adjusted in order toinfluence the level of demand in the overall economy. the need to becomprehensive and the focus on policies affecting demand influence in manyways the nature of the data collected. thus, at times, the data are limited in theirusefulness for studying aggregate supplyšproductivity and longterm growth.traditionally, the gross national product (gnp) has been the principalaggregate measure of all of the goods and services produced in the economy.how this figure is constructed is a factor in its limitations and general validityfor assessing productivity. the basic data that go into gnp describe the sales ofgoods and services for consumption, the sales of goods (including construction)for investment, and government purchases of goods and services (including theservices government itself produces). included in gnp are final sales, that is,sales to consumers or to government or the sales of durable goods to businesses.sales of components or raw materials that are then processed further areconsidered sales of ''intermediate" goods and are not included directly in gnp.additions to inventory are counted as part of investment and are added to finalsales in computing gnp (or subtracted in the case of any depletion ofinventories).the gnp includes the income that is earned by u.s.owned assets locatedoverseas minus the earnings of foreignowned assets located in the unitedstates. when this net income is subtracted out, the resulting aggregate is calledthe gross domestic product (gdp). in its recent revisions of the nipa, bea hashighlighted gdp rather than gnp. gdp gives the best aggregate indicator ofeconomic activity within u.s. borders.the bea collects information on final sales and inventories to estimategdp in current dollars, that is, with everything priced at its actual sales price. itthen uses price information collected by the bureau of labor statistics and, forsome components, by bea itself to construct an aggregate price deflator forgdp. this deflator is used to transform gdp in current dollars into gdp inconstant dollars, also known as real gdp. real gdp reflects the total of goodsand services produced in the economy priced in baseyear prices, currently 1987prices. putting everything in common prices is designed to remove the effect ofinflation on gdp and leave onlyintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level31information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an index of the increase in the physical quantities of goods and servicesproduced in the economy, often called the gross domestic product originating inthe u.s. economy (gpo).once total gdp has been calculated, the activities of the governmentsector,9 owneroccupied housing, and the nonprofit sector are often subtractedout, and the resulting measure of output is then described as the gdporiginating in the private business sector of the economy (i.e., the gpo of thebusiness sector).business gdp can be subdivided further into the gdp produced in eachsector or industry in the economy (gpo by industry), based largely on the wageand capital income generated by the industry. obtained in this way, the outputof an industry reflects the value added produced within the industry, that is, thereal value of the sales of the industry (adjusted for any change in inventory)minus the value of materials and services purchased from other industries.10estimating the contribution to total gdp made by each constituent industryoften involves some educated guesswork, because many companies have plantsin several different industries, and so their income has to be divided up toaccount for their various activities.another difficulty encountered in determining the real (constantdollar)output of each industry comes in developing suitable industry price deflators.the dollar value of income generated in each industry is divided by an industryprice deflator in order to compute real output of the industry in 1987 dollars.this approach is analogous to the procedure used to compute aggregate realgdp in 1987 dollars, but some of the industry price deflators are more difficultto construct than the aggregate price deflator. the prices associated with boththe outputs and the inputs of some industries are intrinsically hard to measure,or data are simply not collected that allow accurate measurement.11although it develops data on business gdp and gdp by industry, the beadoes not publish data on productivity. instead, the responsibility for measuringproductivity in the u.s. economy rests with the bureau of labor statistics.productivity from the nipa data: what do the numbers show?the bureau of labor statistics (bls) makes some adjustments to thenipa data on output associated with business gdp and gdp by industry andcombines those data with data on labor input by industry to give average laborproductivity (box 1.2), computed as real gdp per employeehour. (box 1.2discusses different concepts of productivity, such as labor, capital, andmultifactor productivity.) bls publishes data on productivity only for thebusiness sector as a whole, for nonfarm business, and for manufacturing.however, bls will release on request the productivity data for individualindustries, and the resulting productivity information is often widely quoted.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level32information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 1.1 shows the rates of growth of average labor productivity for thebusiness sector as a whole and for the major industry sectors as prepared bybls using the bea data.12 the figures for the productivity of the businesssector show the pattern that has become familiar. productivity grew at a rate ofa little less than 3 percent a year in the business sector as a whole from 1948 to1973 and then fell to 0.63 percent a year from 1973 to 1979 before making apartial recovery from 1979 to 1989.the business sector is divided into goods and serviceproducingindustries, and shows solid growth in both parts of the economy over the periodtable 1.1 average annual growth in gross domestic product per laborhour formajor sectors of the u.s. economy, 1948 to 1989average annual rate of growth (% per year)differencein rate ofgrowth,194873 and197389sector194873197379197989197389business2.880.631.351.081.80goods producing3.210.712.311.711.50farming4.640.113.222.042.60mining4.025.562.130.824.84construction0.582.020.711.201.78manufacturing2.871.803.332.750.12durable goodsexcludingnonelectricalmachinery2.561.552.352.050.51nonelectricalmachinerya2.031.069.106.013.98nondurable goods3.402.372.372.371.03service producing2.490.580.840.741.75transportation2.310.150.950.651.66communication5.224.274.844.630.59utilities5.872.662.352.463.41trade2.740.352.101.181.56wholesale3.141.212.651.181.96retail2.400.141.721.131.27fireb1.440.360.050.171.27services2.170.840.010.321.85governmententerprise0.150.620.040.260.41generalgovernment0.210.030.530.340.13a nonelectrical machinery hours from bureau of labor statistics.b finance, insurance, and real estate.source: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1991. survey of currentbusiness, april, tables 6.2 and 6.11.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level33information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1.2 measuring capital and multifactorproductivitymeasures of productivity relate physical output to physical input. assuch, they encompass a family of measures ranging from measures ofsinglefactorinput productivity, such as output per unit of labor input oroutput per unit of capital input, to measures of multifactor productivity,such as output per unit of labor and capital combined. in the form ofindexes these measures present the change in output associated with thecorresponding change in input. in other words, the indexes show thechange in resources (labor, capital, materials, or all combined) used toproduce the output of the activity being measured. they do not measurehow much of the change in output came from any of the individual inputfactors, but rather how the many factors affecting the production processresulted in changes in resource use.the most extensively developed and widely used measure ofproductivity is the one relating output to labor inputšlabor productivity. itis a tool relevant for analyzing labor costs, real income, and employmentand, as a practical matter, is most easily measured. however, an increaseor decrease in output per employeehour does not imply that labor issolely or necessarily even primarily responsible for improved or worsenedproductivity. movements in output per hour reflect technologicalinnovations, changes in capital input, scale of production, education,management, and many other factors as well as the skills and efforts ofthe work force.average labor productivity is the ratio of output to labor input. laborinput is chosen as the most important factor of productionšthecompensation of labor is about twothirds of total value added. but laborproductivity can change for reasons that have nothing to do with the workforce. various factors can cause labor productivity to change over time.for example, there have been substantial increases in the amount ofcapital used per worker. technology itself and the organization of workmay change. these considerations do not invalidate the concept of laborproductivity; they simply mean that it is important to interpret it correctly.also, it may be necessary to choose among a family of measures relatingoutput to labor, capital, and other inputs, some of which adjust for quality,and some of which do not.many economists prefer a concept called multifactor productivity ortotalfactor productivity. when the value added measure of output is used,growth in multifactor productivity is computed as the growth rate of outputminus a weighted average of the growth rates of labor and capital inputs.the weights are then shares of labor and capital costs in total cost.increases in multifactor productivity reflect increases in the efficiency withwhich labor and capital are used to produce output.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level34information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.when considering multifactor productivity, it is important to find agood measure of the capital input to production, but such measures arehard to find. so, in practice the main capital input measures reflect onlyphysical capitalšstructures and equipment. the stock of physical capitalin use is estimated from the history of investment over time and fromestimates of the extent of scrapping and depreciation. land use is alsoincluded in many capital measures.these basic measures of productivity have been extended in severalways. a weighted or adjusted labor input can be used to reflect thechanging level of human capital in the work force as a result of changes inage, experience, and years of schooling. for individual industries andsectors of the economy, there are measures of multifactor productivity thatuse the gross output of the industry rather than its value added. materials,energy, and purchased services are then considered inputs intoproduction, like capital and labor.human capital is one form of nonphysical or intangible capital, andthere is some concern that other forms of nonphysical capital havebecome increasingly important but are not counted. manufacturingindustries spend heavily on r&d, and many industries in themanufacturing sector and in services spend heavily in developingsoftware and computer systems. members of the committee familiar withcomputer systems development estimate that these costs are two to threetimes or more the cost of computer hardware. these additional costsinclude software, hardware, and software to connect to other computersor to network pcs, support staff, and r&d support for new systems. it hasbeen argued, for example, that to some airlines the value of theirreservations systems is greater than the value of their airplanes.taking account of the full range of different types of capital does nothelp explain slow growth in productivity, however. in fact it could make theslowdown seem worsešerrors that lead to an understatement of outputlead to an understatement of productivity, but errors that lead to anunderstatement of inputs lead to an overstatement of productivity. if therehas been an acceleration of investment in nonphysical capital over thelast several years, as seems likely, then multifactor productivity may showa larger slowdown than labor productivity. if we are getting so muchsmarter, why are we not getting richer?taking account of nonphysical capital could change perceptions ofthe slow rate of investment in the u.s. economy overall, however.discussions of u.s. competitiveness often focus on the low rate ofinvestment in the u.s. economy in plants and equipment in the unitedstates relative to other countries. but perhaps the structure of the u.s.economy is simply making that kind of investment less important.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level35information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from 1948 to 1973, when productivity in the goodsproducing sector grewat a rate of 3.2 percent a year and in the serviceproducing industries at 2.5percent a year. contrary to common perception, substantial growth in theproductivity of the service industries was evident prior to 1973, even taking intoaccount the various flaws in the data. notable over this period is the stronggrowth of productivity in transportation, communications, utilities, trade, andthe narrowly defined services sector.13as table 1.1 indicates, productivity growth in both the goods and serviceproducing sectors collapsed after 1973. productivity had actually begun todecline prior to 1973 in both the mining and the construction sectors, and thisdecline continued in the 1970s. manufacturing and farming managed to sustainpositive growth in productivity over this period, but at a much slower pace.within the serviceproducing industries, there was substantially slower growthafter 1973; only the communications industry sustained its pre1973performance.since 1979, the gap has widened between the productivity growth rates ofthe goods and the serviceproducing sectors. the goodsproducing sector hasmade a substantial recovery in growth, especially in manufacturing; onlyconstruction has shown continued weakness. the serviceproducing sector hasalso experienced some recovery, especially in trade, but its overall recovery hasbeen much less than that in the goodsproduction sector overall and certainlyvery much less than the recovery in manufacturing.one of the distinctive patterns shown in table 1.1 is that productivity hasgrown extremely rapidly in the nonelectrical machinery industry, which is partof manufacturing. the computer industry is the main source of growth in thissubsector, and the very rapid decline in computer prices has been captured bythe price deflator for this industry and is powering its growth. the extraordinaryperformance of the computer industry is making a major contribution to themeasured recovery of manufacturing's growth in productivity. in fact, thepost1973 recovery of the whole goodsproducing sector owes a great deal toproductivity in the production of computers. among the manufacturingindustries, several still had weak growth in the 1980s. the improvement ingrowth in the 1980s has not been uniform even within goodsproducingindustries.what do the macroeconomic data say about the contribution of it toproductivity in the serviceproducing sector since its widespread introductionbeginning in the mid1970s? the record of productivity in this sector is highlyheterogeneous. telecommunications, for example, has long been a leader ingrowth in u.s. productivity and has benefited greatly from it. automaticswitching and other developments have enabled an enormous increase intelephone service while labor input has been reduced. the telecommunicationsindustry is one for which a good measure of output can be obtained.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level36information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.outside of communications, however, the macroeconomic data revealscant evidence of it's contribution to productivity. for example, there is a set ofhandicraft services (including teaching, health care, automotive repair, legalservices, and police protection) whose costs have benefited very little from it,even though in some cases the quality of the product has benefited greatly.areas in which a major impact might have been expected, such as finance,insurance, and real estate (fire) and the narrowly defined services sector, haveshown almost no growth in productivity since 1979. data on the productivity ofthese services have reflected persistently slow growth (at least when the figureson productivity are not adjusted for improved quality of products), and theirrelative prices have consequently risenša facet of the productivity paradoxdescribed earlier in this chapter.the committee has noted that the data on productivity computed by blsusing output series of the nipa are published by bls only at a very aggregatedlevel; bls does not publish the data on service sector productivity. althoughthese figures can be readily calculated from the commerce department'sbreakdown of gnp by industry and in fact are widely cited, the bls itselfbelieves that the results obtained for the service sector as a whole lack thequality to merit publication. there are several reasons for the agency's concerns.problems with the data from the nipathe three main problems with estimating productivity from the nipaoutput data are (1) the difficulty of assessing each industry's contribution tototal output (discussed above), (2) the problem of accounting correctly for newproducts and for changes in quality, and (3) the fact that in some industriesoutput is actually measured by inputs.difficulty in accounting for new products and changes in quality animportant deficiency in the data on productivity based on the nipa is that theimpacts of new products and services and of changes in the quality of existingproducts and services are understated or ignored.14 this is a recognized problemwith respect to goodsproducing industries that introduce new productsconstantly. for several years after new products are introduced, their prices arenot used in the calculation of the price deflators. for example, after color tvswere first introduced, the price index for televisions continued to be basedsolely on black and white tvs for some time. of course the production and saleof color tvs were counted in the nominal or dollar value of output, so that colortvs did to some extent add immediately to productivity. but the price indexcaptured neither the benefit to consumers of being able to watch in color, northe rapid decline in price that occurs commonly with most new products in thefirst few yearsintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level37information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.after their introduction. overall, the impact of color tvs on productivity wasunderstated.understatement of the contribution of new service products to productivityis also a serious problem. for example, measured growth in productivity hasbeen slow in the insurance industry because the dollar value of insurance outputis deflated by the price index for the activities being insured against. incomefrom the provision of medical insurance is deflated by the rapidly rising pricedeflator for medical care costs. what is not reflected in the data on productivityis that the insurance industry has in fact introduced a range of different policyoptions, tailoring the policies to customers' particular needs. computertechnology has provided the means for this individualized service. at the sametime, according to some observers, computer and telecommunicationstechnology has drastically reduced the length of time needed to processclaims.15 neither the customization nor the convenience factor is reflected inthe data on measured real output. many other service industries have alsoprovided innovative new services. for example, the financial services industryhas introduced a variety of new investment securities, and thetelecommunications industry can offer highspeed data transmission lines andnew consumer services, such as call forwarding or caller identification.moreover, the ability to communicate information almost instantaneouslyallows knowledge workers to operate in entirely new ways. companies withoperations in several countries can allow employees in the united states, forinstance, to work cooperatively and concurrently with employees in london ortokyo.changes in the quality of existing goods and services can be just asimportant as completely new products or servicesšsometimes more important.although changes in quality are sometimes counted, they are often missed inmeasures of productivity. in manufacturing, if a newly introduced model of aproduct has specific additional features (e.g., an ice maker) that enable themanufacturer to charge higher prices, then this change in quality is counted asan increase in output and thus as a contributor to increased productivity. but if anew model of a refrigerator simply has a better design but takes the same inputsto manufacture, then this change in quality will generally be missed. similarly,in services, a higherquality (more reliable, more flexible) service that requiresinputs similar to those needed for a lesser service will be ignored in measures ofproductivity unless the price can be increased. for example, in the supermarketindustry, reported growth in productivity is low, but change in quality is a majorconcern. table 1.2 shows a variety of measures of u.s. supermarketproductivity and some selected measures of the quality of service beingprovided. real sales per hour of labor input or per square foot of selling spacehave grown little over time, or have even fallen over some years. but there hasbeen a huge increase in the variety of products offered and in the quality ofother services provided.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level38information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.need for wider use of hedonic price indexes for some products, theprice deflators are adjusted to capture the effects of changes in quality. forexample, when a new model of computer is introduced that runs at higher speedor has more memory, these changes are reflected in what is called a hedonicprice index. this price index has been in use for the computer industry for anumber of years and is based on a statistical technique that estimates how muchcustomers value speed, memory, or other characteristics of computers. the veryrapid measured growth of productivity in the computer industry testifies to theimpact a hedonic index can have. estimated growth in that industry'sproductivity was much slower before the hedonic price index was introduced.residential housing and automobiles are other important industries for whichhedonic price indexes are used, although in neither case is the index as powerfulas for the computer industry. the residential housing index adjusts mostly forthe square footage of the houses built.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level39information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hedonic price indexes are a very good tool for capturing the effects ofchanges in quality. they can be used to evaluate the different characteristics ofa good or a service, track how these change over time, and then estimate howthe market values these changing characteristics. unfortunately, use of theseindexes is very much the exception rather than the rule within the goodsproducing industries, and these indexes are not used at all for price deflators forthe service industries. many people in the service industries believe that newproducts have proliferated to the point that conventional concepts ofproductivity are breaking down. it is no longer possible, for example, to talkabout mail services as a homogeneous group, because overnight mail is really adifferent product from regular mail. unless systematic attempts are made tocapture the effects of new or different products being provided in the servicesector, the quality of the data on u.s. productivity will decline.use of data on input as measures of output earlier in this chapter it wasnoted that financial services companies have been very innovative inintroducing new services and that the techniques used for measuringproductivity will lead to understatement or omission of the impact of theseinnovations. this problem is actually much worse with respect to bans andother depository institutions, which represent about 30 percent of totalemployment in the finance, insurance, and real estate (fire) subsector, becausethere is no valid price deflator for this group. the deflator used is an index ofcompensation paid to employees in the industry, and this deflator has the effectof assuming that real output in the banking industry group rises oneforonewith the number of employees.16 the way in which real output is computedensures that almost no change in measured productivity will be observed in thebanking industry group, regardless of what the actual increase in productivitymay have been.industryspecific measures of productivity developed by thebureau of labor statisticsthe bureau of labor statistics (bls) has developed another set ofproductivity measures for services that is not subject to the constraints imposedby adhering to the framework of the nipa. these measures are made for anumber of goodsproducing industries and also for many industries classified inthe department of commerce's standard industrial classification (sic) systemas service industries.at present, bls publishes indexes of output per hour, that is, output perunit of labor input, for selected industries for the major service activities. theseinclude selected industries classified at sic code 40 and higherštransportation,communications, public utilities, trade, finance, insurance, and real estate, andbusiness and personal services. indexes of productivityintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level40information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are published for 39 service industries, covering about 42 percent of all workersin the service industries in the private business sector.the bls also publishes measures of productivity for the federalgovernment with separate detail for the common functions provided by federalagencies, such as recordkeeping, library services, building and groundsmaintenance, loans and grants, and so on. in addition, work is currently beingconducted on the development of indexes of productivity for hospitals andadditional wholesale trade activities.the measures of output used in these bls series are independentlydeveloped from data on sales, prices, and physical units whenever possible,combined with labor input weights. in some instances the data on labor inputweights are not available, and approximations such as gross margins have to beused. the data on labor input cover the hours of all persons employed in aparticular industry, including the selfemployed, and are based on the blssurveys of establishment employment and hours. the ''hours of employees" arebased on hourspaid data from the surveys of establishment employment andhours. the hours of the selfemployed are derived from the household survey ofemployment and hours conducted for the bls by the bureau of the census.what do the bls data on selected industries show?table 1.3 shows the compound annual percentage change in output peremployeehour for selected service industries over the period from 1973 to1990, the longest period for which continuous measures from bls areavailable. contrary to the general belief that service industries are characterizedby uniformly low growth in productivity, a wide range in the rates of growth isevident. over the most recent decade, 1980 to 1990, the rates range from adecline of 4 percent per year for gas utilities to an increase of 9 percent per yearfor railroads. the increase for railroads actually exceeds that for almost allmanufacturing industries, in which significant rates of growth in productivityhave occurred. even over the longer period from 1973 to 1990, when the rangeof rates of growth was narrower, there was still considerable variation acrossindustries.gaps in bls data and measures of productivityalthough bls publishes at least one measure of productivity for eachmajor service activity groupštransportation, communications, and so onšthere are major areas within each of these groups for which no measure ofproductivity has been developed and published.one reason for these gaps is that it is difficult to define and developmeaningful indicators of output and/or input in many service industries. inintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level41information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level42information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most cases adequate measures have to be derived from data obtained insurveys conducted for purposes other than measuring productivity. formeasuring productivity, the output indicator should be final to the activity beingexamined, quantifiable, and consistent in coverage with, but independent of, theinput indicators; should reflect differences in the quality of the activity beingevaluated; and should represent the major part of the activities of the sector. formany service activities, the available data do not meet these criteria. the majorgap within communications is radio and television broadcasting; in electricity,gas, and sanitary services, it is sanitary services. in trade, the gap in coverage isin the area of wholesale trade; in finance, insurance, and real estate the gap is inthe real estate component. in business and personal services, no measures areavailable for health, education, and legal services. finally, in the area ofgovernment, the major gap is in state and local government.conclusions on productivity measures developed from bls datathe bls has made considerable progress in developing indexes ofproductivity for selected service industries. the measures of productivity forsome of these industries are very accurate, clearly reflecting changes in outputper unit of labor input. because the concepts of output are relatively straightforward and appropriate data are readily available, the measures fortransportation, communications, and public utilities fall into this category. themeasures for some of the trade industries present some difficulties primarilybecause of the heterogeneity of the categories of merchandise line sales and thelimited availability of adequate price deflators. however, these indexes ofproductivity are useful indicators of trends over time and are continually beingimproved as the number of detailed price indexes increases.17many difficulties remain in clarifying some of the basic conceptualproblems of defining the output of certain service industries, and manyinadequacies are present in the data available.18 in particular, the bls does nothave the resources to follow the rapidly changing nature of the output in manyservices industries, changes that have been enabled by the use of it in manycases. bls's measurement of productivity is good if output over time can becaptured adequately by a simple measure such as passengermiles. it does notdo so well when other characteristics are important, and in such situations itsuffers from the same kinds of problems that the bea data suffer from. forexample, in the case of airlines, no account is taken of changes in the frequencyof service, ease of booking or changing reservations, flying time, number ofstops, ontime record, and so on. for many service industries, these aspects ofservice quality are crucial.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level43information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.alternative measures of productivity andperformancethe slowdown in the growth of measured productivity in services has beenthe subject of great concern among policymakers, but productivity is only onemeasure of economic performance. for the business manager, other measures ofperformance may provide a better guide to longterm profitability and success.productivity and profitability are linked in that, other things being equal, acompany that is able to raise its productivity relative to that of its competitorswill be able to lower its costs and raise its margins or reduce prices to increasemarket share.but other things are not always equal. for example, a company thatprovides a unique new product or service may be able to raise its profitabilityby more than a company that simply concentrates on raising productivity in itsexisting lines of business. or an industry may find that its market conditionschange. the deregulation of many service industries has forced them to adaptand, in many cases, to raise productivity. but the increase in competition withinthese industries has lowered prices, and margins and profits are hard to comeby. airlines, railroads, and trucking are all in this position.for workers, employment may be more important than productivity,especially in the short run. in fact some people see a tradeoff between jobs andincreases in productivity. the u.s. economy has been very successful over theyears in increasing the number of jobs it has generated, and the largest numberof these have been in the service sector. the fear in some quarters is that assome laborintensive companies in the service sector seek to boost theirproductivity via restructuring, the creation of fulltime jobs may slow.19however, downsizing is not a longterm recipe for sustained growth inproductivity. once companies have eliminated excess staff, they will need tolook beyond downsizing and restructuring and embark on a path of judiciousexpansion that includes increases in the rate of hiring and in capacity. recentevidence suggests that this may be starting to happen. over the period fromoctober 1992 to may 1993, job growth averaged 165,000 jobs per month, wellin excess of the paltry gains of 18,000 per month that occurred in the first 17months of the recovery. for example, during 1992 business spending on capitalequipment has risen at an annual rate of 16 percent, with 60 percent of theincrease concentrated in it hardware.for some purposes international competitiveness is as important or moreimportant than productivity. again, the two are linked, but externalcircumstances may change so that the two indicators of performance movedifferently from each other. for example, the u.s. auto industry and the u.s.textile industry have both succeeded reasonably well in raising productivityintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level44information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in recent years. but both industries have come under intense competition fromforeign companies that have done as well or better in increasing productivityand product quality or have been able to make use of less costly labor. a recentstudy indicates that compared to similar industries of other countries, u.s.service industries have generally higher absolute levels of productivity(box 1.3), although u.s. rates of growth in productivity have lagged those ofmany other nations.20 furthermore, the united states maintains a healthy $52billion service trade surplus with foreign nations.21observations and conclusionsmany factors influence productivity: it affects manyaspects of performanceas noted at the beginning of this chapter, many factors besides theapplication of information technology determine growth in the productivity ofthe u.s. service sector. this is not surprising, since output itself is a function ofmultiple inputs and technology, the latter affecting how inputs are combined inproduction. productivity is also influenced, for example, by other kinds ofcapital investment, such as buildings for retailers or airplanes for airlinecompanies. the fact that over the past 15 to 20 years slow growth inproductivity has been accompanied by rapid investment in it has suggested tosome people that the use of it has actually caused the slowdown in productivitygrowth. but the committee determined that it is a mistake to conclude that it isthe culprit. it surely is in some cases, but in others it has probably made a largepositive contribution. the key point is that the currently availablemacroeconomic data cannot precisely measure how investments in it alone areinfluencing productivity in the services. as documented and discussed above inthis chapter, the committee's findings have led it to make the followingobservations about current macroeconomic data on service sector productivityand how investments in and the use of it have influenced these data: the bea macroeconomic data do not deal adequately with changes inthe quality of the services provided. and it is often used to improvethe quality of services. the development and use of better measures ofoutput might show a very different picture of growth in productivity. the bea macroeconomic data do not adequately allow for the effectsof new services, and it is often used to provide new services. again,the development and use of better measures of output that account fornew services could show a radically different picture of growth inproductivity. existing data on the capital input to production do not take account ofthe knowledge capital (see box 1.2) that is considered by many to be theintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level45information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1.3 a recent study of service sectorproductivity in the united states and othercountriesthe global institute of mckinsey & co., assisted by economistsmartin baily, francis bator, and robert solow, completed in 1992 acomparison of the productivity of the airline, banking, generalmerchandise retailing, telecommunications, and restaurant industries inthe united states relative to the comparable industries in europeancountries and japan.for three of the industriesšairlines, banking, and telecommunicationsšthe study used quantitative output measures of the type used by thebureau of labor statistics in its analysis of specific industries. forexample, in airlines, different output measures were combined, such aspassengermiles, number of aircraft maintained, and number ofpassengers served. adjustments were made to allow for such factors asdifferent route lengths and fleet structures. for the other two industriesvalue added was the measure of output, with the internationalcomparisons made using what are called purchasing power parityexchange rates.except in the restaurant industry, where productivity was comparablein the countries studied, the findings indicated that the u.s. industries hada lead in productivity, usually in the range of 20 to 40 percent. severalexplanations for this productivity lead were examined. for example, it wasfound that u.s. airlines' larger average size gave them some advantageover european airlines. differences in the mix of output and in capitalintensity were also significant in some cases. the most importantdifference overall, however, was found to be differences in how the workforce is organized and managed. there is greater competitive pressureand less restrictive regulation in the u.s. industries than in those of othercountries studied.the mckinsey study is based on an analysis in a single year (1989)of productivity levels and therefore does not directly contradict the bureauof economic analysis macroeconomic data that show a slow rate ofgrowth of productivity in the service sector in the united states. but thefinding that u.s. services have a substantial lead over other countriescould reinforce the concerns about the bea data that are presented in thischapter.in general the mckinsey study concluded that differences intechnology were not the most important factor in the productivitydifferences that they found, since the technology is available toenterprises in all of the countries studied if they wish to use it. fortelecommunications and banking, the study did conclude that a failure toadopt the most advanced information technology had hurt productivity inother countries. the telecommunications industry in germany, forexample, had not introduced electronic switching and could not offerbusiness customers highspeed data transmission. and in the bankingindustry, both germany andintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level46information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the united kingdom suffered a productivity disadvantage becausefewer automatic teller machines had been deployed. u.s. banks hadinvested more heavily in terminals, allowing many activities to becentralized that were still carried out less productively in branchesoverseas, particularly so in the united kingdom. most important part of the capital base of the service industries. the useof any improved measure of capital input could also drastically changethe estimates of growth in productivity. in some service industries, the bea data exclude, by definition, anychanges in measured productivity because real output is measured bythe number of employees working in the industry. banking andfinancial services are the most important examples.for the business decision maker, productivity may be an importantconsideration but will often not be the most important one. productivity isimportant for business because a company that has weak productivity in its corebusiness activities, relative to other companies, is tying one hand behind itsback in its competitive struggle. but productivity is rarely sufficient forbusiness success and should not be the sole or even the primary basis for mostcompanies' decisions about investment in it. providing value to the consumer isoften more important than increasing productivity, and such circumstances willrequire that measures of performance be used to track growth in the economyand to evaluate the part played by it. making better business and policydecisions about investing in it requires having more information about what itis being used for than can be provided by the standard data on productivity. inchapters 2 through 4, the committee discusses how it has been used to improveperformance at the industry, enterprise, and activity levels of the u.s. servicesector.organization and scope of this reportin refining its approach in response to its initial findings, the committeechose to investigate the full range of impacts of the use of it on performance inthe service sector. thus the committee examined the nature and measurement ofperformance in services at progressively less aggregated levels of analysis: theindustry level (chapter 2), the enterprise level (chapter 3), and the activity level(chapter 4). these chapters are supplemented by appendixes that provide moremethodological detail and supporting data: appendix a describes selectedresearch on economic and strategic impactsintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level47information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of it; appendix b describes methods used by the bureau of economic analysisto derive measures of output; appendix c describes methods used by thebureau of labor statistics for deriving measures of productivity; appendix ddescribes how the committee conducted its study, including the interviewprocess used by the committee to inform its deliberations and a summary of itsresults.chapters 2 through 4 culminate in chapter 5, which discusses implicationsfor managers in organizations wishing to improve their management ofinformation technology, and chapter 6, which presents issues andrecommendations for public policy.to put this report in perspective, some observations on the committee'soperation and scope of concern are appropriate. first, this report was shaped byinteractions within a multidisciplinary committee that included businessexecutives, economists, behavioral scientists, management theorists, andtechnologists. second, the committee considered the context of internationalcompetitiveness in conducting its analysis, but detailed investigation ofinternational conditions was beyond its scope. third, although smallercompanies were represented in the data that support industry and nationallevelanalyses, the committee's resources did not permit a systematic examination ofthe distinguishing characteristics of smaller enterprises.in addition to using the standard macroeconomic data collected anddeveloped by government agencies, the committee drew on observations frommanagers and executives in industry (a group including some of the committee'sown members, as well as numerous others). these observations were obtainedthrough interviews that were used to develop and check insights, not to generatequantitative data. appendixes provide methodological and supporting detailsabout the committee's sources of information and its approach. appendix e liststhe interviewed executives, whose observations helped the committee tounderstand the processes by which it projects are planned, implemented, andevaluated.at the macroeconomic level, the committee was concerned about theconstraining effects of looking at services from the traditional perspectives ofgoodsproduction (chapter 1). at present, most of the terminology,methodology, and data for analyzing productivity (and performance) derivefrom earlier studies in the goodsproducing industries, but to the committee,most of these seemed inadequate for understanding trends in the service sector.for example, whereas productivity in goodsproducing activities is measured interms that refer to relatively concrete units of output, dollar sales, or profits,performance in services may relate to more subjective quantities such as timing,quality, comfort, or convenience. measurement difficulties are a theme that runsthrough the report.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level48information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes and references1. this figure is for checks cleared, deposits processed, and cash distributed by human tellers. cashdistributed by automated teller machines is not included. data reported in 1992 by the globalinstitute of mckinsey and company (see box 1.3).2. see, for example, baily, m., and r. gordon, 1986, "the productivity slowdown: measurementissues and the explosion of computer power," pp. 347431 in brookings papers on economicactivity, w. brainard and g. perry (eds.), brookings institution, washington, d.c.; roach, stephens., 1988, "technology and the services sector: america's hidden competitive challenge," intechnology in services, bruce r. guile and james brian quinn (eds.), national academy press,washington, d.c.; roach, stephen s., 1991, ''services under siege: the restructuring imperative,"harvard business review, septemberoctober, pp. 8291; and strassmann, p., 1990, the businessvalue of computers, information economics press, new canaan, conn.3. a paper by paul attewell that was brought to the attention of the committee while this report wasin press addresses some of these issues. see attewell, paul. 1994. "information technology and theproductivity paradox," in understanding the productivity paradox: organizational linkages,douglas h. harris (ed.), national academy press, washington, d.c., in preparation.4. one variant of this idea suggests that it has transformed the way business is conducted and isessential to competitive success, but the changes it has facilitated do not raise the overall output ofthe economy. for example, individual companies can use it to target their marketing campaignsmore effectively, but overall industry sales are not affected and so neither is productivity measuredat the industry level.5. for a discussion of the slowdown in the united states and other countries, see baumol, williamj., sue anne batey blackman, and edward n. wolff, 1989, productivity and american leadership:the long view , mit press, cambridge, mass.; and baily, martin n., and alok k. chakrabarti,1988, innovation and the productivity crisis, brookings institution, washington, d.c. however,note that u.s. productivity growth rates that lag behind those of its international competitors are adistinct concern for u.s. policymakers, even though u.s. base productivity levels may still behigher than those of its competitors.6. see, for example, kendrick, j.w., 1987, "service sector productivity," business economics,april, pp. 1824.7. david, paul a. 1990. "the dynamo and the computer: an historical perspective on the modernproductivity paradox," american economic review, may, pp. 355361.8. brynjolfsson, erik, and lorin hitt. 1993. "is information systems spending productive? newevidence and new results," mit sloan school of management, working paper 357193,september 24. (to appear in proceedings of the 14th international conference on informationsystems .)9. the part of the government sector that is subtracted is "general government." this includes thesalaries of government workers in the various federal, state, and local agencies. the output of"government enterprises," such as the postal service and the tennessee valley authority, areincluded in the business sector of the economy.10. the capital goods purchased by an industry are not subtracted from the gross output of theindustry. value added in an industry reflects the payments to both labor and capital inputs to theindustry.11. one difficulty is that there is not a direct match between products and industries. plants inseveral industries cast their own steel products, for example. an industry deflator should be basedon the prices of the products that are produced by the plants that are classified within that industry.12. also included in table 1.1 is productivity for the government sector, although any productivitythat shows up in the data is purely the result of shifts in the composition of government activities.by assumption there is no productivity growth within government activities.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level49information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13. the narrowly defined services sector consists of hotels and other lodging places, personalservices, business services, auto repair and similar services, motion pictures, amusement andrecreation services, health care, legal services, education, and social services. by contrast, the termservice sector is used throughout this report to denote the entire range of service industries, as notedon the opening page of this chapter.14. though important when productivity is used as an indicator of living standards, adjustments forchanges in product quality can be misleading if the issue at hand is product cost analysis. forexample, if the number of teaching hours per student does not decline, college costs must rise asquickly as faculty salaries, whether or not the quality of teaching changes.15. not everyone agrees that claims processing has speeded up. there have been complaints thatsome insurance companies have delayed payments.16. for example, the gdp originating in the commercial banking industry per fulltime employee in1980 ($37,600 in 1982 dollars) was virtually identical to that in 1988 ($37,900 in 1982 dollars).this small change was due entirely to a different structure in the commercial banking industry.17. the use of gross margin weighting as an approximation of labor input weighting is appropriateas long as labor costs represent a significant portion of gross margins and the elements of marginsdo not change over time.18. the difficulties that remain involve clarifying some basic conceptual problems of definingoutput for some service industries and filling gaps in data available. with regard to data, more andimproved data are needed on prices, value of output, capital, and material input. the bls and othergovernment statistical agencies have undertaken initiatives to expand the coverage in the servicesector, and the results of these efforts should lead to better and more comprehensive industrymeasures. collection of more measures of service industry prices, expanded data on hours workedthat provide more disaggregation, and continued work on publicsector productivity by bls are buta few examples. however, some areasše.g., education, entertainment, legal and social services, andmany segments of medical servicesšpresent such severe conceptual and data problems thatappropriate solutions may be a long time in coming. additional resources may have only a limitedeffect until the conceptual problems can be dealt with.in expanding the number of industries for which measures are prepared, the bls has had to takethese problems, among others, into consideration, and this has limited the number of serviceindustries for which measures have been developed. nevertheless, adequate measures ofproductivity have been developed for many service industries. the problems of measuringproductivity are different for each of the various service industries, and the approaches followed vary.19. the recovery of 1993 is widely believed to be relatively weak by historical standards. forexample, unpublished data from the bureau of labor statistics, u.s. department of labor, indicatethat jobs in the ninth quarter of this recovery rose by 0.3 percent as compared to their nadir in thefirst quarter of 1991. by comparison, the corresponding figure for the eight previous recessions is6.8 percent. in this recovery, manufacturing firms seem to be relying more on overtime than on newhiring to meet expanding demand for goods, while service firms seem to be relying more on hiringparttime workers with few benefits (for one example, see swoboda, frank, 1992, "in omaha, theunderside of a jobs promise," washington post, october 25, p. h1). the result in manufacturinghas been fewer jobs with longer work weeks, and in services more jobs with shorter work weeks(see uchitelle, louis, 1993, "fewer jobs filled as factories rely on overtime pay," new yorktimes, may 16, p. 1). even strong companies are cutting labor costs to maintain or increase profitmargins (see uchitelle, louis, 1993, ''strong companies are joining trend to eliminate jobs," newyork times, july 26).20. recent data suggest that the slowdown in growth of u.s. productivity has been accompanied bya slowdown in that of the other leading industrial countries, and that the percentageintroduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level50information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.decline in japan has been almost exactly as great as that in the united states. further, all industrialcountries have moved closer to the united states in levels of productivity and gdp per capita,although they have not caught up with this country in real terms (i.e., in terms of purchasing powerparity exchange rates). with the race narrowing, it is a tautology that the laggards must be runningfaster than the leader, thus explaining how the united states can be ahead of everyone else inproductivity level, although its productivity growth rate lags behind those of many of the othercountries.21. u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1992. survey of currentbusiness, june, table 3, "selected services transactions," p. 96.bibliography for chapter 1brand, horst, and john duke. 1982. "productivity in commercial banking: computers spur theadvance," monthly labor review, vol. 105 (december), pp. 1927.brand, horst, and zaul ahmed. 1986. "productivity in beauty and barber shops," monthly laborreview, vol. 109.carnes, richard b. 1978. "laundry and cleaning services pressed to post productivity gains."monthly labor review, vol. 101 (february), pp. 3842.carnes, richard b., and horst brand. 1977. "productivity and new technology in eating anddrinking places," monthly labor review, vol. 100 (september), pp. 915.dean, edwin, and kent kunze. 1990. "productivity measurement in service industries," outputmeasurement in the services sector, national bureau of economic research, cambridge,mass.duke, john. 1977. "newcar dealers experience longterm gains in productivity," monthly laborreview, vol. 100 (march), pp. 2933.friedman, brian. 1984. "productivity in the apparel and accessories stores industries," monthlylabor review, vol. 107 (october), pp. 3742.friedman, brian, and john l. carey. 1975. "productivity in gasoline stations, 19581973," monthlylabor review, vol. 98 (february), pp. 3236.kutscher, ronald, and jerome a. mark. 1983. "the serviceproducing sector: some commonperceptions reviewed," monthly labor review, vol. 106 (april), pp. 2124.mark, jerome a. 1982. "measuring productivity in the services," monthly labor review, vol. 105(june), pp. 38.ššš. 1988. "measuring productivity in service industries," in technology in services: policiesfor growth, trade, and employment, bruce r. guile and james brian quinn (eds.),national academy press, washington, d.c.mincer, jacob. 1974. schooling, experience and earnings, columbia university press, new york.roach, stephen s. 1991. "services under siege: the restructuring imperative," harvard businessreview, septemberoctober, pp. 8291.smith, anthony d. 1972. the measurement and interpretation of service output changes, nationaleconomic development office, london.waldorf, william h., kent kunze, lawrence s. rosenblum, and michael b. tannen. 1986. "newmeasures of the contribution of education and experience to u.s. productivity growth,"paper presented at annual meetings of american economic association, dec. 2830, neworleans, la.introduction and impact of information technology at themacroeconomic level51information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2impacts of information technology at theindustry levelas discussed in chapter 1, it is difficult to generalize about the impacts ofinformation technology (it) on productivity or performance in the servicesector, because the effects of using it cannot be isolated from the effects ofother factors and because the service sector is highly heterogeneous. a betterpicture of it's impact can therefore be obtained by focusing on individualindustries. although firms differ within a given industry, they must generallyshare a common environment whose factors are relevant to their performancešfor example, an industry's requirements for particular kinds of workers andskills, the quality of its labormanagement relations, the presence or absence ofregulation, how capital or laborintensive the industry is, and the kinds oftechnology applications associated with it all influence the performance of thefirms within that industry.likewise, an industry's environment affects the nature of the benefits thatcompanies can realize from use of it. although the dimensions on whichperformance may be evaluatedšsuch as the nature of improvements in productquality, increases in product variety, and product innovationsšwill thereforevary across industries, industry context is important for understanding both howand how much the use of it has affected an industry's performance in providingservices. in addition, the experience of one industry may provide insightsrelevant to understanding or anticipating effects in another.to explore how industry context affects the use of it and performance, thecommittee focused on six industries: air transport, telecommunications,impacts of information technology at the industry level52information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.retail and wholesale trade, health care, banking, and insurance. together theindustries chosen accounted for about 27 percent of the gross domestic productand 35 percent of u.s. employment in 1989; they are also proportionately muchhigher users of it than are some other industries (tables 2.1 and 2.2).1 thesectors to which some of these industries belong are relatively capitalintensive;for example, the ratio of capital investment to value added in 1991 fortransportation and telecommunications exceeded the comparabletable 2.1 six selected service industries compared to all u.s. industry and allu.s. service industries, 1989 (figures in billions of 1982 dollars)gpo in 1989investment in itin 1989 (as % ofgpo)value of itcapital stockin 1989gnp4117.7gdp4087.6all industry(manufacturing,construction, mining, andnongoodsproducing)3610.5128.4(3.6)513.3mining127.21.2(0.9)8.8construction179.00.7(0.3)3.2manufacturing929.024.3(2.6)78.0all services (nongoodsproducing industries)2375.3102.3(4.3)456.1transportation156.35.5(3.5)20.6communications109.417.6(16.1)124.7utilities136.66.3(4.6)26.0wholesale304.711.6(3.8)54.0retail412.010.6(2.6)44.8financial, insurance, realestate604.033.7(5.6)123.2business, personal,professional services652.316.9(2.6)62.8six selected serviceindustries (air transport,telecommunications, retailand wholesale trade, healthcare, banking, insurance)1119.762.5(5.6)291.1six industries as fraction of"all services"47%61%64%six industries as fraction of"all industry"31%49%57%six industries as fraction ofgdp and gnp27%summary: in 1989, six service industries (air transport, telecommunications, retailand wholesale trade, health care, banking, insurance) accounted for 27% of gnp, 31% ofthe 1989 gpo of "all industry," and 47% of the 1989 gpo of "all services." however,they accounted for 49% of 1989 it expenditures by "all industry" and 61% of 1989 itexpenditures by "all services." similarly, they accounted for 57% of the 1989 it capitalstock value of ''all industry" and 64% of the 1989 it capital stock value of "all services."in addition, these six industries averaged 5.6% in their 1989 it investment as apercentage of gpo, while for all industries the comparable percentage was 3.6% and forall service industries it was 4.3%.impacts of information technology at the industry level53information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2.2 snapshots of selected service industries, 1981 and 1989air transporttelecommunicationsretail trade1981gpo (billions of 1982dollars)16.875.7286.4revenues (billions of1982 dollars)45.291.8453.6number of employees(millions of jobs)0.51.116.9number of hours worked(billions)0.92.427.4annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)1.021.05.1it capital stock (billionsof 1982 dollars)1.8125.313.2gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)17.7031.9710.44annual it/gpo6.2%27.8%1.8%annual rate of change ingpo per laborhour2.7%5.2%1.6%1989 (1989 value as percent of 1981 value)gpo (billions of 1982dollars)31.7(189)98.8(131)412.0(144)revenues (billions of1982 dollars)66.6(147)100.6(110)628.3(138)number of employees(millions of jobs)0.7(149)0.9(82)21.2(125)number of hours worked(billions)1.4(148)2.0(83)32.8(120)annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)3.0(288)13.8(66)10.6(207)it capital stock (billionsof 1982 dollars)9.8(543)113.7(91)44.8(340)gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)22.64(128)49.97(156)12.54(120)annual it/gpo9.4%(153)14.0%(50)2.6%(144)annual rate of change ingpo per laborhour8.0%4.0%1.2%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.impacts of information technology at the industry level54information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wholesale tradehealth carebankinginsurance1981gpo (billions of1982 dollars)212.7138.164.235.4revenues(billions of 1982dollars)317.6204.888.766.8number ofemployees(millions of jobs)5.75.92.01.2number of hoursworked (billions)11.410.23.92.4annualinvestment in it(billions of 1982dollars)5.01.81.90.7it capital stock(billions of 1982dollars)13.28.95.11.7gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)18.6413.4916.6614.76annual it/gpo2.4%1.3%3.0%2.0%annual rate ofchange in gpoper laborhour4.7%1.2%0.0%9.0%1989 (1989 value as percent of 1981 value)gpo (billions of1982 dollars)304.7(143)164.4(119)71.4(111)36.7(104)revenues(billions of 1982dollars)400.8(126)286.6(140)99.8(112)77.5(116)number ofemployees(millions of jobs)6.6(116)7.9(134)2.3(112)1.4(116)number of hoursworked (billions)13.1(115)13.5(132)4.3(110)2.8(116)annualinvestment in it(billions of 1982dollars)11.6(230)3.6(204)13.8(715)6.2(856)it capital stock(billions of 1982dollars)54.0(409)15.7(177)35.1(690)17.9(1080)gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)23.30(125)12.14(90)16.80(101)13.18(89)annual it/gpo3.8%(160)2.2%(171)19.3%(643)16.8%(826)annual rate ofchange in gpoper laborhour2.3%3.6%0.2%1.1%impacts of information technology at the industry level55information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.impacts of information technology at the industry level56information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ratio for durable manufacturing, while the capital expenditure per fulltimeemployee for transportation, communications, and financial services, insurance,and real estate (fire) was larger than or comparable to that for durablemanufacturing.2the discussion of these industries was informed by a variety of sources:the individual expertise and knowledge of committee members, interviews withsenior executives from the six industries, data drawn from federal and othersources, and published articles and books. however, because the data availableat the industry level are limited in scope and detail, this chapter's brief vignettesof each industry are intended in part to capture the direct and intuitiveobservations of experienced industry executives and industry analysts. giventhe multidimensional nature of performance in the service industries and theresulting difficulty of isolating the specific impact of using it visàvis otherfactors, these vignettes are largely anecdotal but suggest the important factorsthat have affected overall industry performance and the scale and impact of theuse of it in each industry.box 2.1 describes the origin of the data on each industry presented below.air transportin the last two decades, the u.s. air transport industry has undergoneremarkable change, expanding its equipment inventories and facilities rapidly tohandle substantial increases in passenger volume. in 1989, it operated a fleet ofsome 4000 large jet aircraft,3 produced 433 billion revenue passengermiles(rpms),4 generated revenues of $67 billion (1982 dollars), and employed about691,000 people5 (table 2.3). however, poor profitabilityšand even sometimesnet lossesšhave characterized the industry for much of the last decade.6the industry has also undergone considerable consolidation and today ishighly concentrated. as of september 1991, four large air carriers (americawest, continental, midway, and pan american) had filed for bankruptcyprotection, and eastern airlines ceased operating in january 1991. twentytwolarge carriers (out of over 200 certificated u.s. air carriers) account for 95percent of total airline revenues for scheduled passenger operations.7a major event in the last decade was the deregulation of the airlineindustry. beginning in the early 1980s, there was a gradual lifting ofgovernment regulations whose effect had been to reduce the efficiency of aircraft use and to generate incentives for the acquisition of certain kinds ofequipment and for the maintenance of routes that did not optimize the use ofresources for the country as a whole. deregulation has allowed airlines toemploy a much more efficient "hubandspoke" routing system, rather than thepointtopoint routing used in a more regulated environment.8 otherimpacts of information technology at the industry level57information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important influences on the airline industry in the last decade have includedsignificant increases in fuel costs, the 1981 strike of air traffic controllers,expensive purchases of new airplanes owing to need or to regulations calling forgreater fuel efficiency or quieter aircraft, and a recessionary economy for muchof the 1980s that drove down demand for air travel.table 2.3 air transport industry19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)15.117.316.819.022.8revenues (billions of 1982dollars; sic 45a)34.852.145.241.444.2output measure (billions ofrpmsc)132b254248260281employment (millions of jobs)0.40.50.50.40.5number of hours worked (billions)0.81.00.90.90.9annual investment in it (billionsof 1982 dollars)0.00.71.00.91.2it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)0.01.01.82.43.2gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)20.0018.1917.7020.8824.49annual it/gpo0.1%3.8%6.2%4.5%5.3%rpmc/laborhour174b267262285302annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourd0.9%e2.7%17.9%17.3%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.a standard industrial classification system code.b 1969 figure.extensive deployment of it has been necessary to help the air transportindustry deal with larger volumes of passengers and inquiries, higher operatingtempos, and more complex flight and ground operations. indeed, the airtransport industry is a major consumer of it, having spent $3 billion in 1989(1982 dollars) on it. the importance of it is suggested, though not proven, bythe fact that in both the aircargo and passengertransport segments, airtransport companies prospering in the last decade have tended to be those withstrong it systems (e.g., american airlines, united airlines). however, the widerange of external influences on the industry in the last decade makes it difficultto identify with confidence the impact of any single factor such as it. indeed,some analysts assert that the benefits of it, substantial though theyimpacts of information technology at the industry level58information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may be to the leaders in the airline industry, are small compared to the generaleconomic problems that the industry faces at present.9198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of 1982dollars)23.423.228.433.032.431.7revenues (billions of1982 dollars; sic 45a)47.951.157.762.365.166.6output measure (billionsof rpmsc)305336367404423433employment (millionsof jobs)0.50.50.60.60.70.7number of hoursworked (billions)1.01.11.21.21.31.4annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)1.11.53.11.71.83.0it capital stock (billionsof 1982 dollars)3.84.66.97.68.29.8gpo per laborhour(1982 dollars)23.1521.3024.2726.7424.6022.64annual it/gpo4.5%6.4%11.1%5.2%5.5%9.4%rpmc/laborhour302308313328321309annual rate of change ingpo per laborhourd5.5%8.0%13.9%10.2%8.0%8.0%c rpm, revenue passenger mile.d the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 3.1 percent.labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.e average annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1969 to 1980.in the air transport industry, it has had an impact on both business andoperational dimensions. in the business dimension, it has been used to improveboth the cost efficiency and quality of performance as well as to provideservices not otherwise available. perhaps the most significant of these servicesis the use of computerized reservation systems (crss). crss are a classicexample of it use that has had a largescale strategic impact on an industry.generally owned by individual airlines, these systems contain fare and routeinformation for both the crs owner and other carriers, and they make itpossible for agents to book passage on any carrier in the database. crss haveenabled airlines to manage passenger loads and hubandspoke routings thatwould otherwise have been extremely cumbersome and time consumingšifpossible at allšunder less automated conditions.two crss, sabre (american airlines) and apollo (united airlines),dominate the industry: in 1981, nearly 80 percent of travel agenciesimpacts of information technology at the industry level59information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with connections to crss were tied to one or both of these systems.10 today,virtually all airline bookings are made through one of four airlineownedcrss.11 carriers without their own crss pay crs owners to have their flightsand fares listed, thereby providing crs owners with additional revenue.12initially, crss simply replaced manual reservation systems and did notcommunicate either with the systems of other companies or with otherdepartments within the owning company. however, by making relevantinformation about most scheduled flights available in a single database,13 crssnow enable passengers to use independent travel agents as well as agents fromeach participating airline as onestop points of contact to gather schedule andfare information on all carriers providing the desired service and to makecomplete trip reservations, rather than having to call individual airlines directly.in the future, it will be common for crss to provide gateways to other nonairline systems through which hotel reservations and automobile rentals can beobtained.crss have played an important role in facilitating the interlinkage ofmajor and regional carriers through a process known as crosscoding. regionalcarriers operate in specialized markets, whereas major carriers provide whatcould be called "trunk" service on major routes. flying between two smallairports on opposite ends of the country usually requires coordination of flightsoperated by a major carrier and by smaller regional carriers; from listing itsflights on crss owned by major airlines, it is a relatively small step for aregional carrier to affiliate formally with a major carrier to provide a higherdegree of operational integration.crss have enabled implementation of a fare structure that can be veryfinely tuned to maximize revenues through yield management,14 and they haveprovided a mechanism for the rapid implementation of price changes and formonitoring the prices of competitors. moreover, crsbased it figuresprominently in marketing mechanisms that have flourished since deregulation(e.g., incentives and bonuses for travel agents) and indeed in the growth of thetravel industry itself. for example, crss have been linked to "frequentflyer"databases that have themselves been made operationally feasible by it.the potential drawback of crss is their ability to communicate the faresof one carrier very quickly to other carriers. as of this writing, the u.s.department of justice (doj) has alleged that carriers participating in variouscrss use postings of future fare changes to fix prices at artificially high levels.for example, the doj suit alleges that one airline announced on january 15 aprice increase to take effect on february 1, and that other airlines noticed theposting and raised prices upward accordingly. in effect, crss are alleged tohave replaced facetoface meetings to set prices that are illegal under antitrustlaws. in response, the airlines have argued thatimpacts of information technology at the industry level60information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.they provide notices of future price changes for the benefit of consumers, whomay wish to know when price increases are to take effect. the doj is seekingto enjoin the airlines from posting changes that will occur in the future.15the impact of it on the air transport industry's operations has also beenquite significant. for example, itbased systems connected to crss keep trackof flight arrivals and departures, and they manage the many changes in plannedschedules that are inherent in complex planning operations. some airplanemaintenance crews make use of knowledgebased "maintenance advisors" thatguide mechanics through certain repairs. inventories of spare parts aremaintained and supplies are replenished via itbased systems,16 and airlinefood services are also being automated.17computerbased flight simulators are used extensively to train pilots forreasons of cost and safety. an hour in a flight simulator costs far less than anhour of actual flight (hundreds of dollars vs. thousands of dollars), therebyreducing fixed costs associated with crew training. in addition, emergencysituations can be simulated and pilot responses rehearsed with no real danger tolife or to an airplane, enabling the pilot to obtain experience and familiarity withsituations that occur only rarely in actual flight. today's simulators are so goodthat pilots for some commercial airplanes can be certified entirely on the basisof their experience in flight simulators.18flight safety is critically dependent on it. highly automated air trafficcontrol systems manage thousands of en route flights. weatheršan importantinfluence on safety and flight schedulesšis monitored and predicted using itbased systems. inflight communications and navigation depend on stateoftheart it.19 weight, and therefore fuel costs, are reduced by onboard it thatmonitors every aspect of an airplane's flight performance. onboard computerscomplement pilots' abilities in flying airliners, thus enhancing safety.20it is becoming increasingly important to airplane design, since computeraided design and engineering save time and design effort and reduceconstruction costs.21 in some cases, airframe designs stored in digital form aretested in simulated wind tunnels, and highfidelity results can be obtainedwithout a single model having to be built.the logistics planning requirements of major airlines managing hundredsof flights per day are formidable, especially with hubandspoke routing. today,centrally located dispatchers that previously operated out of three or fourlocations use itbased systems to assist pilots with crew scheduling, flightplans, and fuelload and weatherchange calculations, an approach resulting insignificant improvements in efficiency.22 (one estimate suggests that deltaairlines was able to reduce the amount of unproductive crew time from 11percent to 8 percent, thereby saving $14 million per year;23 united airlinessaved $6 million per year by installing, at a cost ofimpacts of information technology at the industry level61information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.$500,000, a computerbased planning system for scheduling shift work.24)working with expert systems that take online variables from local sites, suchas the number of bags loaded onto a plane, crew schedulers and load plannersare able to balance loads and to communicate directly with pilots. airlines alsouse expert systems to generate leastcost routings of flights.the benefits of using it to assist with operations are relatively easy todemonstrate quantitatively: for example, computerassisted route planningprovides for more optimal use of fuel and assignment of crews than wouldmanual planning. however, specific financial bottomline benefits of using itare more difficult to quantify. a vice president of a major airline noted,we want to convert our unintelligent workstations to intelligent ones becausewe've developed a number of programs that we believe are going to besignificant in terms of their support and enhancement of customer serviceactivities and other types of activities at the airports. though the benefits arethere, we cannot quantify them specifically. we're doing this to enhance theoverall environment for the passenger.u.s. air transport companies have consistently led the worldwide industryin major innovations such as customer reservation systems, overnight packagehandling, special customer services (e.g., frequentflyer programs and packagetracking), and differential pricing systems to maintain load factors. wellautomated major u.s. airlines have maintained their relative competitivenesswith other international carriers and have extended their penetration of u.s. andforeign markets. indeed, none of the several senior executives from majorairlines interviewed by the committee believed they could operate withoutextensive it systems, and all pointed to important cost and qualityimprovements enabled by it. given the relatively poor financial performanceof the industry as a whole,25 the ability to make necessary investments in itmay have been an important element in the survival of current industry leaders.in the future, it may be used by the airline industry to create a variety ofadditional benefits. for example, airport operations and procedures could begreatly streamlined if the current manual system of checkin were automated tolink crss and airport systems.26 inflight time could be used to entertaintravelers or to help them be more productive; a number of pilot projects toprovide relevant services have been launched or planned.27 it could also beused in customized, proactive marketingšfor example, potential customerscould be alerted to the existence of inexpensive fares.telecommunicationsover the last decade, the telecommunications industry has undergonedramatic structural change. it has also been highly successful in financialimpacts of information technology at the industry level62information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.terms, although whether this success is despite or because of these changes isopen to debate. revenues and contributions to the gross domestic product havegrown substantially for telecommunications (table 2.4), and the industry's rateof growth in productivity of 4.8 percent per year over the period from 1979 to1989 exceeds that of manufacturing (3.3 percent per year), as indicated intable 1.1 in chapter 1. in 1990, the telecommunications industry supportedover 136 million access lines.28 although data on total minutes of local calls arenot available, the federal communications commission reports that 308 billionminutes in interstate calls were connected in 1990 through these access lines.29two major factors have shaped contemporary telecommunications: (1)deregulation, in combination with the divestiture of at&t, and (2) advances intechnology, with concomitant reductions in cost and changes in productofferings. the divestiture of at&t and the consequent restructuring of theregulatory environment completely changed the character of the domestictelecommunications industry. prior to december 1983, the industry operated asa regulated monopoly. however, in august 1982 the courts approved a consentdecree that required divestiture of at&t intralata service (i.e., servicewithin local calling areas) to seven regional holding companies by january 1,1984. this action created more direct competition in interlata (longdistance) services and equipment. the combination of the breakup of the bellsystem, deregulation, and the proliferation of new, technologybased businesseshas fragmented the telecommunications industry; the result has been theemergence of about a halfdozen major longdistance/interexchange carrierssuch as at&t, mci, and u.s. sprint, and several hundred smaller carriersoperating via comsat and leased private lines.such competition, combined with federally regulated charges for localaccess, has driven longdistance calling prices down and volume up, and muchof the growth in the telephone industry in the last decade has been associatedwith the provision of longdistance services. moreover, the separation of longdistance service from local carriers has forced local carriers to seek additionalsources of revenue, and they have responded to these pressures by using it toimprove operations (e.g., collection of revenues from unbilled calls30) and toprovide new services (e.g., caller id) to supplement traditional local telephoneservice (''plain old" telephone service). some have argued that today'sregulatory environment, which mandates equal charges for local access to alllongdistance providers and thus has reduced pricing differentials amongproviders, has placed an increased emphasis on quality of service andreliability. however, the growth in the number of services that are criticallydependent on telecommunications and the experience of several major andhighly publicized telecommunications outages have raised the question ofwhether current levels of reliability are as high as those that existed before thebreakup of at&t.31impacts of information technology at the industry level63information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2.4 telecommunications19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)33.271.475.777.383.2revenues (billions of 1982dollars; (sic 481,2,9a)36.387.791.892.892.3minutes of calls (billions)1,7331,7871,8531,923employment (millions of jobs)0.91.11.11.11.0number of hours worked (billions)1.92.32.42.32.1annual investment in it (billionsof 1982 dollars)12.722.721.017.314.3it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)54.1115.8125.3126.5124.6gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)17.1730.4031.9733.0239.49annual it/gpo38.2%31.8%27.8%22.3%17.2%annual rate of change in gpoper laborhourb5.3%5.2%3.3%19.6%minutes of calls per laborhour737.8754.6791.5912.7note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.the growth of telecommunications parallels advances in informationtechnology, because the technological substrate of telecommunications iswholly dependent on it. the telecommunications industry's investments in ithave been very large, amounting to $12 billion to $15 billion per year in the late1980s (1982 dollars), and those figures are for hardware only; they do notinclude the substantial investments in software associated with the expansionand upgrading of telecommunications networks and services. meanwhile,during the 1980s the capabilities of underlying microelectronic technologies fortelecommunications were improving at average rates of 40 to 50 percent peryear.over the years, major innovations have improved underlying service andhardware technology, including satellite, cellular, and fiberopticcommunication systems. historically, applications of it have driven changes inlongdistance telephone service, beginning with the introduction of directdialing between 1950 and 1952. since then, the telephone industry haswitnessed the introduction of computerbased toll operator assistance systems,impacts of information technology at the industry level64information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.automatic credit card validation and billing, automated directory assistancesystems, automatic coin recognition in paytelephone systems, and, recently,voicerecognition systems that build on the digitization of network and voicerecognition technology.32 such innovations have reduced the amount of laborrequired to provide telecommunications services33 and have facilitated a gradualshift in employment toward executive and staff occupations. there has alsobeen ongoing progress relating to encoding, processing, and transmittingmessages (e.g., voice and video compression), all of which provide for moreefficient use of telecommunications facilities.198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of1982 dollars)80.881.785.093.297.898.8revenues (billions of1982 dollars; (sic481,2,9a)89.291.591.192.898.4100.6minutes of calls(billions)2,0452,1452,2072,2672,3852,460employment(millions of jobs)1.01.00.91.00.90.9number of hoursworked (billions)2.12.12.02.02.02.0annual investment init (billions of 1982dollars)13.815.916.915.913.913.8it capital stock(billions of 1982dollars)122.0121.2121.1119.9116.7113.7gpo per laborhour(1982 dollars)37.9339.3542.4245.9848.0649.97annual it/gpo17.1%19.4%19.9%17.1%14.2%14.0%annual rate of changein gpo per laborhourb3.9%3.7%7.8%8.4%4.5%4.0%minutes of calls perlaborhour960.110331101.31118.411721244.3a standard industrial classification system code.b the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 5.7 percent.labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.a substantial amount of it is used to support the people operating andmanaging the network. operations support systems monitor traffic as well asthe health and condition of facilities and switches, provide telemetry, detectfaults, and provide alerts. databases record what is in the network and how it ishooked up. operations support systems help in keeping track of circuits andreconfiguring them. itbased systems are used to collect vast amounts of datafrom multiple sources to support rate filing and networkimpacts of information technology at the industry level65information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.planning. today's use of test equipment often incorporates expertsystemtechnology in applications that automatically signal when maintenance isnecessary and in techniques for optimizing network routing, especially underemergency conditions.managing the huge volumes of billing data that are generated in providingtelecommunications services would not be possible without sophisticated itsystems. billing is complex because companies must continuously record eachuse of every service, and then rate it and price it based on multiple variables(distance, time, specific service, quality of service, pricing plans, and so on).for this reason, automated billing systems are built directly into centralswitches, and most billing systems are therefore relatively inflexible.enhancements to billing systems have transformed them from beingsimply support systems that emphasize rates, prices, invoicing, and billing, tobeing strategic systems that emphasize accuracy, speed, calling patterns, andother attributes of customer service. for example, mci developed a newmarketing program by using it for sophisticated billing and data processing:friends and family involves accurate monthly tracking of customers and callingcircles (designated groups of people who call each other) across their use ofvarious telecommunications services. other billing system enhancements havegiven rise to customer billing and usage management tools that have historicallybeen focused on corporate users. for example, mci has a relatively newproduct, service without paper, that provides corporate telecommunicationsmanagers with billing and usage data on optical disk.telephone credit cards (calling cards) were made possible by using it,34and they represent an area of current innovation. calling cards serve asmarketing tools, promoting easy access to products and services, and they arelinked with proliferating services: electronic message delivery, stock quotationsand weather forecasts, language interpretation, speed dialing, andteleconferencing. longdistance carriers are now developing voicerecognitionsystems that can substitute for operators in handling routine interactivetelephone transactions (e.g., collect calls). in the future, enhanced calling cardsmay be indistinguishable from automated teller machine cards.35deregulation and technological advances have both contributed to shifts inthe mix of products produced by the telecommunications industry. fallingprices for longdistance calls have contributed to a shift in the mix of local tolongdistance calls. telecommunications companies have evolved fromdefining the service they offer exclusively in terms of providing facilities totransmit the electrical impulses representing voices or data to redefiningthemselves as enterprises that help customers collect, process, and distributedata. more specifically, using it, telecommunications companies provide moreinformation to customers on the way infrastructure is usedimpacts of information technology at the industry level66information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(e.g., billing and network management services), new informationbased modesof access to information (virtual private networks, calling cards), and gatewaysto information services, if not information services themselves. thus there is ablurring of the traditional categories of telecommunications and informationprocessing, as well as a convergence of public and private networking.36in recent years, much of the capital investment in the telecommunicationsindustry has been driven by the enhancement of the communicationsinfrastructures installed by both regional and national carriers. today, theinfrastructure of modern telecommunications makes increasing use of broadband transmission and digital switching.compared to analog transmissions, digitized communications improvesignal fidelity and, through signal processing, use available bandwidth moreefficiently. digitized communications also facilitate data transmission (althoughvoice signals are increasingly digitized), thereby changing the mix of voice anddata traffic, and enable as well the use of companion overlay networks fornetwork management functions (e.g., call setup) and for new services (e.g.,automatic number identificationšbox 2.2). the entire at&t interchangenetwork is digital today, as are about 40 to 50 percent of central officeswitching facilities in local exchanges.37broadband transmission is associated primarily with optical fiber cable,which offers huge gains in capacity over that provided by copper cable. thebandwidth provided by fiber will greatly exceed what is needed to handle theexpected traffic volume upon installation and will thus be able to accommodateincreased traffic or new services. (at the same time, the prospect of "dark fiber"or unused capacity contributes to the controversy over how fast to increasenetwork bandwidth.)thanks in part to deregulation, new telephone services are now introducedmuch more rapidly than before. itšin particular, programmable digitalswitchesšhas been integral to the rapid development of such innovativeservices as call waiting, caller identification, and call forwarding. by extendingthe traditional notion of plain old telephone service, such services increase thenumber of options for local customers and generate substantial revenue for localtelephone companies today.it has also been used in the telecommunications industry to enhance andimprove corporate image and the quality of customer service, even when theseconsiderations do not relate directly to calling volume. mci's richardliebhaber described a $35 million investment to provide the capability forcustomer service representatives to display customer invoices andcorrespondence on graphics terminals, saying, "it is an opportunity to improvethe image, the feel, the touch of mci. intuitively, i would tell you it's going toprovide market share, customer satisfaction, bottomline. i can't prove it. i'm notgoing to waste my time trying."impacts of information technology at the industry level67information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.2 applications for automatic numberidentificationautomatic number identification (ani) is a service usually (though notalways) provided through an integrated services digital network (isdn)that enables the telephone number of the calling party to be transmittedalong with the signal that carries the call itself.telemarketing organizations initially used ani to identify callers; thecalling number would trigger a database inquiry, enabling the marketer toidentify the caller and his or her previous history. however, many callerswere disconcerted by the fact that their identities were known to themarketer without their providing any identification.new applications of ani are being used to provide different levels ofservice. for example, if a caller is known from previous interactions tospeak spanish, ani can be used to route calls from that party to spanishspeaking operators. credit card holders can be routed to different servicestaffs depending on the type of card they hold. equipment serviceorganizations can route calls to the appropriate staffs based on databasesthat coordinate telephone numbers with equipment present at given sites.source: sweeney, terry. 1993. "carriers, users discover newapplications for automatic number id," communications week, january4, p. 27.future advances in telecommunications are likely to include multimediatransmission (e.g., combined twoway video and audio) made possible with thewide availability of digital networks, the assignment of telephone numbers toindividuals rather than locations (resulting in a single telephone number for anindividual regardless of where he or she is), and automatic translation services(giving, e.g., an american and a japanese businessperson the opportunity toconverse through a telephone, but both in their native tongues). broadbandnetworking technologies supporting transmission speeds in excess of 45megabits per second will be deployed widely in the next decade; by contrast,the technology that supports most home telephones today is limited totransmission speeds measured in tens of kilobits per second. broadbandnetworking technologies will require substantial deployment of fiber optics toend users (initially commercial ones). wireless communications (cellulartelephone, personal communications services) is a market in which considerablegrowth is expected (subject to availability of spectrum bandwidth). advancedintelligent network technology is expected to continue facilitating thedevelopment of additional customized communications services.impacts of information technology at the industry level68information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementing these advances is likely to have a substantial impact both onusers and providers of telecommunications technology. using sophisticatedtelecommunications technology most effectively will most probably requiresubstantial learning of new skills comparable to the new skills demanded ofthose using increasingly powerful software packages on personal computers. asimportantly, sophisticated telecommunications technology will dependincreasingly on the capability to develop complex software, a task that routinelypushes the state of the art of current knowledge in computer science andsoftware engineering.while both financial performance and growth in productivity in thetelecommunications industry have been strong, the benefits of technologicalinnovation and investments have sometimes appeared in other segments of theeconomy. private companies, whether manufacturing or service firms, mayrealize improvements in productivity from the installation of their own switchesand terminal equipment, but these improvements are not reflected in the data forpublic providers of communications services. nonregulated companies outsidethe industry have been able to install their own widearea networks and"cherrypick" profitable service opportunities by selling such systems andservices to others. returns from these activities show up in sellers' and users'books of account, rather than those of telecommunication providers. there is asubstantial crosssubstitution between the "product" and "service" componentsof the telecommunications field and an increasing merging of thetelecommunications business between equipment manufacturers and serviceproviders as currently defined.retail and wholesale tradethe retail and wholesale trade industries are responsible for the ordering,collection, distribution, and sale of goods. both industries have been growing.retail revenues increased from $447 billion in 1980 to $628 billion in 1989(1982 dollars; table 2.5). wholesale revenues grew from $310 billion in 1980to $401 billion in 1989 (1982 dollars; table 2.6). for wholesale and retail tradetaken together, the 1989 investment in it in constant dollars was 2.6 times theamount invested in it in 1980.the retail industry consists of a broad collection of segments with ratherdifferent businesses (department stores, restaurants, specialty stores, grocerystores, and so on) that vary greatly in terms of the categories of the items theysell, the range of prices of the items, the market size for the items, and profitmargins. retail trade is dominated by relatively few, large, national or regionalchain operations specializing in merchandise trade, food, and pharmaceuticals.38a much larger number of smaller "momandpop" retail operations are locallybased; such operations are relatively easy to start (compared to ventures intelecommunications or air transport) becauseimpacts of information technology at the industry level69information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.their requirements for capital and technology infrastructure are relatively small.for example, a means for displaying merchandise is often the minimum capitalrequirement, a task that can in some cases be accomplished by publishing acatalog.table 2.5 retail trade19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)212.7281.7286.4287.5307.8revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;sic 5259a)326.5446.5453.6459.9485.4employment (millions of jobs)12.316.816.916.917.4number of hours worked (billions)22.927.427.427.227.8annual investment in it (billions of1982 dollars)0.14.65.15.87.0it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)0.410.013.216.620.7gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)9.3110.2810.4410.5611.06annual it/gpo0.1%1.6%1.8%2.0%2.3%annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourb0.9%1.6%1.2%4.7%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.wholesalers provide all activities involved in selling goods or services tothose who buy for resale or business use. they exist as an industry because theyprovide efficiencies that manufacturers often are unable to support themselves.39given the heterogeneity of the products sold by retailers and wholesalers,aggregate trade output is best measured in terms of financial value. (outputmeasures for trade are discussed in greater detail in appendixes b and c.)however, measured productivity varies greatly among such different elementsof the retail trade industry as supermarkets and other food stores, restaurants,apparel and accessory stores, newcar dealers, gas stations, home furnishingsand equipment stores, and drug stores.moreover, financial measures do not necessarily capture other importantelements of performance. for example, the 1980s saw improvement inmeasures of quality such as the variety of products, geographic dispersion,demographic specialization within stores, fashion responsiveness, and hoursimpacts of information technology at the industry level70information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.open. significant increases in the diversity of their products, the growth of chainstore branches, and the proliferation of small specialty chains may have maskedother elements of improvements in productivity in large chain operations. inaddition, because of "overstoring" and competitive pressures, margins at bothretail and wholesale levels dropped during the 1980s, despite majorimprovements in operational performance enabled by new it capabilities.198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of 1982dollars)334.0354.4377.5371.6399.2412.0revenues (billions of 1982dollars; sic 5259a)521.7549.5574.9595.6623.5628.3employment (millions ofjobs)18.318.919.520.120.621.2number of hours worked(billions)29.329.930.631.532.232.8annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)8.98.59.08.010.510.6it capital stock (billions of1982 dollars)25.930.234.236.841.144.8gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)11.4011.8612.3511.7912.3912.54annual it/gpo2.7%2.4%2.4%2.1%2.6%2.6%annual rate of change ingpo per laborhourb3.1%4.0%4.2%4.5%5.1%1.2%a standard industrial classification system code.b the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 2.3 percent.labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.retail and wholesale enterprises seek faster receipt of goods, lowerinventories and more inventory turns per year,40 a better fit between goodsoffered and goods bought, and reduced labor costs. in retailing, considerableeffort is made to attract customers to retail establishments, because the marginalcost of providing service to a new customer is relatively low.in retailing, investments in it increased from $4.6 billion in 1980 to $10.6billion in 1989 (1982 dollars; table 2.5). in wholesaling, investments in itapproximately tripled in the 1980s, from $4 billion in 1980 to $11.6 billion in1989 (1982 dollars; table 2.6). the vast bulk of these expenditures was madeby large establishments, which now depend on it for planning and control ofinventories, merchandising, and logistics management. by contrast, smallerretailers use relatively little it, except inimpacts of information technology at the industry level71information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.catalog sales operations. it has contributed to the growth observed in these twoindustries and also to the growing competition between them: large retail chainsnow use it to provide many of the services wholesalers used to provide, andwholesalers have linked "downstream" to tie retail customers together intovoluntary chains.table 2.6 wholesale trade19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)149.0200.1212.7219.0222.2revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;sic 50,1a)210.0310.3317.6318.8315.4employment (millions of jobs)4.25.65.75.65.6number of hours worked (billions)8.811.211.411.211.3annual investment in it (billions of1982 dollars)0.34.05.05.910.4it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)0.810.413.216.523.2gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)16.9717.8118.6419.6219.70annual it/gpo0.2%2.0%2.4%2.7%4.7%annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourb0.4%4.7%5.3%0.4%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.it has become critically important to the retail and wholesale tradeindustries as a competitive tool; instead of merely providing information atgreater speeds, it can be used to help manage information that can then becoupled with strategic planning to optimize the efficiency of a business. indeed,the national retail federation credits the use of it with helping to cushion theimpact of the recent recession: "technology helped to cushion the blow. manyretailers had better information about their sales and inventories than in the lastrecession and were thus able to more selectively promote merchandise."41 byenabling better and faster matching of inventories and customer needs, it candecrease the need for retail markdowns, a major cost in retailing.in the 1980s, wholesalers often installed direct links to suppliers throughelectronic data interchange and support systems for retailers to deal with stockmanagement, merchandising, and price marking. wholesalers forimpacts of information technology at the industry level72information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foods, pharmaceuticals, and hospital supplies placed computerized orderingsystems directly on customers' premises to great effect. these investmentstended to shift shares of the market among wholesalers (or between wholesalersand retailers) rather than increase the total volume of products, so that benefitswere frequently not captured in measures of output. although volume grewduring the 1980s without proportionate increases in employment, competitivepressures kept wholesalers from realizing significant gains in profitability. thenumber of products and the complexity of services offered by wholesalersexpanded enormously during this period. consequently, the data on profitssuggest that wholesalers were passing benefits from their investments in itthrough to their customers and suppliers.198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of 1982dollars)254.9267.1284.7284.3290.6304.7revenues (billions of 1982dollars; sic 50,1a)347.2362.2371.8373.4386.9400.8employment (millions ofjobs)5.96.16.16.26.46.6number of hours worked(billions)11.912.112.212.312.813.1annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)13.912.313.79.612.611.6it capital stock (billions of1982 dollars)32.338.845.547.651.754.0gpo per laborhour (1982dollars)21.4522.0023.4023.0522.7823.30annual it/gpo5.5%4.6%4.8%3.4%4.3%3.8%annual rate of change ingpo per laborhourb8.9%2.6%6.4%1.5%1.2%2.3%a standard industrial classification system code.b the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 2.8 percent.labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.a current trend is for large retailers to develop their own directconnections to suppliers and manufacturers; both kmart and walmart havedirect links to over 2000 vendors. it is an enabling element of such connections.in one case, pointofsale data from the retailer have been used to adjust the mixof sizes of a manufactured product based on how frequently various sizes aresold.42the fact that the trade industries are very laborintensive has led to interestin technologies and processes that reduce labor costs. for example, a topimpacts of information technology at the industry level73information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive of a major supermarket chain noted that ''scanning [has] had thehighest impact of any technological advancement from it in this businessbecause of its improvement on productivity at the front end and throughimproved [e.g., faster] checkout and price removal, taking the prices off theproducts and not having to do price changes." similarly, retailers have used itto improve labor scheduling and to minimize costs.scanning systems are used to read a product's universal pricing code labelat the cash register, look up the product's price and the applicable tax, andrecord this information at the register as part of the transaction. thus pricechanges can be recorded in a central database at the store rather than on eachitem or on the shelves. moreover, the cashier is freed from having to enterprices on the register manually. both attributes can improve accuracy andreduce requirements for personnel; they also change the mix of skills requiredof cashiers. in addition, data made available at the point of sale facilitateaccurate analysis of what gets sold, when, and, sometimes, to whom, whilefaster access to information facilitates better ordering, marketing, andmerchandising; improved management of inventory; and improved schedulingof personnel. communications systems that link pointofsale systems in storesto headquarters allow daily and even hourly analysis of sales and trends. amajor benefit can be better insights into what sells well and poorly, thusminimizing overstocking and deep discounting.in some cases, pointofsale systems (whether or not using scanners) havebeen tied to inventory control systems. such systems are often used to link retailstores and wholesale vendors through electronic data interchange systems andallow nearly paperless and highly automatic ordering. in some instances, thesesystems allow orders to be shipped from wholesalers directly to retail stores,bypassing warehouses.the largescale deployment of pointofsale systems and their integrationinto centralized ordering and inventory control networks have been importantelements in the expansion of the giants in the retail industry. for example, byusing standardized ordering practices and inventory control procedures anddrawing on the expertise of the entire corporation regarding sales andoperations techniques, a new branch of a retailer like mcdonalds can be openedmore economically than a store of comparable size that lacks an existingsupport infrastructure. one result of this trend has been a division in the numberof companies as a function of sizešthe retail industry now consists primarily ofa handful of giants and a plethora of small institutions with one or a few storesunder their control.it has been used effectively in specialized trade applications. in furnitureretailing, video catalogs are being used to show a large variety of fabrics and toaid in room planning, special orders, and followup, allowing the customer tomore easily visualize and compare products. restaurants today often use it toperform location and layout analyses; manage recipesimpacts of information technology at the industry level74information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and menus; track supplies, markets, and costs; and handle general ledgeraccounting (accounts receivable and payable, payroll accounting and laborscheduling, and financial reporting). supermarkets are using it to generatecentsoff coupons at the point of sale (i.e., at the cash register) that arecustomized to a particular consumer's shopping patterns.43in other cases, it is applied across functional activities. an example is theuse of a computeraided design (cad) system in the general merchandisesegment. without cad, several individuals with three separate specialties areneeded to design floor plans, determine shelving requirements, and designatespecific items to be placed in exact locations. today, through the combined useof technology, historical data, and projections, individual functions can bereengineered into one process to best achieve the final goal of shelfspacemanagement. it is also used to support buyers in making decisions about themix of products for individual stores and to determine optimal itemtostoreallocations.it can be used to extend the activities of a business. a retail store may sellto other organizations the customer information captured in its marketingdatabase. telemarketing, which first relied on telephones and now involvescombinations of telephones and computer systems, is wholly dependent on itfor collecting information on existing customers and new prospects, fordisseminating information through promotional efforts, and for conductingvarious other salesrelated activities. in addition, computer systems are usedthroughout the telemarketing process, for sorting, merging, and purging lists ofprospective customers; distributing leads to agents; preparing for calls; dialingcontacts; delivering sales presentations; referencing information; scheduling thenext contact; recording contact information; carrying out the fulfillmentprocess; and management reporting.44a most promising future application of it is its use to track the number ofpeople entering a store, an approach pioneered by kmart. at present, few storescan count how many people pass through its doors; measures of success (e.g.,for sales and advertising) derive from measures of sales volume (number ofpurchases). yet the conversion of potential customers (those who visit the store)into actual customers (those who make a purchase) is a critical but poorlyunderstood element of the retail business, and a small upward change inconversion ratios could have a dramatic effect on sales volume. kmart believesthat the installation of it to count customers will enable managers to determineconversion ratios with unprecedented accuracy and will guide them in theirimprovement.health carein recent years, public concern over the health care industry has reachedunprecedented levels. the industry provides a huge volume of service:impacts of information technology at the industry level75information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2.7 health care19691980198119821983health services gpo (billions of1982 dollars)a73.4133.8138.1142.0143.7national health expenditures (gpo,sic 80,b estimated billions of 1982dollars)an/a309.6321.4326.1330.1revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;sic 80b)120.1194.5204.8213.6223.2employment (millions of jobs)3.25.75.96.26.3number of hours worked (billions)5.6c9.810.210.710.8annual investment in it (billions of1982 dollars)0.91.91.81.52.8it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)3.38.68.98.910.0gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)13.0113.6413.4913.2713.25annual it/gpo1.2%1.4%1.3%1.1%2.0%annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourd0.4%1.2%1.6%0.2%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.a gpo figures differ substantially from figures often reported as "national health expenditures" butare presented for the sake of consistency with other industries. national health expenditures are themost comprehensive measure, including both public and private spending on health care. thenational health expenditure (nhe) figures presented in constant 1982 dollars are estimated on thebasis of nhe figures in current dollars widely available in various publications. currentdollar nhefigures are deflated by a multiplicative factor that is the ratio of the gpo for health services for agiven year in 1982 dollars divided by the same quantity in current dollars for that year.americans made 1.3 billion visits to physicians for ambulatory care and 31million visits to hospitals in 1988.45 the health care industry absorbs a largeand increasing percentage of the income of workers in all sectors: the privatehealth care industry generated $120 billion in revenues in 1969 and $287 billionin 1989 (1982 dollars; table 2.7).46 it is also a large employer that in 1989provided 7.9 million jobs. table 2.7 describes the evolution of the health careindustry over the last decade.a key element of the u.s. health care system is the massive presence ofthirdparty payers, both private and government, that pay for most or all of thehealth care received by individuals. a large number of third parties obtain theresources to pay for these services from some combination of the individual andthe employer for whom the individual works, or through taxes levied on thepopulation at large.impacts of information technology at the industry level76information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198419851986198719881989health services gpo(billions of 1982 dollars)a145.0148.6150.5158.0161.1164.4national healthexpenditures (gpo, sic80,b estimated billions of1982 dollars)a334.3340.2341.7345.3351.4362.6revenues (billions of1982 dollars; sic 80b)230.6239.8252.8266.0279.2286.6employment (millions ofjobs)6.56.66.97.27.57.9number of hours worked(billions)11.111.411.712.212.813.5annual investment in it(billions of 1982 dollars)2.82.73.03.13.53.6it capital stock (billionsof 1982 dollars)11.111.812.713.614.715.7gpo per laborhour(1982 dollars)13.0813.0712.8512.9712.5912.14annual it/gpo2.0%1.8%2.0%2.0%2.2%2.2%annual rate of change ingpo per laborhourd1.3%0.1%1.7%0.9%2.9%3.6%b standard industrial classification system code.c health care hours worked in 1969 are extrapolated from 1979 ratio of jobs to hours worked.d the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 1.3percent. labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.rising health care costs have been attributed to many different causes,including the prescribing of newer, more complex, and more costly medicalprocedures with only marginally better clinical outcomes; a litigious climatethat encourages the practice of defensive medicine; the transformation of theunderpaid and partly volunteer nursing force of the 1960s and early 1970s intothe more professional hospital and nursing staffs of the 1980s; thirdpartypayment of the medical expenses of large numbers of patients who are thereforenot motivated to seek lowercost care; and an aging population that can beexpected to incur higher medical costs. these factors suggest that outputmeasured by health care expenditures is problematic at best.the physical output of the health care system is also notoriously difficultto measure. for example, using treatment outcomes as a measure inimpacts of information technology at the industry level77information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.individual cases is complicated by the fact that outcomes depend on factorsother than the treatments provided, such as preadmission health of the patient.measures of public health, for example, incidences of disease, are complicatedby external factors such as the increasing medical needs of an aging population.issues such as unequal access to health care further compound the difficulties ofmeasurement. another key issue is measuring the quality of care that patientsreceive.against this backdrop, technology, including it, has had an undeniableimpact on the success with which many medical problems are treated, e.g.,cancer as treated with computercontrolled beams of radiation. it is today anintegral part of diagnosis and therapy. microelectronics and embeddedcomputing are essential parts of digital thermometers and sphygmomanometers;highspeed computing is at the heart of computerized tomography scanning andmagnetic resonance imaging. laboratory tests are increasingly automated, ascomputerbased instrumentation is used to take readings with consistency,reliability, and speed equal to or greater than that of human technicians.monitoring of the vital signs of hospital patients and automatic signaling of theneed for clinical action are performed more effectively and reliably by it thanby human monitors.the use of it in the business side of the health care industry is a differentmatter. as a whole, the health care field has been slow to use it in its businessoperations and recordkeeping activities. nevertheless, pressure on the healthcare industry to explore the use of it is now being exerted by a variety offactors, including the explosion of medical knowledge, the larger volume ofclinical information potentially relevant to individual patients, the increasinglycooperative nature of medicine, the need for more detailed clinical audit trails todefend against potential malpractice litigation and to ensure proper thirdpartypayment, greater regulation, greater competition among health care institutions,and greater pressure for outcomes assessment and improvement of quality andpatient satisfaction.by far the most common use of information systems in health care is forbilling, accounting, and administrative tasks, which typically include theadmission, transfer, and discharge of hospital patients; materials management;and scheduling and management of human and physical resources. increasingly,hospitals recognize the need for integrating these tasks across departments.integrated health care data systems can pass information electronically in acommon format among all departments in the system, thus reducing oreliminating the need to reenter data manually. with an integrated system,billing information from the laboratory and the pharmacy can be electronicallyintegrated in a hospital's financial office. billing for consumable items used bya patient can be integrated with the hospital's inventory control system. in somecases, inventory control systems themselvesimpacts of information technology at the industry level78information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are tied directly to hospital supply companies, and replacement orders aregenerated automatically when necessary.the actual clinical practice of medicine has not effectively used it for costreduction as widely as would be desirable. a recent study examined thepotential of itbased physician order entry in an indianapolis hospital to steerphysicians toward lowercost treatments; the result was that patient bills werereduced by an average of 13 percent.47 the networked pcbased system usedsoftware that alerted physicians to the cost of various drugs and tests, warnedabout potential drug interactions, and specifically discouraged the use of certainexpensive drugs under particular circumstances.in the future, computerbased patient records (cprs) hold considerablepromise for improving health care and reducing costs. today, patient recordsare contained on numerous slips of paper (e.g., laboratory tests, physician notesperhaps produced by transcribing the physician's dictation using a wordprocessor) stuffed into a folder and perhaps arranged in chronological order.however, in some institutions cprs are beginning to supplement paper records,over which they have many potential advantages. cprs are or can be morelegible, more current, more reliable and accurate, more comprehensive, moreeasily accessible, and more easily searchable. cprs could also be the basis oflongitudinal databases that would allow development of "bestclinicalpractice"guidelines coupling treatment to expected or likely outcomes. outcomebasedtreatment is thought by many to have considerable potential for reducing healthcare costs.a second growing application of it in health care is its use in givingphysicians remote access to hospital information systems through dialupmodems or leased lines, allowing them to check on the status of patientsthrough cprs. physicians practicing in rural areas can thus use widebandvideo to consult with specialists, who tend to reside in urban areas; one oftencited use is the transmission of xray images by network from rural familypractitioners to urban radiologists. citytocity teleconferencing can also beused so that the best specialists can consult together. remote access providedby itbased systems is also very important to emergency medical teams sentinto the field. ambulance teams or rescue squads do not typically includephysicians. however, radio communications can link onsite personnel withphysicians elsewhere. voice communications provide advice and direction fromthe physician, and both voice and data downlinks from the field to the physicianprovide information about the condition of the patient.automated systems to support clinical decision making have been thesubjects of research since the mid1960s. given a set of data on a patient, thesesystems commonly act as a consultant that advises the physician on diagnosis ortreatment. such systems attempt to capture in machinereadable form theexpertise that clinical physicians have about their patients andimpacts of information technology at the industry level79information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.diseases. two relatively old examples of medical "expert" systems are mycin,a system designed to help physicians manage different types of infection, andinternist, a system designed to support diagnosis of diseases in internalmedicine.the widespread use of it in clinical practice will require it that can beused to support the wide range of clinical functions for which the medicalprofession is responsible, taking into account the high degree of variability inclinical practice from practitioner to practitioner and the reluctance ofphysicians to alter their practices on the basis of outside influences.nevertheless, if physicians are willing to use data on outcomes and to adaptclinical practice to take the best advantage of it's potential to reduce costs andimprove efficiency, there are many opportunities to use information moreeffectively in providing health care. future applications may includemultimedia cprs, explicit coupling of medical and related knowledge (e.g., themedical literature, government regulations regarding practice, or guidelines forpractice) to a patient's medical record and/or to a specific treatment program forthe individual, and universal electronic interchange of data and information.bankingas a major component of the u.s. financial system, the banking industry isvital to the u.s. and world economies and to individual financial wellbeing.banks mediate a wide range of commercial and personal transactions involvingthe exchange and investment of money, providing such services as loans,deposits, and trust services to individuals, small businesses, and corporations.the banking industry is a major factor in the economy. it generatedrevenues of $209 billion (current dollars) in 1990. at the end of 1989, insuredcommercial banks alone held about $3.3 trillion in assets, $2.0 trillion in loansand leases, and $2.5 trillion in deposits. there were 12,713 banks in thiscategory, down from a peak of about 14,481 in 1984;48 however, the number ofcommercial banking offices (central and branch) grew from 57,010 in 1984 to61,162 in 1989.49 the industry exhibits considerable concentration. forexample, in 1989, 4.8 percent of federally insured commercial bankinginstitutions (614 commercial banks) held 74.9 percent of all assets ($2.47trillion); 23.4 percent of these institutions held 88.9 percent of assets.50 savingsbanks exhibit similar concentration, although not as intense; in 1989, 15.8percent of federally insured savings banks (534) held 77.2 percent of all assets($1.2 trillion).51 table 2.8 describes the evolution of depository institutions overthe last decade, of which banks were by far the largest component, about 90percent.although the banking industry has grown at a moderate rate over theimpacts of information technology at the industry level80information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.last two decades, the most significant changes in this period concern itscharacter rather than its size. for most of its history, banking has been subject toextensive federal and state regulation. however, partial bank deregulation in thelate 1970s and early 1980s led to a sharp increase in the variety of services andproducts offered by commercial banks. driven by both technology andcompetition from nonbank financial institutions, increasing productdiversification continues today in commercial banking, although it is stillconstrained to some extent by current regulations.the banking industry has experienced a variety of economic and financialproblems over the past several years, including losses from bad real estateloans, a large fraction of portfolio assets tied up in borrowings for takeovers andfor loans to less developed countries, the failure of a number of wellknownfinancial institutions, the widespread implications of the savings and loan crisis,and, finally, the economic downturn of 19901991.52 in large part, theseproblems are ultimately responsible for the considerable consolidation that thebanking industry has undergone in the last decade. bank failures, contractions,mergers, and acquisitions have reduced the number of all banks and the numberof large banks, and as a result, industry employment has been shrinking. mostreductions in personnel have been concentrated in backoffice jobs.given the magnitude of the banking industry's investments in it over thelast two decades, large increases in productivity might have been expected. onereason these have not appeared in measures of macroeconomic productivity isthat such measures in the banking industry remain highly problematic. figureson the gross domestic product originating in the u.s. economy (gpo) for thebanking industry are derived by the bureau of economic analysis essentiallyfrom employment data (table b.3, appendix b), whereas measures of grossoutput that are generated by the bureau of labor statistics take into accountcommercial banks' three major servicesšdeposits, loans, and trust services(appendix c). neither approach is able to account for improvements in thequality of service offered to customers or for the availability of a much widerarray of banking services. for example, the speed with which the processing ofa loan application is completed is an indicator of service that is important to theapplicant, as is the 24hour availability through automated teller machines(atms) of many deposit and withdrawal services previously accessible onlyduring bank hours. neither of these services is captured as higher bankingoutput at the macroeconomic level.a second reason for the lack of large increases in measured productivity isthat early applications of it proved to be costly and cumbersome. software andequipment had to be updated and replaced frequently. a dizzying array of newproducts constantly called for new software and communication capabilities. itsystems required large amounts of tailoring,impacts of information technology at the industry level81information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training, upgrading, and updating. cost control, management skills, andproductivity tracking systems lagged behind the new technologies in a rapidlychanging competitive marketplace. margins long protected by regulations weresqueezed by inverted yield structures (i.e., financial instruments whose yieldvaried inversely with their time to maturity), changing markets, and crosscompetition with other savings and investment instruments. risks andopportunities for profit both increased. the result was that tangible paybacksfrom it investment were delayed.table 2.8 banking19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)39.661.964.265.266.1revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;sic 60a)56.490.588.796.4100.9employment (millions of jobs)n/a2.02.02.12.1number of hours worked (billions)n/a3.73.93.93.9annual investment in it (billions of1982 dollars)0.11.61.91.82.9it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)0.24.45.15.66.9gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)16.6716.6616.7716.77annual it/gpo2.6%3.0%2.8%4.4%annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourb0.0%0.6%0.0%note: figures include all depository institutions. commercial banks, federal reserve banks, andsavings and loan banks account for about 90 percent of all figures. see box 2.1 for explanation ofterms and sources of data given.consolidations in the industry have had the desirable effect of reducingexcess it capacity, particularly that associated with backoffice processingfunctions, and also excessive branch network structures.53 it has been anenabler of consolidation. however, studies of smaller mergers in the mid1980ssuggest that the noninterest expenses of merged banks do not differsignificantly from the expenses of nonmerged banks.54 other studies suggestthat economies of scale characterize some but not all activities undertaken bybanks.55today, it is being used to support growing efficiency and greaterdispersion among banks. backoffice it systems for internal accounting andimpacts of information technology at the industry level82information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.customer accounting were the focus of it investment throughout the 1970s andearly 1980s. virtually all banks were interconnected to regional and nationalnetworks. a large percentage of paperbased transactions were transmitted andprocessed electronically. atm services and direct electronic deposits andwithdrawals by large automated users replaced many paper processes. as newproducts and services expanded, and as margins became less predictable,commercial banks began investing in frontoffice automation to provide contactpeople with better information and to enhance the delivery of products andservices.198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of 1982dollars)67.268.570.371.170.871.4revenues (billions of1982 dollars; sic 60a)98.699.9100.3100.399.599.8employment (millionsof jobs)2.12.22.22.32.32.3number of hoursworked (billions)4.04.14.24.34.24.3annual investment init (billions of 1982dollars)4.15.97.99.812.613.8it capital stock(billions of 1982 dollars)9.112.516.922.228.835.1gpo per laborhour(1982 dollars)16.6016.5816.6216.7016.7716.80annual it/gpo6.0%8.7%11.2%13.8%17.8%19.3%annual rate of changein gpo per laborhourb1.0%0.2%0.2%0.5%0.4%0.2%a standard industrial classification system code.b the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 0.1 percent.labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.initially, investment in it was concentrated in computers, since bankinginvolved inputoutput intensive processing and huge databases. most bank workinvolves establishing accounts (or customer relationships) and handlingtransactions within those accounts; banks process an increasing number oftransactions that now total many tens of billions per year, a number that wouldbe unthinkable without automation.56 for example, visa's peak capacity forprocessing credit card transactions grew from 30,000 per day in 1978 to over1.4 million per day in 1991, while its response time for authorizations droppedfrom 5 minutes in 1973 to 1.1 seconds in 1991.57impacts of information technology at the industry level83information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.banks developed the technology for magnetic ink character recognition,which enables a high degree of automation in the checkprocessing system.standalone systems for check processing, credit applications, and savingsaccounts are used by a large number of banks today. more recently, new itbased systems have helped to consolidate mainframebased operations. forexample, the bank of boston revamped its securitiesprocessing business in1989, consolidating these operations from 11 separate locations into 2. this itbased consolidation reduced staff requirements by 17 percent while volumeincreased by 80 percent.58in the late 1980s, the banking industry began to focus on automation ofdata communications. the installation of online terminals in the early 1970senabled automation of the customer interface and frontoffice applications insuch areas as corporate treasury. atms, first introduced in the late 1970s, havebecome an agent of a strategic change in banking. more than 75,000 atms inthe united states handle about 6 billion transactions per year for cashdispensing, funds transfer, credit card payments, and obtaining credit lines.59the deployment of an atm network in 1977 was a major contributor tocitibank's growth of market share from 4 percent to 13.4 percent; between 1977and 1988 citibank's branch staff grew by 18 percent while they served threetimes as many customers.60) data communications also lies at the heart of banktobank transactions all over the world: the clearing house for interbankpayments system handles daily transactions worth nearly $2 trillion.61it enables banks to provide better service to customers. for example,mellon bank has installed an itbased system to help resolve credit card billingdisputes; this system enables the clerk to view in one place all documentsrelevant to a particular disputed transaction. using this system, which alsoinvolved considerable reengineering of its process for handling customercomplaints, mellon was able to reduce its backlog of customer complaints from5200 to 2200, resolving them in 25 days on average (versus 45 dayspreviously).62it has been used to support a plethora of new products, including atmaccess to banking services, the ability to shift funds between multiple accounts,and overdraft privileges.63 many of these new products are made possible by''securitization" of mortgages and credit card portfolios. bank products arearguably information combined in new ways; for example, variablerateconsumer loans depend on computergenerated indexes and interestcalculatingalgorithms,64 while unified statement processing enables the display ofinformation from all accounts at one bank on one statement and "sweep"services enable customers to consolidate dividends and interest from differentinvestment funds in one central interestpaying money market account.impacts of information technology at the industry level84information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.changed by sophisticated itbased systems, loan processing shifted frompersonal loan officers accessing branch cash reserves to automated access tocredit databases and external funds acquisition with assetbacked securityarrangements.65 trade processors have eliminated the gap between front andbackoffices through automated interfaces.66 automated credit scoringsimulates the organizational structure of centralized approval; instead of branchpersonnel sending applications to a central site for approval, workstationsconnect lenders to centralized computer systems that are used to help makedecisions about granting credit.67dan schutzer, a vice president of citibank, asserts that it has been used tocreate "whole new industries in investment banking that never existed beforewith the growth of derivative products, mortgagebacked securities, credit cardreceivables, commercial paper, corporate bonds to a large extent, and so forth.many of these things didn't even exist as sources of revenue the way they arenow."the banking industry has invested heavily in building a sophisticatedinformation infrastructure, which now includes highpowered desktop systems,artificial intelligence applications, automated credit scoring, electronics fundstransfer, and links among a wide range of services and providers. it will beused to enable an increasingly diverse set of banking interactions. more thanlikely, a higher proportion of banking will be carried out via atms, or morebroadly over wiresšvia telephone or screenbased transactionsšas well as bymail. thus the interaction will be more indirect. in the future, there may bemore cardbased interactions, as the uses of credit cards grow and as cardsthemselves become "smarter" (e.g., smart cardtelephone services). anincreasing amount can be done at little extra cost, with relatively few people, acircumstance that promotes diversification into generation of assets (e.g.,mutual funds), insurance products, and so onšbuilding blocks for the industry.there will also be a high premium on integration of products and servicesšthatis, standardization up to some levelšfollowed by specialization to the customer.lastly, the banking industry has come under considerable competitionfrom "nonbank banks." while the relaxation of the regulatory environment inthe last decade has been important, it has enabled a variety of nonbankinginstitutions to take advantage of this new environment by offering services thatpreviously only banks could offer. for example, supermarkets with atms arenow surrogate bank branch offices for transactions such as cash withdrawal.large corporate entities such as at&t and general motors now offer widelyaccepted credit cards similar to mastercard and visa. with the cooperation oflocal banks, investment firms offer mortgages at favorable rates across thenation. thus the traditional boundaries of the banking industry are blurring, andthe ultimate impact of new competition is uncertain.impacts of information technology at the industry level85information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.insurancethe insurance industry is divided into two large segments: (1) life andhealth insurance, including pensions and annuities, and (2) property andcasualty insurance. life and health insurance is divided among individualproducts (sold to individual consumers) and the group market (life, health, andpension insurance products sold to employee or other groups).68 property andcasualty insurance products are divided between personal lines (individualproducts, mainly automobile and homeowners' insurance) and commercial lines(e.g., coverage for liability, errors and omissions, business continuation, andemployee fidelity bonding, as well as fire, theft, and so on).total premium receipts for life and health insurance and annuitiesapproach $300 billion annually. life and health insurance is provided by about2350 companies;69 total life insurance in force (i.e., aggregate policy face value)exceeds $10 trillion, with the average u.s. household now having more than$100,000 in coverage. net written property and casualty premiums total about$225 billion annually,70 with about 3800 companies providing such coverage.71about 55 percent of this figure covers commercial liabilities, with theremainder covering personal liability. the scale of these dollar flows makesinsurance companies a major element of the u.s. financial system and majorinstitutional investors.the several thousand companies that provide insurance coverage rangefrom very large multiline companies that sell a broad range of products in allstates, to small companies that sell particular products to fill specializedcustomer or product niches. policies are sold to the public through direct writersthat sell through their own agents (often known as captive agents) or directlythrough telemarketing, the mail, and so on, and through agency companies thatsell through independent agents who offer products from several insurancecompanies. in 1989 about 1.4 million people worked for insurance carriers(table 2.9). expenditures on it in the insurance industry have grownsignificantly more rapidly than those of most of the other service industriesexamined. table 2.9 describes the evolution of the industry in more detail.in recent years, major changes have taken place in the insurance industry.life insurance carriers have relied less on traditional wholelife policies, havingbeen pushed by market forces to offer products that compete with a wide rangeof other investment vehicles. in the very competitive market for pensions andannuities, life insurance companies offer a wide range of investment vehicles toindividuals and corporate pension plans. in the health insurance market,traditional indemnitybased group health plans now are in a minority, asinsurers more often offer and serve as administrators of managed health careplans, such as health maintenance organizations and preferred providerorganizations. insurance companies are facing increasingimpacts of information technology at the industry level86information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.competition from a range of entities, including banks and other financialinstitutions, health insurance plan administrators, and corporations' increasingwillingness to selfinsure.understanding the impact of these changes on productivity in the insuranceindustry is highly problematic, and the bls has been unable to develop ameaningful measure of output for the insurance industry. still, certain structuralfeatures of the industry can be identified.much of the insurance industry, especially the property and casualty andhealth segments, is dataintensive, being characterized by huge volumes ofaccounting, analysis and statistical data, and transactionprocessing. insurancecompanies are concerned about the quality of business generated by theiragents, as measured, for example, by the level of loss payouts resulting from themix of products offered by a company. these companies need to be able toassess the risk to which a given portfolio exposes them, and thus they are largeusers of actuarial data that enable them to calculate statistically the likelihood ofthese risks with adequate levels of predictability. in addition, a large volume ofdata persists throughout an insurance product's life cycle, which includesunderwriting (in which a substantial number of risk factors are evaluated indetermining the acceptability of a risk and the premiums to be charged),maintaining policyholder and policy and coverage information, and keepingrecords of claims and payments.thus, it is not surprising that insurers were among the first in thecommercial and corporate community to invest heavily in computers of allsizes, to develop their own extensive software and to use packaged software,and to install major telecommunications networks. for example, the insuranceindustry was quick to automate claims processing, which involves verifying thata claim has been submitted by a current policy holder, validating theconsistency between the particular claim made and the policy's coverage(perhaps checking other policies held to coordinate benefits), and generating acheck for the appropriate amount along with an explanation for how thatamount was derived. all of these functions are performed today in a highlyautomated fashion. automation has enabled the volume of claims processed togrow enormously with a minimal increase in personnel requirements, clearly anincrease in productivity. as importantly, such systems enable claims processingto be carried out more quickly on a decentralized basis by employees (oragents) in the field who can access the necessary databases remotely.beyond reducing labor requirements and increasing processing speed inbackroom operations such as accounting and records, insurance companies areusing it to do qualitatively different things. for example, portable computersare being used increasingly in field operations to communicate with the homeoffice for a variety of functions. an agent tied by modem to the home office canserve a customer much more effectively now, by providingimpacts of information technology at the industry level87information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.customized quotes or claims payments instantaneously, than in the past.insurance companies have connected their own agents and independentsthrough networks they have designed and built themselves, or through systemssuch as the insurance value added network system (ivans) developed byibm.table 2.9 insurance19691980198119821983gpo (billions of 1982 dollars)20.238.735.429.833.2revenues (billions of 1982dollars; sic 63a)44.167.866.867.867.3employment (millions of jobs)1.01.21.21.21.2number of hours worked (billions)1.92.42.42.42.4annual investment in it (billionsof 1982 dollars)0.00.60.70.81.8it capital stock (billions of 1982dollars)0.11.31.72.03.1gpo per laborhour (1982 dollars)10.5416.2114.7612.4513.97annual it/gpo0.2%1.6%2.0%2.5%5.3%annual rate of change in gpo perlaborhourb4.0%9.0%15.6%12.2%note: see box 2.1 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.development of insurance policies for different corporate clients has alsobenefited from the use of it. for example, the aetna life and casualtycompany used it to revamp its "case installation" process for developing healthplans for new clients.72 the networked pcbased system now used by aetna'shealth plan business unit for case installation was based on reengineeringaetna's installation process to homogenize case installations across regionaloffices and to reduce the volume of paperwork associated with each newinstallation and its different requirements.knowledgebased expert systems are being used increasingly byunderwriters to help decide acceptance of applicants for coverage. such systemsfacilitate the rapid comparison of a particular individual's risk profile with thosein the community at large and make it easier to customize a policy based on therisks faced by that individual. they also provide the capability, based on quitesophisticated and elaborate data analysis developed byimpacts of information technology at the industry level88information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the insurance industry, to implement widespread and varied costcontainmenttechniques in paying group health claims.198419851986198719881989gpo (billions of 1982dollars)35.939.536.034.437.036.7revenues (billions of1982 dollars; sic 63a)70.274.273.773.576.977.5employment (millionsof jobs)1.21.31.41.41.41.4number of hoursworked (billions)2.42.52.72.72.82.8annual investment init (billions of 1982dollars)3.33.64.65.66.46.2it capital stock(billions of 1982 dollars)5.47.510.012.915.817.9gpo per laborhour(1982 dollars)14.9315.7213.5212.5313.3213.18annual it/gpo9.2%9.1%12.8%16.4%17.3%16.8%annual rate of changein gpo per laborhourb6.9%5.3%14.0%7.4%6.3%1.1%a standard industrial classification system code.b the compounded annual rate of change in gpo per laborhour from 1981 to 1989 was 1.4percent. labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of gpo per laborhour.quality in the insurance industry can be reflected in the extent to whichinsurance products can be tailored to meet the needs of individuals and in themanner in which customers are served. as is the case with many other serviceproviding activities, measuring the quality of the service delivered in theinsurance industry is problematic. although in some cases quality does havequantitative indicators (e.g., the average number of days needed to issue apolicy or settle a claim), often the value of quality is subjective; i.e., it is in theminds of customers.today, many companies are using customer surveys and focus groupsessions to find out what is important to their customers. many insurers arefocusing their initial reengineering efforts in areas that will affect customerservice, seeking ways to further differentiate themselves in what is beingviewed increasingly by many customers as a commodity market. the ultimategoal is to sell insurance to a market of onešsingle clients to whose individualcircumstances a policy's payments and benefits are specifically tailored. theway each company uses it will help determine whether and how it meets thisgoal.impacts of information technology at the industry level89information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.selling customized insurance to markets of one may change the traditionalnotion of insurance as the sharing of risk among large groups of individuals.insurance companies have always differentiated among some risk groups (e.g.,male drivers under the age of 25 usually pay more than others for autoinsurance). but prior to the widespread availability of it, data to differentiatemore finely among individuals were simply unavailable. today, the use of itenables insurance companies to collect data on individuals from multiplesources and thereby define risk groups consisting of relatively small numbers ofindividuals, individuals with aids or cancer. insurance may not be available tosuch groups at all, or only at a very high priceša possibility that posessignificant questions for social policy.it has also been used effectively by insurance companies attempting tocompete in new markets. for example, james stewart, executive vice presidentand chief financial officer, noted that cigna invested in it "to significantlyimprove and enhance the ability to deal with an individual participant'sstatements and a whole bunch of other services that we felt were responsive,both to the competition and to the customer's needs. that decision was made,not on a costbenefit basis, but rather [to answer such questions as], whatmarkets do we want to compete in? what do we need to do to positionourselves against both the insurance company and noninsurance companycompetition?"insurance agencies that provide coverage to individuals have followed asimilar path with respect to using it. a recent survey of independent agentsfound that 85 percent of independent agencies have some automation and that agrowing number are using integrated, comprehensive fullfunction agencysystems for backoffice work (e.g., commission analyses, accounts receivableand payable). regardless of whether they have agency systems, 90 percent haveword processing, 85 percent have automated insurance rating, 76 percent haveautomated accounting, and 72 percent have automated billing. somewhat fewerhave automated underwriting (33 percent) and automated interfaces to multiplecompanies (44 percent, up from 23 percent in 1987). seventytwo percent ofthese systems were installed before 1989.73agency systems, like corporate systems, have been used largely toautomate what were previously manual processes (accounting, billing,marketing, and customer service). although such systems enable the samenumber of people to handle a larger volume of work (and thus hold down laborcosts), independent agents' desires and expectations for agency automation are,according to some observers, largely unfilled. early agency users of itexperienced more difficulties than they had expected, partly as a result of theirfailure to understand the new systems, plan appropriately for their use, and trainemployees accordingly.impacts of information technology at the industry level90information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.j. raymond caron of cigna systems argues thatthere is a big evolution of is (information systems) in an insuranceenvironment. we went through an era with massive tab card sorting. we leftthat era and went into mainframe computers, data centers, and batchprocessing. we left that era and went into online applications, networks, andall that stuff. i think we're on the verge of a significant change in what isorganizations are all about, and i think that change is going to be radical.reengineering, how we build applications, and how we work on solutions willbe the new drivers.cigna's systems organization is going through the process of reengineeringalong with every other division within the company. what we are striving forin our reengineered systems organization is to be an integrated part of thebusiness strategy. to accomplish this, we have had to help our people changetheir mindset from a narrow technology perspective to a more global businessperspective. today, cigna systems professionals use their skills to solvebusiness problems, not technology problems. and they understand that theirperformance will now be measured by customer satisfaction and businessresults.one of the things i'm planning is changing the way is people think. if youget them to think about it right they can provide solutions that have nothing todo with technology. we need to get them to think that way because thosemight be the most powerful solutions rather than thinking the only thing is canbring is technology. so we're restructuring is, and i think the difference will bedramatic.put differently, it may be used to drive restructurings that might nothappen in the absence of technology. developing better ways to use it isalready an integral part of many insurance companies' strategic planning and isa key factor in the industry's growth and in the successes of individualcompanies.observations and conclusionsin both scale and nature, the use of it is highly varied within and amongthe industries the committee examined. that is, it has been used by companiesfor many different purposes, both operational (e.g., accounting, logisticsscheduling) and strategic (e.g., changing competitive positioning or providingtotally new services). although it has been used primarily to improve theefficiency and effectiveness of specific activities, the impact of it in theseindividual instances has sometimes had a large influence on the structure of theindustry as a whole. because of the effects of other nonit forces, thesignificance of it's use for an industry may be observable in aggregate industrydata only when its impact is truly overwhelming or revolutionary. a goodexample is the telecommunications industry, which literally has been built on itand which is now pervaded by it. in otherimpacts of information technology at the industry level91information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.instances that are more likely the norm, it's impact may be measurable only atthe level of individual enterprises (e.g., in shifts of share or profit) or inactivities within various companies.at the same time, it is clear that the use of it can bring about changes inthe boundaries and definition of an industry. for example, deregulation and newtechnologies have allowed new players to provide services that were once theexclusive domain of traditional telephone carriers; today, private carriers andvalue added carriers handle voice and data longdistance traffic for payingcustomers, and even some corporate networks have spare capacity that can besold to other outside users. it has been used to alter existing relationshipsamong wholesalers, retailers, manufacturers, and end users (e.g., to eliminateintermediaries and enable direct sales from manufacturers to end users).insurance companies are moving ever deeper into the business of health caremanagement, and the lines between the two are already blurring. through theuse of it, different industries are moving into banking, thus threatening thetraditional understanding of what constitutes the banking system. it (in theform of crss) has been part of what one airline executive suggested has beenthe transformation of the airline industry into one of the largest retailers ofperishable goods (i.e., empty seats that disappear when the flight takes off).further examples and amplifications of this point are contained in chapter 3.lastly, it may well create entirely new sectors for business that willencompass a variety of new and different industries. for example, a powerfultelecommunications and information infrastructure has the potential to open theprivate home to a host of new informationrelated services. although mostnetworkbased services have been aimed at businesses and other organizations,many now envision the creation of large homebased markets for new productscombining computing and communications devices and services (e.g.,multimedia technology). although past attempts to develop services for thehome such as videotext information delivery or computerbased teleshoppingwere largely unsuccessful, greater potential is seen in the more sophisticatedofferings promised by recent and announced efforts to blend telephone, cabletelevision, software, video, audio, text, and image database services. betterservices for the home imply changes in the existing communications,information services, and entertainment industries; new markets for services;and new possibilities for homebased work. consistent with the benefitspassthrough phenomenon discussed in chapter 5, these new markets will likelygenerate public or private financial gains that far exceed those realized by thefirst companies entering these new markets.although an industry perspective offers particular insights about the actualperformance of itbased systems versus it's measurable effects onproductivity, further analysis at the enterprise and activity levels is necessaryimpacts of information technology at the industry level92information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to understand where and how deployment of it can be most effective and howit's use is changing the basic structure of the economy, individualorganizations, and most jobs.notes and references1. in 1989, the united states employed 116.6 million workers in fulltime and parttime jobs. seeu.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1990. survey of current business,july, table 6.6b, government printing office, washington, d.c.2. u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1992. survey of current business,july, government printing office, washington, d.c. table 6.22c (p. 91) provides corporate capitalconsumption allowances by industry, table 6.1c (p. 82) provides national income by industry, andtable 6.5c (p. 84) gives fulltimeequivalent employees by industry.3. u.s. department of commerce. 1992. u.s. industrial outlook, government printing office,washington, d.c., p. 401.4. the revenue passengermile (rpm) is the principal measure of output for the air transportindustry: a single paying passenger carried for a 1000mile airplane flight counts as 1000 revenuepassengermiles. the rpm is thus a direct measure of the service being delivered: the movement ofpassengers between different points.5. u.s. department of commerce, bureau of the census. 1991. u.s. statistical abstract, table1072, p. 627, government printing office, washington, d.c.6. scheduled passenger carriers suffered losses from 1981 to 1983, in large part due to the recessionand high fuel prices. from 1984 to 1989, the industry earned positive net income in four of the sixyears and reported a minimal loss in another. however, the industry's financial losses were so severein 1990 (an operating loss of $3.95 billion in 19901991) that any gains in the 1980s were wipedout; scheduled passenger carriers lost about $2 billion from 1981 to 1990. (u.s. department ofcommerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 402.)7. u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 401.8. recent trends suggest that hubandspoke routing systems are most profitable under conditions ofrelatively high demand. lower demand reduces the revenues that airlines can generate, while thecosts of maintaining a hub are considerably less elastic. as recessionary pressures have driven downthe demand for air travel, many airlines are starting to scale back the number of hubs they maintain.see hirsch, james. 1993. "big airlines scale back hubairport system to curb rising costs," wallstreet journal, january 12, p. a1.9. see margolis, nell. 1992. "amr cuts costs, jobs," computerworld , december 21, p. 2.10. transportation research board, national research council. 1991. winds of change: domesticair transport since deregulation, special report 230, national academy press, washington, d.c.,p. 54.11. u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 404.12. for example, this revenue stream is worth $100 million per year to american airlines (quinn,james brian. 1988. "technology in services: past myths and future challenges," p. 37 intechnology in services: policies for growth, trade, and employment, bruce r. guile and jamesbrian quinn (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c.).13. the crs is conceptually a single database, although in fact the data it contains may bephysically distributed over many different computer systems. technologically, the crs provides asingle standard interface to the human user (e.g., the travel agent) for access to multipleheterogeneous databases.14. the term yield management refers to the practice of continuously managing the number and fareclass of seats on a given flight. by combining knowledge of how quickly seats of a given fare areselling with knowledge of competitors' pricing, yield management minimizes the number of emptyor lowpaying seats on any given flight, thus increasing revenues.impacts of information technology at the industry level93information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.15. see tolchin, martin. 1992. ''u.s. sues 8 airlines over fares," new york times, december 22, p.d1.16. air transport world. 1991. "ryder automates parts location," september, p. 106.17. air transport world. 1991. "recipes by videospecs," august, pp. 7881.18. the a320 airbus is a case in point. see stix, gary. 1991. "along for the ride," scientificamerican, july, p. 97.19. air transport world. 1991. "icao looks to space," december, pp. 9698.20. science. 1989. "flying the electric skies," vol. 244(june 30):15321534.21. aviation week and space technology. 1991. "airbus employs advanced procedures in a330/a340 manufacturing, assembly," november 4, p. 48.22. air transport world. 1991. "command center on the prairie," may, pp. 3839.23. kindel, sharen. 1991. "the route cause," financial world, august 20, pp. 7072.24. larson, richard. 1988. "operations research and the services industries," in managinginnovation: cases from the services industries , bruce r. guile and james brian quinn (eds.),national academy press, washington, d.c.25. from 1990 to 1992, the u.s. airline industry lost $9 billion to $10 billion dollars, wiping out allthat it had earned, and more, in the 1980s. see lenorovitz, jeffrey. 1993. "panel issues guidelinesfor airline recovery," aviation week and space technology, august 9, p. 31.26. see o'leary, meghan, 1991, "airport '91," cio, june, pp. 4052; air transport world, 1991,"ionworks," may, pp. 6266; and air transport world, 1991, "automation picks up speed,"september, pp. 5156.27. air transport world. 1992. "new cabins in the sky," april, pp. 7580.28. u.s. telephone association. 1992. statistics of the local exchange carriers: 1992 for the year1991, u.s. telephone association, washington, d.c., p. 2.29. federal communications commission. 1991. "fcc releases report on longdistance market,"news release, october 2, fcc, washington, d.c.30. schatz, willie. 1992. "who's calling, please?" computerworld, november 23, p. 69.31. u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 283.32. in some countries, longdistance calls are still logged by operators with handwritten tickets.33. according to peter chinloy, labor costs constituted approximately 75 percent of the operatingcosts for the bell system in the early 1980s. (see chinloy, peter. 1981. "implications for thecommunications workers of america of technological change at the bell system," reproduced inproductivity in the american economy, 1982, hearings before the subcommittee on employmentand productivity of the committee on labor and human resources, u.s. senate, march 19 and 26and april 2 and 16, government printing office, washington, d.c.) this study of the bell systemfrom 1947 to 1978 also found that labor input grew more slowly than output, resulting in a steadyincrease in labor productivity. however, note that "labor" costs refer only to the costs incurred bytelecommunications service providers; customerprovided labor (e.g., the keying by customers oftelephone and credit card numbers) is not included in such costs. in other words, "reductions" in thelabor required are at times more accurately characterized as shifting labor costs from provider tocustomer. customers can also benefit from such shifts, as they can complete their calls morequickly, more securely, and less expensively by keying numbers themselves.34. calling cards were invented in the 1950s but became especially popular after 1982, when at&tautomated the calling and billing processes, eliminating the need for operator intervention. seeramirez, anthony. 1992. "plastic keys to phone wizardry," new york times, may 30, p. 48.35. see wall street journal. 1992. "at&t unveils card for atms that has wider range ofuses," december 8, p. a6.36. today, with a few exceptions (notably cable tv companies), telecommunications companiesprovide their customers with the ability to move and manage data and information thatimpacts of information technology at the industry level94information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the customer generates and/or owns. local telephone companies, especially the regional bellholding companies, are actively interested in providing information content as well as delivery.legislative action may be taken in the future to remove the constraints placed by the 1982 consentdecree on providing such services.37. personal communication, joseph timko, vice president, at&t architecture, june 1992.38. see business week. 1992. "clout! more and more, retail giants rule the marketplace,"december 21, pp. 6673.39. for example, small manufacturers often have limited financial resources that prevent them fromcreating a directselling organization. to the retailer the wholesaler offers multiple lines ofmerchandise and a larger assortment than is available from an individual manufacturer; wholesalersalso obviate the need to work with multiple manufacturers. the wholesaler has the ability to buy inhuge bulk portions that can be broken down into smaller units for the retailer. some manufacturersare engaged in the wholesale business through the use of their sales branches. retailers may alsochoose to buy directly from the manufacturer through chainstore warehouses; however, this activitydoes not fall within the wholesale classification.40. inventory can represent as much as 70 percent of a retailer's assets. see, for example, standard& poor's corp., 1992, "retailing: current analysis," industry surveys 160(2), sec. 1, january 9; andstandard & poor's corp., 1991, "retailing: basic analysis," industry surveys 159(17), sec. 1, may 2.41. national retail federation, financial executive division. 1991. merchandising & operatingresults of retail stores in 1990, national retail federation, new york.42. business week. 1992. "clout! more and more, retail giants rule the marketplace," december21, pp. 6673.43. see elliot, stuart. 1993. "a last hurdle for shoppers: the checkoutcounter pitch," new yorktimes, january 11, p. d7.44. bencin, richard l., and donald j. jonovic. 1989. encyclopedia of telemarketing, prentice hall,englewood cliffs, new jersey, p. 276.45. u.s. department of commerce, u.s. statistical abstract, 1991, table 162, p. 104, forambulatory care and table 173, p. 109, for hospital usage.46. but see also explanatory note in table 2.7.47. tierney, w.m., m.e. miller, j.m. overhage, and c.j. mcdonald. 1993. "physician inpatientorder writing on microcomputer workstations: effects on resource utilization," jama 269(january 20):379383.48. u.s. department of commerce, 1991, u.s. statistical abstract, table 807, p. 501.49. u.s. department of commerce, 1991, u.s. statistical abstract, table 804, p. 500.50. u.s. department of commerce, 1991, u.s. statistical abstract, table 802, p. 499.51. u.s. department of commerce, 1991, u.s. statistical abstract, table 802, p. 499.52. u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 461.53. humphrey, david b. 1991. "productivity in banking and effects from deregulation," federalreserve bank of richmond, economic review 77(march/april):1628.54. srinivasan, aruna. 1992. "are there cost savings from bank mergers?," federal reserve bankof atlanta, economic review 77(march/april):1728.55. andersen consulting. 1991. strategies for high performance, arthur andersen, chicago.56. steiner, thomas d., and diogo b. teixeira. 1990. technology in banking: creating value anddestroying profits, dow jonesirwin, homewood, illinois, p. 29.57. ganley, oswald, and gladys ganley. 1992. "to inform or to control?," the newcommunications networks, second edition, ablex publishing, norwood, new jersey, p. 223. alsopersonal communication with visa, 1992, cited in "rewards and risks: communications andinformation in the global financial services industries," pirp, harvard university, cambridge,mass., june 1992.58. stewart, thomas. 1992. "u.s. productivity: first but fading," fortune, october 19, p. 56.impacts of information technology at the industry level95information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.59. bove, richard x. 1991. "bank technology reshapes industry," the bankers magazine, may/june, pp. 1720.60. glaser, paul. 1988. "using technology for competitive advantage: the atm experience atciticorp," in managing innovation: cases from the services industries, bruce r. guile and jamesbrian quinn (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c.61. passell, peter. 1992. "fast money," new york times sunday magazine , october 18, p. 42.62. fortune. 1992. "how to steal the best ideas around," october 19, p. 106.63. steiner and teixeira, 1990, technology in banking: creating value and destroying profits, p. 23.64. steiner and teixeira, 1990, technology in banking: creating value and destroying profits, p. 49.65. bove, 1991, "bank technology reshapes industry."66. andersen consulting, 1991, strategies for high performance, p. ix.67. andersen consulting, 1991, strategies for high performance, p. 5.68. there are two large subgroups within the group arena: medicare (health insurance for theelderly) and medicaid (health insurance for the poor) are governmentsponsored programs that areadministered by companies under contract to states. blue cross and blue shield organizations arealso state organized but privately administered. over threequarters of life insurers' health premiumscome from the group health market (usually through employer plans). see u.s. department ofcommerce. 1992. u.s. industrial outlook, p. 502.69. u.s. department of commerce, 1991, u.s. statistical abstract, table 851, p. 518.70. the department of commerce estimates life and health insurance premium receipts in 1991 at$283.5 billion and net written premium receipts for property and casualty insurance at $224.9 billion(u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, pp. 501 and 506).71. u.s. department of commerce, 1992, u.s. industrial outlook, p. 507.72. cafasso, rosemary. 1993. "manual no more: aetna unit gets pcs, results," computerworld,january 18, p. 37.73. acord corporation. 1992. moving into the 90s: the 1992 acord agency automation andinterface survey, acord [agency company organization for research and development], whiteplains, new york.impacts of information technology at the industry level96information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3impacts of information technology at theenterprise levelthe differing structure, environment, and competitive situation in eachservice industry explain only some of the differences in performance relative toinvestments in it. other differences reflect the experiences of individualcompanies within each industry. both performance and the use of it can varygreatly among companies in the same field (see appendix a for references torelevant studies). most of the variation reflects the fact that decisionsconcerning it investment programs are made at different points in time bymanagers with different abilities and perspectives. since most major decisionsabout it investment are made by individual executives at the enterprise level,understanding how these decisions are made and evaluated is critical if nationalpolicy initiatives are to be effective.this chapter examines why firms invest in it, how firms invest in it andthe categories of applications that are typical, and how firms assess the impactsof their use of it. it also discusses crosscutting observations on it andexamines the widespread belief among executives that it has enhancedperformance overall, regardless of what macroeconomic measurements mayindicate. the chapter is based on committee discussions informed by a set ofsemistructured interviews (appendix d) held with about 80 senior managers in46 major firms drawn from each of the major service industriesštransportation,communications, retailing, wholesale distribution, health care, financialservices, and professional services.the interviews sought (1) to discover what types of enterprise level dataand experience might be available, (2) to validate further or raiseimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level97information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.informed questions about the basis for industry and macroeconomiclevel dataand analysis, (3) to understand what factors managers consider important inmaking decisions about investing in it, (4) to obtain some useful insights intohow companies manage their it investments for greater effectiveness, and (5)to explore further the causes for and implications of the it paradox.this exploratory investigation was designed to yield insights, not tosubstitute new statistical data for data obtained in other studies. the particularfirms whose managers were interviewed were chosen because they hadverifiably strong reputations as leaders in the use of it. as such they were morelikely to have both positive and negative experiences to draw on, to havethought carefully about critical issues, and to be willing to discuss them.however, their response cannot be generalized beyond this sample, becausethese firms were clearly more likely than the average company to provideevidence of a positive relationship between use of it and performance. someconclusions follow.why firms invest in itexecutives generally invest in it to increase expected profits, margins, orreturns on capital. some investmentsšthose made to reduce costs, to generatenew products, to make measurable improvements in qualityšmay bediscernible as gains in productivity in standard published reports. however,executives may also invest in it for reasons that do not show up readily in suchreports but may still be vital to the success of enterprises. for example, in someendeavors (e.g., research, engineering design, or medicine), the capacity towork at the intellectual frontier or to solve advanced problems may depend onhaving the most current technologies. in others (e.g., accounting, consulting,legal work, credit clearance, or trust management), flexible access to the mostpowerful current databases and efficient datamanipulating capabilities may beessential to deliver a competitive level of quality.managers generally regard it as only one of many possible investmentsthat may benefit their firms. when they choose to invest in it, they do so in thebelief that such an investment will provide better returns as compared to otheralternatives, for example, not investing or investing in other programs. butmany of the factors they consider and many of the effects of their successfulinvestments may not show up in aggregated economic measures such asproductivity, return on investment (roi), sales, or margins.1 for example, sincecompanies can neither calculate nor report their "alternative cost" gains or lossesšwhere their companies would have been positioned without an investmentversus where they are with itšit is impossibleimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level98information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for more aggregated databases to reflect such gains or losses.2 managers,especially in professional firms, may consider the cost of over investment in itas insignificant against (the potentially much larger) losses the firm might incurif it fails to attract top talent, sustain its competitive edge, or hold market sharebecause its it systems are inadequate.among the more important rational reasons for investing in it that are notpicked up in aggregate databases are the following: expanding market share or avoiding catastrophic losses. whileaggregate industry output is a key economic indicator for policymakers, managers focus more on the performance of their individualcompanies. a company may gain or lose share even though statisticson an industry's performance in the aggregate may indicate relativestability. for executives, market share is a key parameter of successfulperformance as well as a basis for marketing, purchasing, and personalpower for those in the company. investments in it that only shiftmarket share may indicate little or no measurable benefit at theindustry or macroeconomic level. the same is true of investments thatsuccessfully prevent very large lossesšlike airplane crashes orenvironmental catastrophes. yet both types of investment areeconomically rational. creating greater flexibility and adaptability for future business environments. changes in the business environment (e.g., greaterregulation, increased market or operational complexity) often demandsignificant changes in the way a company operates. in some cases,investments in it may represent essential elements of theinfrastructures that allow companies to survive despite rapid andunforeseeable changes in the external environment. in other cases,companies may invest in it to gain future flexibility for creatingproducts that may not yet be planned or even conceived. in still othercases, it may enable a company to maintain or reduce its costs whileproviding greater variety and flexibility in its services. improving the quality and stability of internal environments. somefirms invest in it to obtain and analyze information that can provide agreater degree of predictability or stability in their operations and thatcan help them to avoid undue fluctuations in sales, profitability, oremployment. other firms may invest in it to improve employeesatisfaction or to enhance worker safety. it can help to eliminateburdensome tasks, make jobs more attractive, shorten training cyclesbefore an employee becomes productive, and improve morale. it is anespecially powerful tool that companies with lifecritical operationscan use to manage large amounts of data in realtime to improve thesafety of employees, customers, and the general public. improving the quality of products and of a firm's interactions withcustomers. for many service firms, it is an important element increatingimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level99information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.services that are better customized and tailored to meet the needs ofindividual customers. companies increasingly compete in otheraspects of customer service quality, often using it to serve customersmore rapidly, pleasantly, responsively, accurately, and completely.such improvements help generate longterm loyalty among customers.similarly, it can play an important role in improving reliability byensuring more consistent levels of performance and minimizing errorsand can thus enhance customers' perceptions of a company and itsproducts.as indicated above, individual firms have invested in it to achieve avariety of results that are not generally captured in aggregate databases. arecent study by brynjolfsson and hitt3 provides quantitative support for theseideas. specifically, brynjolfsson and hitt analyzed output data and data on itspending from 380 large firms that generate about $2 trillion in output annually,and found that increases in output at the firm level correlate strongly with itexpenditures, even if the macroeconomic data do not demonstrate increases inproductivity across the national economy or in individual service industries.these data were taken from the 1987 to 1991 time frame.how companies use and invest in ittypes of applicationssenior managers interviewed by the committee tended to cluster theirselected use of it into several broad categories that they evaluated usingvarious techniques. the uses of it included systems to support (1) basicinfrastructure for communications and data handling, (2) mandatedrequirements, (3) cost reduction, (4) specific new products, (5) desiredimprovements in quality, and (6) major strategic repositionings (perhapsincluding a complete reorientation of a company's business). companies tendedto evaluate investments in it on a programbyprogram basis, rather than beingconcerned with measures of overall productivity. in the committee's sample, thetechniques used to estimate or evaluate the impacts of it were comparable tothose used for other major investments.basic infrastructure for communications and data handlinginformation technology infrastructures consist of those basic informationstorage, retrieval, communications, processing, and distribution systems thatprovide the backbone or framework interconnecting the multiple informationgenerating and informationusing nodes in an organization. althoughdefinitions may differ in detail from company to company, the it part of aimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level100information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.firm's basic infrastructure generally includes the core voicetransmission, datacommunication, recordkeeping, and transactionprocessing systems necessaryto conduct business. what a firm regards as infrastructure may change overtime as new technologies become available and customers come to expectcertain basic facilities from their service providers. interactive datacommunications, for example, may be essential today, although this was rarelythe case a decade ago.basic it infrastructure systems are often approached as a "cost of being inthe business." the majority (67 percent) of companies interviewed by thecommittee had done preproject analyses of it investments in this area. but theyoften found that it was not worthwhile to separate out and justify individuallythe it component of infrastructurešany more than it would be to use roitechniques to justify the purchase of hammers for a carpenter, the acquisition ofa telephone for a lawyer, or the installation of a roof on a new building for arealestate developer. some items are integral to being in a certain business.firms tend not to give serious thought to doing without such elements ofinfrastructure in toto, and they often do not make a formal evaluation of theiroverall payback. but they frequently do evaluate incremental investments ininfrastructure on a costbenefit basis relative to other means of accomplishing aparticular goal. on this basis, a majority (73 percent) of interviewed companiessaid that they had attained acceptable to high measured returns on suchinvestments. but 27 percent reported negative or indeterminate returns.measurement complexities represented serious problems.for example, a study by the aetna insurance company once analyzed theimpact of it on expenserevenue ratios over a 15year period. although thestudy concluded that it had had little impact on these ratios, it also noted thatthe company could never have increased its handling of health care claims from250,000 per week to 1.3 million per week without using it and acknowledgedthe fact that this business was very profitable. backoffice automation infinancial services, electronic pointofsale systems in retail and wholesale trade,computer reservation systems in travel services, communications systems in allcompanies, and automatic flight control systems in aircraft for air transport areexamples of large it infrastructure systems without which individualcompanies could not compete todayšbut for which specific financial impactsare difficult to calculate.observed richard liebhaber, chief strategy and technology officer at mci,there is an extensive infrastructure of holes in the ground, structures on theground, and apparatus in the sky. that is our fundamental infrastructure. weregard it as a commodity asset: the transportation mechanism of our company.we view it from the standpoint of a cost factor, and we either build it, buy it,or lease each component depending on comparative cost and performancecharacteristics. the real problems in evaluatingimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level101information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity for these it applications lie in those situations where the outputsare difficult to quantify in financial terms: "if i do this i will save 2 minuteshere; if i do that i will save 8 minutes there," versus another alternative, "if ido this, i will save $9 million."as noted above, managers are not indifferent to infrastructure costs andimpacts. when it is regarded as basic infrastructure, the managerial decision isnot whether to invest in it, but rather how to obtain needed it capabilities atthe lowest cost. if a firm's it infrastructure requires some new capability,managers may consider alternative sources of that capability (e.g., performed inhouse vs. purchased from an outside source) and seek to obtain it at the lowestlongterm cost. when providing new levels of service to existing customersrequires that incremental power or features be added to the base structure,companies may compare the net incremental costs and benefits of each of thesefeatures, in financial terms if possible. if features cannot be evaluated directly infinancial terms, many companies use other metrics such as improvements inresponse times, levels of customer satisfaction, market penetration, or companyimage.several of the firms interviewed by the committee suggested that the onlytruly rigorous way of evaluating the payoff from investments in itinfrastructure would be to calculate the opportunity costs of not being in thebusiness, that is, the losses that would have been incurred if the investment hadnot been made. however, such a calculation could be highly tenuous because ofdifficulties in estimating what would have happened if the investment had notbeen made. as roger ballou, president of the travel services group (usa),american express, noted:a good example of an infrastructure investment would be our automatedauthorization system. to determine the benefit of that system even today, i'dhave to recreate mathematically what would exist if we didn't have it and onlyhad our old personal telephone authorization system. for that you'd have toguess how a 20yearold system would operate in today's world. that would bea highly theoretical exercise.the complications of evaluating the impacts of infrastructurešand thepossibilities of basing some decisions about investing in it on cost and otherson factors besides costšwere illustrated by j. raymond caron, president ofcigna systems, who observed thatthere are two types of infrastructure investments. for some, specific paybackand evaluation mechanisms are used; for others, they are not. for example, forour data or voice communications we have put together a program based onat&t's tariff 12 and network costs. we know what our costs are, and wehave goals to reduce those costs per minute, per connect, to the point wherethere are clear measures of benefits. in this case we can show dramaticevidence of our communications facilities costingimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level102information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.far less today than they did 5 years ago. – when it comes to pc platforms(our cignalink platforms, which include pcs, lans, the software to goalong with them, plus email), we find it very difficult to develop a useful costbenefit measure. we've taken a position that we shouldn't waste time trying todo it.caron's comments about personal computers (pcs) illustrate a specialproblem in measuring enterprise level impacts of infrastructure. the fallingcosts of computer hardware and applications software, the greater userfriendliness of many computer systems, and the increased capability tointerconnect local and remote systems have started to change the very nature ofbusiness infrastructure. it systems are used to increase the level of informationand flexibility within an entire enterprise. such generalized impacts areexceedingly difficult to measure in the short run.however, similar pcbased hardware and software can be specificallytargeted to improve the performance of a particular operation. when used inthis way, pc applications (e.g., to improve order handling, purchasing,customer inquiries or complaints, truck dispatching, field repair, editortoprintedpage cycles, and brokertocustomer interfaces) have had considerablepayoff. when specific goals are set, processes are properly reengineered,organizational interfaces are redesigned, and new incentives are provided,performance gains from specific applications can be impressive. cycle timescan be cut from days or weeks to a few hours or minutes. layers ofmanagement or entire departments can be eliminated. for example: at the new york times company and time inc., pcs enable editing tocontinue right up to the moment when a story is electronically typesetfor printing. entire intermediate hierarchies and the attendantcomplexity of coordinating different functional centers have beeneliminated. at mckesson corporation, retail customers can use pcs to interactdirectly with the company's computers to eliminate many delays inorderprocessing and much of the bureaucracy that used to exist tohandle this function. the number of order takers at mckesson hasbeen reduced from more than 700 to almost zero. the size of the salesforce has been cut in half, even while sales have risen by a factor of 8.the number of buyers has been reduced from 150 to 200 located atover 100 distribution centers to just 12 sitting in front of desktopcomputers at a central site. levels of management have been reducedin keeping with these changes.in other settings (e.g., universities, research laboratories, or publishinghouses), professionals often prefer to write and edit directly at their owncomputers, thus decreasing the number of secretaries needed for these tasks andflattening and downsizing the organization. it is not clear at this point whethermeasured productivity improves when (often) higherpriced employees likeprofessors or researchers undertake such tasks.4 in other situations,impacts of information technology at the enterprise level103information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.builtin desktop computer controls have eliminated much of the need forpersonal oversight in insurance, brokerage, and accounting applicationsšeliminating layers of bureaucracy.despite the undeniable utility of pc applications in certain settings, manyexecutives interviewed by the committee were ambivalent about the impact ofacrosstheboard access to desktop computing in their firms. measures ofperformance are unclear, and personal intuitions about the potential and realpayoffs from this type of it vary widely. for instance, a majority of managersinterviewed believed that the printed appearance and visual clarity ofcorrespondence, graphics, reports, and desktop printed matter are better becauseof pc use. communication between knowledge workers (i.e., the professionalsresponsible for interpreting and analyzing information made available to acompany), as well as the information available to such workers, may also havebeen improved. but the measurable value of these improvements remainsunclear when compared to the significant costs of having desktop computingavailable throughout an organization. at cigna corporation, james stewart, executive vice president andchief financial officer, said, ''i'm not yet convinced that dispersal andutilization of pcbased technology have proven to be efficient. thebusiness people in our organization drive me crazy on the subject ofcost and benefit. i see increasing expenditures for what i perceiveoccasionally as 'toys in the business world,' which don't add up tomeasurable output or improve our results. i think better discipline inthe effectiveness of pc technology is one of our great challenges." at bankamerica, martin stein, vice chairman, noted: "the area wherei would be the first to agree is that the banking industry has not done agood job in utilizing the pc as an office automation tool. we are facedwith the typical problem. everybody's secretary must have a 486 chipin his or her pc because it's much faster. and the question becomes,so what? the metrics for measuring this kind of productivity are notvery good."interviewees reported that, to better manage the costs of their basic itinfrastructures, some companies regarded them as a "utility" and chargeddivisions for their use, just as divisions would be charged for externallypurchased services. to further control costs, a few companies (10 to 20 percent)had begun to benchmark the utility's costs and performance against the pricesand performance available for similar services bought externally.(benchmarking is discussed in greater detail in chapter 5.)skepticism concerning the degree of payoff from general office use ofdesktop computers seemed widespread among interviewed executives. thismay reflect the fact that pc software in its first decade was not well suited tothe needs of nontechnical users and that many senior executives used computersimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level104information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sparingly because of unfamiliarity or discomfort with them. however, this isclearly changing; software is improving rapidly, and upperlevel managersincreasingly are individuals who grew up with personal computing.box 3.1 using lotus notes at chase manhattanbankchase manhattan is beginning a project to deliver financialinformation to its customers using lotus notes, a "groupware" applicationdesigned to facilitate transfers of information contained in largedatabases. senior vice president craig goldman argues that notescreates a new attitude for the information services department, allowingmanagers to focus on the front office where employees interact withcustomers rather than on the backoffice. goldman believes that notesprovides an environment that will let employees react quickly to newbusiness opportunities.source: vizard, michael. 1993. "chase banking on notes to reachcustomer desktops," computerworld, april 12, p. 47.recently, a number of companies have reported observing enhancedperformance when new, specialized "groupware" communication tools (liketeam focus, lotus notes, or vision quest) are used to capture systemknowledge, make meetings more efficient, and realize some of thecommunications benefits sought for pcs (box 3.1). the emergence of simplernetwork software, multimedia capabilities made possible by autosynchronoustransfer technologies, and greater capacities for electronically connecting fixedand mobile workstations may increase the benefits derived from desktopcomputing.mandated systemsregulators such as the internal revenue service, the food and drugadministration, the securities and exchange commission, state and localregulatory agencies, and other constituents like the investment community nowrequire companies to provide specific reports or to have inline monitoringsystems for operations. most respondents to the committee's questionsconsidered the necessary investments as costs of being in their particularbusiness and used it as an element in reducing the cost of complying withincreasing demands from regulators and other constituents. these investmentsin it are made with no possibility of showing a specific profit or gain to thecompanyšexcept as compared to performing the task by more manual means.on that basis, most interviewed executives believed that the returns oninvestments in mandated systems were satisfactory. forimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level105information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many companies, mandated requirements for reporting and monitoring haveescalated in recent years, perhaps because computers have made more complexreporting easier or even possible. almost by definition, mandated investmentsin it do not contribute to a company's measurable overall productivity or gainsin performance.but interviewed company executives did not manage mandatedinvestments in it casually. many estimated the relative cost of achieving thedesired result using system a versus system b. while no evaluations were madeof direct payoffs or returns for such investments, they were carefully monitoredand evaluated using benchmarks, performance metrics established oninstallation, and operations costs versus other alternatives.cost reductioncost reduction is often a major goal of investing in it. this was especiallytrue in firstgeneration applications, in which it often substituted directly formanual or clerical labor in repetitive transactions such as materialshandlingactivities or in large recordkeeping departments such as accounting,purchasing, or personnel. other firstgeneration uses allowed firms to achievesubstantial gains by avoiding costs associated with excessive capital float,inventories, and billing or payment errorsšand by saving on the costs of paperprocessing, check handling, production setup, engineering drawings, orshipping. while the benefits of these systems were said to be substantial,independent studies and the committee's interviews suggest that largecompanies have begun to reach limits in automating repetitive functions andachieving what might be called the industrialization of services.5 they are nowfocusing on using it for other, more complexšand often strategicšpurposes.secondgeneration costreducing systems are often focused onconsolidating or eliminating facilities such as data centers, productionplanningdepartments, or orderprocessing bureaucracies. an interesting application inthis area was illustrated by craig goldman, senior vice president and chiefinformation officer of chase manhattan bank:there is a significant costreducing phenomenon that is not well documentedin the industry. that is picking a single site [from which] to deliver aninformationintensive product on a global basis. it means you have commonsoftware in one location that delivers outputs to multiple sales locations ordistribution centers. anytime you have software in multiple locations, it isnever common and this lack of commonality is usually very expensive. that iswhere we see large potential efficiencies.a large majority (85 percent) of the companies interviewed made formalevaluations of their costreducing it projects. these firms generally found thatdirect financial savings and returns on investment could be calculatedimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level106information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with relative ease. standard formal capital planning and payback analysistechniques widely accepted in industry are applicable in this context. althoughoften not implemented consistently or well in the early days of it, roicalculations for these projects were said to be fairly straightforward now. inmost cases, interviewed companies now claimed to achieve targeted results orto exceed them through secondary uses of the same it technology. at the sametime, the payoffs from costreducing systems often were not as high as theycould have been because of inadequate reengineering of processes andinadequate reorganization of personnel. (this point is addressed further inchapter 4.)specific new products or opportunitiesit can enable the creation and delivery of specific new informationbasedservice products that are extensions of a company's basic repertoire. sometimes,such extensions are relatively modest, for example, a new "shopping channel"offered by a cable tv company. in other cases, such extensions have a majorimpact; for example, a telecommunications company may install new softwarethat allows differential billing rates for calls placed to special parties or at agiven time of day (mci's friends and family program or at&t's reach outamerica program).if a new product is distinctive enough, a company can measure its impacton profit and sales quite explicitly. however, many new products merely applynew applications software to flexible it infrastructures already developed, aswhen a new insurance product is offered using existing systems. in such cases,it is difficult to assess the total costs of the new product, although itsincremental costs may be easy to evaluate. such joint cost situations mayintroduce other complexities. by further utilizing existing it infrastructure,some particularly innovative new products may simultaneously lower averagecosts in the system, thus allowing greater pricing and servicing flexibility onexisting products. a prime example is mci's friends and family program,which lowers costs for residential customers yet uses the network's otherwiseexcess capacity in nonbusiness hours. in the words of richard liebhaber at mci:the decision to do friends and family was a combination of retention andmarket share: 62.8 percent of mci's traffic was during the day; 33 percent ofthe traffic (in 1990) was off shift. the percentages in residential traffic wereapproximately reversed. even today much of our infrastructure is idle duringthe night. so when we introduce a new product for nighttime residential traffic,such as friends and family, it may not require much capital. many of the keyinvestments will be for marketing rather than technological infrastructure.returns are going to be largely the difference between increased marketvolume (share) and marketing costs.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level107information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the creation and delivery of specific new service products have a moremodest and often a much more predictable impact than do strategic innovations(see below), because such products can be offered within the context of a wellunderstood business concept. a majority (64 percent) of the companiesinterviewed by the committee said that it investments used to support newservice products could usually be analyzed explicitly for profitability andreturns. the vast majority (90 percent) of responding companies noted that theyreceived satisfactory to high returns on these investments.it is important to note that the corporate financial statements that are thebasis for macroeconomic statistics reflect total returns from specific products,rather than the prorated returns that might be more appropriately assigned to itas just one component of total investment. any bias in reported data wouldtherefore overstate positive returns on it at more aggregated levels. even forinvestments in it that seemed to have quite measurable results, companieswhose representatives were interviewed only had an overall correlation betweeninvestments and total project returns. this is a special problem in interpretingresults whenšas has been notedšmany new informationbased productscapitalize on installed infrastructure and marginal investments for the newproducts themselves are minimal.conversely, if new products do not achieve desired returns, one cannotconclude that the fault lies in the it system. poor planning and implementationmay be the principal culprits. further, since potential payoffs from newproducts are always probabilistic, multiple projects and investments in it areoften necessaryšas in any other innovative fieldšto obtain a single payoff.hence, average payoffs on new products will be considerably less than those onestablished ones. and actual returns may not appear until long after investmentshave been made.improvements in qualityimproved quality is often a most important output of it systems. yet mostservice companies encounter major problems in appraising the impacts of it onservice quality, and especially in measuring that impact in financial terms. thisis true when two services are compared simultaneously or when a service outputat one time is compared to an output at an earlier date. service quality is oftenan intangible whose real value exists only in the mind of a customer.respondents to the committee's interviews noted that it was impossible toquantify how much more valuable it is to a customer to receive a monthly bankstatement within 48 hours versus a week later; how much more a cleaner,neater, more professional letter is worth; how much better served a customermay be in choosing from 100 financial service products rather than from 50; orhow much it benefits a customer to have a shorter wait, a more accurate salesslip, or a more relaxed clerk in aimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level108information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.checkout line. companies reported that it was also very difficult to define therelative worth to customers of the more precise analytical and diagnosticcapabilities now available in, for example, medicine or design, versus the lesspowerful but sometimes cheaper techniques of the past.often it allows the handling of enormous increases in complexity.although large benefits accrue to customers, competition may prevent theservice company from increasing its sales or profits. for example, travel agentsmust complete in minutes arrangements that they could not have handled in daysšor in some cases weeksšonly a decade ago. to optimize their load factors,airlines make an average of 175,000 fare adjustments a day and up to 600,000on some days. while these may payoff in higher profits at the airline level,travel agents must often research and reissue tickets multiple times for a givencustomer's flight. complexity, compounded by tasks such as worldwidearrangements, has increased by orders of magnitude; however, agents' averagecommissions have held steady at between 7.5 and 9.5 percent on airline pricesthat have dropped in real terms since deregulation.other factors further complicate determinations of quality. first, thequality of outcomes is heavily dependent on the actions of the buyer. superbeducational, health care, consulting, or financial services can be rendereduseless if the buyer does not followup properly. alternatively, excellentcustomer implementation can convert poorquality services into astoundingsuccessesšas successful graduates from poor schooling systems so often prove.second, final outcomes may not be known until long after the delivery of aservice. the true costs and benefits of education, surgery, dentistry, orinsurance, for example, may not be known to either the customer or theprovider for years or decades. even then exogenous events may largelydetermine outcomes. but the customer will perceivešand receiveštheservice's value in terms of actual outcomes, not only those over which theproducer might have had reasonable control.measures of it's impact on performance are essentially useless unless theyadequately reflect the quality of output. while a significant majority (over 80percent) of the responding companies had established formal metrics to measurethe quality of their service, these were almost always engineering metrics (suchas system response times, percentages of time computers were available, andcycle times for operations) or data from customer surveys (expressingcustomers' views of the services of the company) that could not be convertedinto financial measures of the quality of output. even when they had elaborateengineering and survey mechanisms to monitor quality, companies could notisolate the relative contributions of it, versus those of other factors such asmanagement, in creating these outputs. nor could they relate such measuresdirectly to financial results.american express's $6.8 billion travel related services (trs) groupimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level109information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is a case in point. the trs group samples client satisfaction monthly on suchmatters as timeliness, accuracy, and problem resolution for all its transactiontypes. it tracks some 46 measurementsšdefined as important by client researchšbroken down into six main categories. american express asks its clients toweigh the importance of each issue, leading to a weighted customer satisfactionindex that summarizes the key metrics and aggregates the number of"dissatisfying incidents" recorded in interviews and in customer complaints.american express uses these indexes as direct measures of the quality of itsperformance. these metrics are tied into a total quality management approachthroughout the trs group division for improving the overall effectiveness(efficiency and quality) of its operations. yet american express cannot place adirect dollar value on improvements in quality.unless sales increase or capital or labor requirements decrease as a directresult of investing in it to improve the quality of output, companies aregenerally unable to place a financial value on the benefits they receive fromusing it. surrogate measures of qualityšengineering metrics or data fromcustomer surveysšwere used by a vast majority (90 percent) of the companiesinterviewed by the committee. yet no company stated that it could reliablyconvert such measures into metrics of financial payoff. intangibles such as afirm's better responsiveness to customers and increased coordination withsuppliers do not always increase the total volume or the margins and prices onproducts a company sells or services.6 competitors may quickly match the newcapability, and each company may merely maintain its share of a total marketthat has not grown in size.although companies often try hard to measure the impact of it on quality,capturing such impacts and presenting them in ways that can be aggregated athigher levels of data are real problems.major strategic innovationsstrategic investments in it are those that significantly change thepositioning of a company in its markets, redefine the basic nature of thecompany, or are necessary to maintain the viability of the company despiteunforeseen competitive incursions. strategic systems tend to simultaneouslychange many different elements of customer, cost, and competitive relationshipsšnot just revenues or costs. they affect such things as quality of customerservice, flexibility, breakeven points, response times, and market image, whichcannot be measured in simple financial terms and hence be picked up inmacroeconomic data.strategic changes almost always induce a competitive response whosetiming, scope, and force are unpredictable. so many things happen at once inthe marketplace that respondents reported that it was difficult, even postimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level110information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hoc, to sort out impacts precisely. as in the introduction of new products, majoreffects may not be felt for a long time. for example, both the retail trade andtelecommunications industries are in the midst of huge transformationsšinvolving optical scanning, computing, and digital communication technologiesšthat were largely unforeseen when these innovations were first introduced.in some cases, incremental applications of it may ultimately restructure acompany so much that they redefine the very nature of the company's businessin ways that could not have been foreseen at the time of installation. forexample, bankers trust automated its backoffice functions so successfully inthe early 1980s that it was able to handle many wholesale banking operationswith a sophistication much greater than that of most of its competitors. as itswholesale volume grew, it sold its credit card operations and its new yorkretail and upstate commercial banking operations. the core of its businessbecame proprietary trading in bulk capital market activities, and bankers trustreoriented itself toward wholesale banking and trust operations. within thewholesale markets it understood well, bankers trust could take higher riskswith newer, more complex instruments, making possible much higher margins.in terms of efficiency, automation enabled bankers trust to cut its staff by twothirds, while tripling its volume. but more importantly, bankers trust hadredefined its total business concept and its options for future growth.when they are successful, strategic systems offer the highest potentialpayoffs from it. but, by definition, strategic investments in it systems areinfrequent and the results are difficult to forecast precisely because no one hasdeveloped or exploited such systems before. classics among systemsrepresenting strategic investments are economost and its successor systemsat mckesson, cosmos ii at federal express, automated teller systems atciticorp, and aanet at arthur andersen & co. other examples include bankof america's coin, levi strauss's levilink, chips (clearinghouse forinterbank payments system), and the depository trust. all of these systemsenabled their sponsoring companies to offer new services to clients, but it wastheir capacity to restructure the business in its industry that qualified thesystems as strategic. in some cases, investments in it that the sponsoringcompanies hoped would have strategic impact failed or yielded disappointingreturns: these include videotext, the new york times reference service,federal express's zapmail, and amramris's confirm system. systems inthe latter category show up both in higher cumulative it investment figures(until written off) and in decreased profits at the macroeconomic level.perhaps the best known example of an it application with strategic impactis the sabre system of american airlines. in addition to providing efficientand accurate flight reservations, sabre enables the company toimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level111information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.handle hundreds of thousands of pricing and routing changes each day tooptimize customer value and its own costs. the airline can hold fridayafternoon seats open for business travelers who are willing to pay a higher pricethan leisure passengers will pay. while offering discount fares early in the yearfor the christmas season, the airline can ensure that seats are available forpassengers who wait until later in the year, thus balancing and increasing profitsover the long haul. it can also control oversales on flights and the customerunhappiness that results. by using a postdeparture checkout procedure,american can also sell at later stops the seats opened up by "noshows." and itcan better control subsidiary services, such as special meals and handicappedsupport, as well as flight operations. american believes its greater capability inthese respects and its capacity to finely segment its customer base because ofthe detailed information it has available have enabled it to grow steadily duringthe postderegulation shakeout when many other airlines have lost control oftheir costs. many credit sabre for converting american from one of theweaker airlines in the late 1970s to one of the strongest airlines today (although,like other airlines, it faces financial challenges).the strategic use of it to change a company's positioning in themarketplacešand the difficulty of measuring that impactšis illustrated intelecommunications by richard liebhaber of mci, who said,we deal with 20 million customers every month. it's the only business in theworld where companies invoice every minute, every second, every line item.and people send us letters about details in their bills. wouldn't it be powerful,as a service provision, if we could convert all our workstations in customerservice to image capability and provide our representatives with the invoiceand any letters about it in image form? when the customer call comes, wecould answer questions immediately and better, but there would be nomeasurable productivity increase there. – it is an opportunity to improve theimage, the feel, the touch of mci. intuitively, i would tell you it's going toprovide market share, customer satisfaction, bottomline. i can't prove it. i'mnot going to waste my time trying.the strategic use of it may also enable industries to develop additionalrevenue streams of considerable value. one example is the sale of mailing listscreated and maintained by it systems among mailorder retail houses; in someinstances, the revenue from such sales is an important fraction of the revenuegenerated by actual sales. a second example is the revenue stream that goes toowners of major computerized reservation systems (crss); airlines unable toafford their own crss must buy services provided by existing crs owners.the revenue from such sales is substantial.it may also help to create whole new lines of business for an entireindustry, as mortgagebacked securities, swaps, and derivative securities have ininvestment banking. as daniel schutzer, vice president at citibank, noted:impacts of information technology at the enterprise level112information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the quality of the total service we deliver and the fact that these are wholebusinesses now handling trillions of dollars and making hundreds of millionsin profit leave no doubt in my mind that there has been productivity. but ifwe're talking about productivity in terms of the number of people that runbranches and how much profit we're making on our old lines, we probablyhaven't really decreased the number of people; for years, we were buildingmany more branches.the use of it has facilitated the formation of many new industries ormarkets, as the examples in table 3.1 indicate. the list there is incomplete, andthe data indicate only approximate scales. the full impact of creating these newindustries often will not be reflected as benefits for the originating firm(s) or tothe original service industries they might supplant. there can often besubstantial delays before macroeconomic data are restructured to reflect suchnew industries. although other forces helped to create these new markets andindustries, most would have been essentially impossible to operate at theirexisting scales and efficiencies without it. how much they substituted for otherbusinesses is unknown. even the incomplete list in table 3.1 suggests that newservice benefits to customers substantially outweigh aggregate investments in it.one of the most powerful strategic applications of it is the largescalecapture, segmentation, and integration of data about both markets andoperations (box 3.2). use of the resulting data and information has helpedrevolutionize the ways in which business (and even government) is conducted.7for example, retail chains, by keeping track of product features and sales trends indetail, can help innovators design products most suited to the market.by using these data to constantly update operations, producers canaccess markets more quickly, shorten cycle times, and decrease theirrisks from innovation. customers are presented with the products theymost want. and shortening productiontomarket times (as levistrauss's levilink does) reduces inventory risks for both producersand distributors. researchers in companies routinely use electronic networking tocommunicate internationally and with more centers of expertise than inthe past, bringing together the best minds in an entire company (andthe outside world) to bear on a problem. professional service firms canquickly access their expertise anywhere in the world. the potentials forsynergy and value are well recognized in research and consultingnetworks such as internet or aanet.arthur andersen & co. has developed a network, aanet, that helps linkover 60,000 people in some 300 offices in 70 countries. the company'scumulative experience is growing so rapidly that executives say, "even those inthe know may not have the best answer to the totality of a compleximpacts of information technology at the enterprise level113information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 3.1 scalar estimates of new markets and industries largely facilitated by itindustry typeasales volume orrevenues(billions of dollars)byearsourcecatalog retailing47.21992catalog age, march1993computer softwareand services79.81989the 5th annualcomputer industryalmanac, 1992fastfood restaurants75.61992frozen food digest,march 1993wholesale clubs33.01992financial times, may21, 1993discount merchandiseretailers151.51989discount store news,july 2, 1990computerizedreservation services(worldwide)1.81989pc week, august 7,1989public informationresources (northamerica)11.01991information week,august 26, 1991cellular telephones7.21992u.s. industrial outlook,1993home video sales andrental12.21992u.s. industrial outlook,1993basic cable television(subscription revenue)12.61992u.s. industrial outlook,1993satellite services1.51992u.s. industrial outlook,1993video games(worldwide)7.01992forbes, january 18,1993computer animation(worldwide)>5.01994computer graphicsworld, march 9, 1991assets managedcredit card receivables206.01990faulkner & gray, 1992swaps (worldwidešoutstanding balance)300.01991the bankers magazine,may/june 1993mutual funds(worldwide)161.01992business week, january18, 1993credit card chargevolume464.01991faulkner & gray, 1993''securitized" homemortgages100.01991business week, july 20,1992assetbackedsecurities50.9 public 8.0private1992the bankers magazine,may/june 1993transaction volumenew york federalover fedwire150,000 transactions/minute1990computerworld, april22, 1991automated tellermachines600 milliontransactions/month1991american banker,december 7, 1992impacts of information technology at the enterprise level114information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industry typeasales volume orrevenues(billions of dollars)byearsourcetransaction volume (continued)chipsc$250 trillion1990interviews withclearinghouse forinterbank paymentsforeign exchangemarket> $600 billion/day1990the economist, july 21,1990treasury bond market$100 billion/day1990the economist, july 21,1990depository trust(outstandingcommercial paperissues)$555 billion1992american banker,september 28, 1992a u.s. only unless otherwise indicated.b all figures are approximations only.c clearinghouse for interbank payments system.question." aanet attempts to capture and leverage knowledge whereverit exists at arthur andersen. partners say that the company's distinctivecompetency has become "empowering people to deliver betterqualitytechnologybased solutions to clients in a shorter time." auditors andconsultants who find unique solutions to problems introduce the solutions to thesystem through specially indexed subject files maintained in the chicagoheadquarters. field professionals who encounter a new problem can queryeveryone on the system for solutions through an electronic bulletin board. onits audit reference and resource disk (a cdrom system connected to desktopmicrocomputers), arthur andersen & co. collects and distributes as much uptodate data as it can on taxes, customers, solutions to special problems,financial accounting standards board pronouncements, court rulings, andprofessional standards to guide its auditors and consultants in the field. fieldpersonnel can both tap into the headquarters database directly through aanetand carry onto a customer's premises a cdrom with the power of many firms'central libraries.the capacity of many companies to develop a knowledgebasedcompetitive advantage depends largely on the level of detail to which they canbreak down their contact point data and then analyze, mix, and match these datain different ways (see box 3.2). the company with the largest and most detailedinformation base can segment and target its marketing and customer serviceactivities with a precision and unit cost that smaller competitorsimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level115information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.2 comprehensive and companywidedatabasesproperly designed systems for comprehensive data capture offercompanies one of the few and most important economies of scale in thecurrent marketplace. just as the utility of a telephone network increasesdramatically with the number of telephone subscribers connected to thenetwork, so also do comprehensive data sets enable highly sophisticatedbusiness operations. computerized reservation systems providedimportant competitive advantages for individual companies, but they hadmajor structural impacts on the entire industry when they began to carryflight and fare information for carriers other than their owners. these morecomprehensive data sets enabled much tighter integration of servicesprovided by different companies (e.g., feeder airlines and nationalcarriers, auxiliary services such as car rentals and hotels) and facilitated"onestop" shopping, thereby making trip planning much less onerous forindividuals or travel agents. in the telecommunications industry, detailedper call records of telephone traffic have enabled longdistancecompanies to develop a wide variety of call pricing plans to suit differentcalling patterns. in the retail industry, detailed profiles of customerpreferences have increased the efficiency of marketing by enablingfocused and targeted sales campaigns. the databases of dow jones,merrill lynch, readers digest, the new york times, and many otherservice companies are unique competitive resources individually worthbillions of dollars.a firm that has taken particular advantage of comprehensivedatabases is toys "r" us, which enjoys $5.5 billion in annual sales andthree times the revenues of the world's largest toy suppliers. with itscommand of information about the marketplace and capacity to control thepositioning, display, retail advertising, and pricing of toys, toys "r" us cansell products virtually year around while its competitors can afford to carrysignificant inventories only during the short prechristmas season, whenover 60 percent of all toys are sold at retail. toys "r" us, with its highvolumes and sophisticated electronic inventory and pointofsale systems,has a powerful mechanism for pretesting which toys are likely to sellšandin what formšwhen the big christmas sale season comes. in addition,with its sophisticated models of toy sales, toy production, and changingtastes, it can invest in its inventories with considerably less risk than othercompanies. by insisting on ''justintime" deliveries, it can further decreasemarkdown losses, which are as much as 25 percent of the toy industry'scost for other retailers.to create such comprehensive databases, it is virtually essential tocapture information at the point of its creation. for example, pointofsalesystems that capture price and item information in realtime are a criticalelement of the foundation for the use of it in the retailing industry. moderntelecommunications systems generate large amounts of transactioninformation with each call (e.g., calling number, called number, time andimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level116information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.length of call), thus enabling a host of new services (e.g., caller idand friends and family, as well as very detailed billing information).airline companies capture transactions at the source through theircomputerized reservations systems, enabling downstream improvementsin scheduling, food preparation, maintenance, and so on. securitiescompanies must capture each element of a transaction instantaneouslyand be able to display both that transaction and market averagescontinuously. the most valuable resources of a brokerage firm are oftenits electronic database, datatracking, and computertracking programswithout which it could not compete. customer expectations about theprofessional capture and use of this informationšand legal liabilities for itsnonusešhave grown apace.pointofcreation data capture, coupled with a higher degree ofautomation in the actual mechanics of capturing data, reduces both thetime required and the error rate for data entry; barcode scanners makemany fewer errors than human cashiers. in addition, capturing data at thesource means that data need not be repeatedly entered (furthereliminating opportunities for error), and the availability of data at thebeginning of the dataprocessing cycle means that the benefits ofautomation can be captured at any point downstream. transactions withcustomers are the originating point for all work processes within anindustry and the key to providing new and better customer services.cannot match. data systems have thus become one of the most importanteconomies of scale for service enterprises.this fact has strategic significance in systems design. companies that donot consider the future strategic implications of comprehensive data capture atthe time they develop their systemsšor that attempt to save upfront costsduring early systems design and installationšoften lose important data andassociated opportunities, as well as incur higher costs when they try later toexploit more refined breakdowns of data. many companies have discovered thatit is much easier to aggregate overly refined data later rather than to try tointroduce disaggregations to a structure not built for them. a good example isprovided by mci, whose friends and family program is based on flexibilitiesdesigned into its it systems from the beginning. as richard liebhaber of mcisaid,how we do this is probably the most important trade secret in our company.we didn't think about friends and family specifically at the time we designedour it system. what we did was focus on what we had to be able to controlfrom an information base viewpointšbecause we are an information servicebusinessšand designed in extra flexibilities at that time.making quantitative judgments about the impact of investments in it forstrategic purposes, as for infrastructure, presents unique problems. strategicimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level117information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it systems are not necessarily less intensive in either labor or capital thanexisting operations; indeed, they may well require more of both. precisepreproject calculations of expected return are difficult because ultimateconsequences are often unknown. and postproject calculations require massiveassumptions about what a company's cash flows would have been with andwithout the chain of investments involved. for example, as noted by liebhaber,to analyze payoffs of friends and family we would have to introduceassumptions both about what our share would have been without [the product]and about how much longer you [the customer] will be a member of the mcifamily as a result of this product.in some cases, potential payoffs from success may be so obviously high asnot to warrant detailed evaluation. as robert elmore, partner and worldwidedirector of the business systems consulting group at arthur andersen, said,it is often not necessary to take a detailed look at paybacks on certain strategicinvestments. strategic use of information is often dealing with a 100to1return or at least a 10to1 return, and in these cases returns should be obvious.for example, our electronic bulletin board was installed about 4 years ago, andthere is no question among our practitioners that it gives us a competitiveadvantage and that it has made a large direct contribution to sales growth. weexpect our line of business to triple in size in the next few years. we couldn'teven think about being that large if we did not have this capacity to leverageour intellectual capital across the entire division.in other instances, broad gauges such as changes in market share, totalprofitability, growth rates, overall sales, and returns on investment may berelevant to judging strategic impact. when a major strategic change results froma series of incremental decisions (as in the case of bankers trust), it may bepossible to justify each incremental step by using traditional measures.however, when the aggregate impact is considered post hoc, these detailednumerical analyses may have little meaning because of failures in some projectsand unexpected synergies among others. in some cases, the risk posed by astrategic project may be unassessable by strict financial analyses. the onlyreason some projects succeed is that an individual entrepreneur evaluates risksdifferently and actually enters the field to test the assumptions underlying aproject. turner broadcasting company and federal express's overnightpackage service are success stories in this category.decision making about investing in it and the rigor ofprogram evaluationgiven the multitude of reasons for investing in it and the different ways inwhich firms use it, processes for decision making about it of course vary fromfirm to firm. nevertheless, two common characteristicsimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level118information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stood out in the committee's sample group: (1) the similarity between thepractices these companies use for decision making about it and those used forother types of corporate technology investments and (2) the difficulty ofseparating it's impacts from those of other factors affecting the success orfailure of a project.the committee's sample of firms tended to use decision making proceduresfor it investments that were (1) comparable to those they use for other projectsand (2) similar to those other companies use when investing in hightechnologyprojects. a large majority of the companies interviewed by the committee (seequestion box 2 in appendix d) reported that they routinely undertookpreproject evaluations of investments in it program by program. depending onthe nature and purpose of a given project (it or not), preproject assessmentsvaried greatly in the degree of quantification used. few companies felt they hadeffective systems for evaluating the aggregate paybacks from all it programs.a vice president of a major airline reflected the position that many respondentsexpressed. he said,the process that we've followed for the last 10 yearsšfor all of the projectsthat have been large investmentsšis to put them through a very rigidjustification process. the focus is on roi justification. there are somestrategic implementations or implementations which you can't justify, nomatter how hard you might try, in terms of dollars and cents. but there must bethe implication that implementation will be an advantage for the companyfrom a strategic viewpoint. it's basically a systembysystem process that isvery similar to our capital allocation process. as a matter of fact, all theresources that are used at the it end of the business are allocated through aprocess that very similarly matches our capital allocation process within thecompany.in certain cases in which the desired result is relatively easy to specify(e.g., for costreducing systems and certain newproduct projects), companiestend to use the same rigorous roi and financial evaluation techniques for itinvestments that they would use for nonit investments devoted to the sameends. but for many systems, data forecasts are less precise, and calculations ofroi are often not as useful as other metrics. for example, because there are nopositive returns from mandated systems, companies often merely comparevarious it systems to see which will give the desired effect at the lowest longterm cost. because it is frequently impossible to measure the impacts ofimprovements in quality precisely in terms of sales or profit, firms often useengineering metrics like response times, error rates, or service availability timeswhen evaluating investments in systems intended to improve quality. similarly,the longterm effects of strategic flexibility, more refined data handlingcapabilities, or more detail in databases may defy financial quantification.hence strategic investments may be evaluated in terms of their probable effectson market share, customerimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level119information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satisfaction, capacity to attract or empower personnel, or potential for futureflexibility, as well as their capacity to accomplish a specific current mission ormajor goal.major effects of strategic investments may not be felt for a long time, andthe timing and impact of specific events, if they occur at all, are alsounpredictable. the entire cost structure and cost competitiveness of a firmwithin its industry may be affected, also unpredictably. in some cases, so manyintangibles are involved that management's judgment may be a better indicatorthan detailed metrics. although many interviewed companies noted that it isoften not possible to develop accurate quantitative or financial metrics tomeasure the potential or actual benefits of some strategic investments in it,they tended to treat such decisions within the same framework used for othercomplex advancedtechnology ventures.a good analogy can be found in research and development (r&d) bothr&d and it are often intended to provide new options for the investingcompany. in many cases, investments in r&d and it are uncertain with respectto payoff. payoff is usually not immediate, and the expected value is often notquantifiable or even estimable, let alone predictable. executives try their best toforecast expected benefits, but success is often driven more by vision andsuperb implementation than by meeting accurate financial analyses. as withr&d, some it projects succeed, and some do not. it is not surprising that theexperience of firms in implementing new it systems varies from extraordinarysuccess to utter failure, a fact illustrated by many studies at the enterprise level.sometimes, the analogy goes much deeperšimplementing a new itapplication may in fact be an r&d venture. if it has never been used in aparticular application before, managers may not understand whether, how, orhow well the system will function in practice. there can be large uncertaintiesin the amount of time it takes to develop the application, apply it to it, anddevelop specific software for it. such efforts can be very expensive. often afunctionally complete it infrastructure must be put into place before the realpros and cons of possible applications can be reasonably tested. if the system isinstalled in an ongoing operation, there are additional risks of interrupting thebusiness itself. for example, the new york stock exchange had to install itsautomated trading system successfully without any interruption of operations;otherwise losses could have been catastrophic. similarly, in the mid1980s,kmart invested in an expensive relational database system to store scanner data(hundreds of gigabytes) from retailers with only the belief (not the assurance)that once such data were made available, retailers would be able to exploit thatdata to their advantage.a second key characteristic of decision making for investing in it in anycomplex situation is that it is virtually impossible to separate it's contributionsto success or failure from the effects of other factors such asimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level120information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.planning, training, management, or other supporting investmentsšor fromother important changes that may be happening in the marketplace and businessenvironment at that time and that may make it difficult to sort out net effects,even post hoc. against a backdrop of extensive external change, it is oftenimpossible to discern the financial impact of entire programs, let alone thecontribution of it to those programs.like a milling machine or a grinder, it is only one component of a systemthat enables a company to produce and deliver a good or service effectively;actual production usually requires many other components, includingmanagement, facilities, training, support, organizational factors, systems,equipment, and even materials. for example, when incremental increases insales or levels of service require an incremental buildup of a firm's physicalplant or capacity, the cost of it may be just another component in the aggregateinvestment needed to bring the new business opportunity into being (e.g., the itaccompanying an extension of operations into a new geographical area). atbest, it may be possible for a company to impute to the it investment a proratedshare of a project's total return based on its relative cost as one factor. in manycases, executive intuition and judgment may be as satisfactory as more complexnumerical allocations of cost and benefits.in a strict sense, the proper way to evaluate the impact of it is to measurethe effects of a total system and then to analyze it's direct contribution to themon a factor contribution basis.8 however, due to the inability to separate theinfluence of it from that of other important factors at the enterprise level, suchan approach to evaluation is rarely feasible, and no company interviewed by thecommittee had used it. however, this is also true for evaluating investments infixed equipment in manufacturing industries and other, nonit businessinvestments in most enterprises. although a majority of those interviewed bythe committee had tried to evaluate their firm's overall payoff from it, none feltthat they had satisfactory financial metrics for this purpose.9to supplement or take the place of unsatisfactory financial metrics, manycompanies reported using engineering metrics to determine important impactsof it. engineering metrics often reflect more detailed aspects of an individualfirm's work process (e.g., the number of individual transactions processed peremployee in the banking industry, the number of claims processed peremployee in the insurance industry, the time taken per customer service requestin the telecommunications industry, the time before the arrival of desiredmerchandise in the retail trade industry; box 3.3 gives additional examples).10engineering metrics are very useful for diagnostic purposes and to compare theperformance of one company to that of another (benchmarking). for those typesof investments in it for which financial measures are ineffective (particularlyfor improvements in quality), managers rely heavily on engineeringimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level121information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.metrics to plan and oversee performance. often such metrics cannot be relateddirectly to bottomline measures of revenue or profitability. the fact that nocompany interviewed by the committee had been able to do so supports thecontention that macroeconomic data based on financial reports cannotaccurately reflect changes in quality. data from engineering metrics on the trueimpacts of it on many aspects of quality are available only at the enterpriselevel and are not captured at any higher level of aggregation.box 3.3 examples of engineering metricsairlines fuel cost per passengermile load factors (average percentage of occupied seating on scheduledflights) response time for customer inquiries on reservations linestelephone companies average repair time for service calls number of calls processed per operatorday cost per mile to install cable sources and destinations connection delays number and duration of interruptions frequency of disconnects signal variation over different intervals, signal strength and othermeasures of signal quality system "down" timescrosscutting observations regarding all usesof information technologydespite the wide variety of it uses described above, several observationsseem to apply to all of them.controlling the costs of itit has become a significant element in the cost structure of manycompanies. from 1981 to 1989, absolute annual expenditures on it in constantdollars grew by 86 percent nationally across the entire service sector.11 moreimportantly, this figure understates by a substantial amount the total cost of it,since it reflects only expenditures on hardwarešmainframe computers, pcs,terminals, data communications networks, and the like. at least asimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level122information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important for an organization that wishes to make effective use of it are severalother essential elements that seriously affect profits from it's use: software, whether custommade, offtheshelf, or userdeveloped.initial investments can vary from very costly domainspecific softwareto inexpensive "shrink wrapped" diskettes and userdevelopedspreadsheets, databases, and so on. training and support. users often require extensive training andsupport if they are to use a technology effectively. even then they areunlikely to achieve the ability to use a system's full capability beforethe next generation of technology and customer demands requirefurther changes. maintenance and upgrading. hardware and software in place must beconstantly maintainedšand often upgraded or replacedšlong beforethey have reached the use life calculated at the time they wereacquired. the latter two categories often represent over 60 percent ofthe ongoing cost for a sophisticated system.despite the importance of the elements listed above, the accounting rulesthat determine a company's book value do not treat hardware, software, and itservice (e.g., maintenance, training, support) equally. it hardware costs (andinitial software costs, if demanded by irs) are usually carried on a company'sbooks as depreciable assets. the costs for equally important software support,training, and it service are generally treated as expenses (see appendix d).since overall it costs are typically divided about equally among hardware,software, and service, a company's true investments in it are rarely reflected instatements of book value.even for elements of it captured on a balance sheet, the capabilities of itimprove so rapidly that any given it investment may be obsolete before acompany can obtain the full benefits for which the technology was purchased.various studies have suggested the effects of over investment, duplication, anddissipation of profits that may occur.12 repeated replacement poses problemsfor all companies. but the committee's interviews confirmed studies indicatingthat replacement costs are a special issue in professional services, such asaccounting, consulting, medicine, scientific research, architecture, engineeringdesign, advertising, entertainment, or the law. these concerns were wellcaptured by marshall carter, currently chairman and chief executive officer ofstate street bank and trust company, who said:the investment side of this poses problems. we have traditionally invested intechnology on a 3 to 7year cycle. but now the shelf life of a lot of things is18 to 36 months. if you're not putting in tens of millions per year, you'll findyou're falling behind the competition. yet you must constantly invest evenmore in your capital base before you can get a complete payoff. for example,we're now installing a global treasury system. within 18 to 36 months, there'llbe a new version or modules that we'll have to rebuy.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level123information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.once a significant it infrastructure is acquired, costs for hardware,software support, and maintenance become more fixed than variable in nature.these fixed it costs become especially burdensome when revenues aresqueezed by recessions or competitive pressures. a special problem existsbecause it systems are purchased in "lumps." because of the power ofindividual systems and long learning times, companies tend to purchase morecapacity than warranted by average levels of demand. as a result, entireindustries tend to overcapacity. in such situations where costs are mainly fixed,each producer can (up to the constraints on its capacity) gain total margin byselectively lowering prices to increase volume. the result is strong downwardpressures on average prices (and thus on the percentage of margins) in servicesusing it,13 even though the services provided may be much more complex andof higher absolute value to the customer.daniel schutzer at citibank expressed one strategic response to thisproblem:today we would like to move to an architecture which is less fixedcost basedand more variable. this would let us make sure our businesses remainprofitable as they're growing and as they're shrinking, without being stuck withbig fixed costs just at the wrong times. we see the technology moving moretoward totally networkbased systems where our divisions provide services ontop of an intelligent network. all of these things dictate a more opensystemsapproach, but we do not know now what their specific impact will be.enhancing technological sophistication and developingstandardsservice companies have often driven the state of the art in it software,computing algorithms, hardware, and standard setting. for example: (1) expertsystem software is widely used to capture and disseminate "best practices" fromone skill source to others (e.g., for paramedics, diagnosticians, maintenancepersonnel, or brokers). (2) software programs for telephone switching systems(millionline programs controlling realtime operations and billing records)routinely push the software state of the art. (3) airline scheduling problemshave generated more efficient linear programming algorithms that can solveproblems involving tens of thousands of variables. (4) financial services firms'demands for analysis of huge quantities of data have driven the design andpurchase of massively parallel processors.the need to exchange data for applications extending across differentorganizations has driven the development of standards for electronic datainterchange (edi). standards for document formats, communications protocols,and interapplication data transfer have enabled disparate computer systemsrunning different software packages to communicate with each other across aimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level124information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.variety of applications. standards have been crucial to growth and progress in anumber of industries, including travel agencies and airlines (standards forcrss), retailmanufacturing (universal product code and edi standards),financial services and banking (magnetic ink recognition and message securitystandards), and standards for asynchronous multimedia (data, voice, and video)communications. despite such progress, meaningful standards for interapplications data transfer have yet to be developed for important specificapplications, such as standards for recording medical information, formonitoring outcomes of various procedures, or even for billing.14there are, of course, important possible drawbacks to standardsšnotablya premature "freezing" of technology. for standards to be accepted, members ofthe relevant community must be willing to forego some unforeseen futureopportunities and potential technological advances in favor of those created byenhanced current interoperability and electronic data interchange. when theformer outweigh the latter, interested partners will resist standards, causinghigher current costs but perhaps enhancing future capabilitiesšas did theopponents of analog standards for highdefinition television.problems in assessing enterprise performancefor companies in certain industries such as air transport andtelecommunications, there are some readily quantifiable and widely acceptedmeasures of output. tonmiles or passengermiles handled in transportation,packages or documents processed in overnight delivery, kilowatthours or cubicfeet of gas delivered by utilities, and the number of calls connected, minutesconnected, or access lines provided by the telecommunications industry arewidely accepted examples.in industries for which measures of physical output are available (e.g.,telecommunications, transportation, electric utilities, large fastfood andmerchandise chains), levels of productivity (as measured, e.g., by revenues orvalue added per unit of labor input) have traditionally compared favorably tothose in manufacturing. however, the correlation between growth in thesemeasures and higher profits is not always good. fare wars in the airline industryhave destroyed profits even when revenue passengermiles have risen, and theprofits of individual companies within the industry have shown even greatervariations. even a uniformly positive correlation between measures of physicaloutput and profitability or revenues may be the result of other business practicesor investments, or the result of a regulatory environment that assures operatingcompanies a "reasonable" rate of return.for many firms (e.g., those in financial services, health care, medicine,law, accounting, design, software, or government services), it is almostimpossible to define a consistent measure of physical output that will reflectimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level125information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.variety, complexity, quality, or value produced (see chapter 1). in some cases,gross statistics such as the number of clients or customers served or the numberof audits or medical procedures performed may be available.15 but thequalitative nature of the output of many service companies makes its precisenumerical measurement much more difficult than in goodsproducingenterprises.16 yet it is often along these qualitative dimensions that individualservice firms compete with one another.in such cases, financial metrics such as gross revenues or profitability maybe the only alternative, although even financial metrics have their limitations. acompany may be a nonprofit enterprise (e.g., a nonprofit hospital). revenues orprofits may not be valid measures of output in enterprises where prices havebeen regulated (as in property and casualty insurance or telecommunications),where price increases are due to increased risks (as in insurance or obstetrics),or where revenues are determined by budget allocations (as in museums,foundations, or educational institutions).17assessing the performance of individual firms involves several criticaldifficulties, a number of which affect the usability of measures at themacroeconomic or industry levels and have been discussed from that standpointin previous chapters.passthrough of benefitsa variety of respondents reported that the rapid advances in it and thehigh levels of competition in both the itsupplying and itusing industriesmade it difficult for even innovative companies to capture benefits from theirinvestments in it. with rare exceptions, it hardware and softwarešandsupporting communication servicesšare available from many competingvendors. hence it is hard to create technological barriers to entry in the servicesector other than those attributable to software developed internally. even then,since a wide variety of software approaches can (with almost equal efficiency)solve almost any given problem, there are few protectable intellectual propertyrights that prevent replication of results.fast followers can move with relative assuredness toward known resultsšand often at costs lower than those of the innovators because of ongoingtechnological advances. technologies diffuse so rapidly that even the mostinnovative respondents said that, with few exceptions, it gave them only atemporary competitive edge. when asked how long this edge might last, theusual answer was ''a few months," which on further inquiry resolved into 3 to 9months' time. once new products or improvements in quality are copied,companies are forced to compete largely in terms of price. the same is true foreach competitor, with the result that overall industry revenues may not fullyreflect the benefits of an innovationšwhich are largely passed through to thecustomer instead. the innovationimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level126information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may proliferate so quickly that it soon becomes a routine and "commoditized"expectation of all customers. unless the total market is growing substantially,overall industry revenues will not increase significantly despite multipleinvestments dedicated to innovation.the tendency for profits from itbased innovations to be shortlived isexacerbated by it hardware trends. the computing power of it has beengrowing so rapidly relative to unit cost (recently 35 percent per year forprocessors and 45 to 50 percent per year for memory) that the same dollarinvestment at a later time purchases substantially more power or capability.competitors who invest later are able to buy more capacity per dollar than theoriginal innovator, and competitors end up with either an equal capacity at lesscost (reducing their fixed costs relative to those of the innovator) or a greatercapacity for the same cost (resulting in a greater potential for businessexpansion relative to the innovator). the net result is that the ease of access toproductivityenhancing hardware (usually available to all competitors) forcesmany service producers to pass benefits through to others and often lowersrather than raises their prices while increasing their breakeven volume.18given that the benefits of itenabled innovations in services are not fullyrealized by the innovator, who does capture them? three beneficiaries standout: (1) the company's direct customers, (2) its suppliers, and (3) the generalpublic.for example, wholesalers such as mckesson or supervalue are linked toretail drugstores and grocery stores. as these wholesalers improved theirservice capabilities for customers, they actually lost percentage in margins. inthe case of mckesson, currently a $7.8 billion firm, the percentage ofwholesaling margins has dropped from about 7 percent to 3 percent over the last15 years, making another 4 percentage points available for the margins of itsretailers and producers. mckesson passed savings on to others by loweringprices and by providing higher levels of service to its suppliers and customers(e.g., mckesson's central maintenance of virtually all price stickers and pricefiles for its drug retailers). as david malmberg, vice president of mckesson'sinventory management and systems services, said, "these used to be extremelytime consuming and expensive things for the retailer. they are done by ourtechnology now. but this doesn't show up in our margins, and our competitorshave to match the service. in effect, we've upped the investment ante foreveryone."the experience of supervalue, a $9.4 billion distributor to independentgrocers, is comparable. supervalue has developed extensive inventory andproducthandling technologies that allow it to manage thousands of productlines and assist suppliers and retail customers with their distribution functions,including architectural design, construction, and space management. it systemsprovide services upstream, downstream, and geographically. inimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level127information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.addition to controlling inventories in transit, supervalue also offers extensivehostsupport services for the electronic pointofsale systems of its supermarketcustomers, permitting them to manage their operations better through instantaccess to price files, shelf tag printing, and detailed reports about their products'turnover, gross profits, category profits, and so on. so effective is supervalue atproviding these services that several major supermarket chains now buy fromsupervalue in order to obtain the economies of its system. no single foodproduct manufacturer could compete with these services. this is even truer forfood producers for whom supervalue handles the complex functions ofcoordinating fieldproduce contracting and transportation, freshmeat deliveryand marking, and instore shelfprice verification. yet because of competitiveforces, supervalue's total aggregate margins have not changed significantly.firms outside the service sector that purchase services from an innovatorše.g., manufacturers buying communication services from at&t or mcišareoften major beneficiaries. strategic alliancesšor major "outsourcing"arrangementsšcan present even greater potentials for passthroughs. a largedownstream partner may radically reduce its internal costs by cooperating withan efficient service provider whose own costs may not be reduced by thepartnership. in these cases, the service producer may show no gain inproductivity, while service users reap substantial benefits. an example is thealliance between state street bank and trust company and ford motorcompany. state street has had a program with ford for several years to connectford's u.s. treasury and trading operations with state street's. in the words ofstate street's marshall carter, "ford feels pretty strongly that they've managedto increase quality yet reduce their staff substantially as a result of this allianceand its electronic connections. you wouldn't necessarily see a productivity gainhere at state street, but you would see a dramatic productivity gain at ford."a third major category of beneficiary may be end users or the generalpublic. when a transaction's marginal benefit to a customer is high and its costdrops precipitously, transaction volumes are likely to increase; this has beenespecially true in financial services, banking, and communications. forinterstate toll calls, volume has increased since deregulation at a rate of 10.6percent a year, while prices have decreased at a rate of 7.1 percent a year.19new york stock exchange transactions have risen from a daily average of 10million to 12 million shares in the early 1970s to an average of 183 millionshares in the third quarter of 1992.20 both of these service industries werederegulated during the 1980s, eliminating the monopoly profits of existingproducers. customers benefited from lower costs and subsequently a greaterselection of services. often the volume of transactions increased so rapidly thatcompanies could not reduce the number of total employees or costs despitemuch more efficient transactionlevel automation.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level128information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in other nonregulated situations, many professional companies interviewedby the committee reported that they could not increase prices to reflect thegreater value added and the lower costs enabled by their it systems because ofovercapacity, competition, industry practice, or legal constraints on pricing.this phenomenon appears paramount in evaluating the impact of wordprocessing and spreadsheets on report writing. the cost of making a change in adocument is quite small; the result is that authors or analysts revise theirmanuscripts with much higher frequency (compared to prepc days). thecustomer or user of the report receives the benefit of a thoroughly massagedfinal product, but the total effort that went into the production of that draft maynot have declined. a similar situation obtains in the use of automated tellermachines (atms). the cost to customers of using atms is low; hence theyengage in many more transactions than would be the case in the absence ofatms. the atm user thus benefits from the machine, but the expense incurredin deploying the atm was at first generally borne by the bank. later, bankssought to recoup some of these costs through usage fees.21on the other hand, the use of it sometimes allows companies to pass coststhrough to customers as wellšespecially in the form of personal labor orwaiting times. for example, it enables telephone customers to dial longdistance telephone calls themselves and enter their own accounting information(credit card numbers) at pay telephones; bank customers perform for themselvesmany of the functions of bank tellers at atms (e.g., checking account balancesor processing deposit and withdrawal transactions). while customers may preferto perform these activities for themselvesšbecause doing so is moreconvenient or fasteršthe actual labor required to provide a service has not beenaltered much by the introduction of it. however, it is customers who are nowdoing much of the work. in a similar manner, it has enabled airlines to managemore efficient "hubandspoke" routing systems, and retailers to provide "retailwarehouse" sales of goods in bulk. but customers also bear some of the costsfrom these innovations, in the form of additional waiting times or a less friendlyshopping atmosphere. very few firmsšif anyštrack costs borne by thecustomer in any systematic manner, and the overall effects on society areimpossible to estimate.time lags and the need for higher skillstiming and implementation factors also complicate measures of it'simpact on performance at the enterprise level.22 various studies indicate that, asin other technology areas, there are long average time lags before highlyinnovative new it systems may achieve expected payoffs.23 workers'impacts of information technology at the enterprise level129information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity constantly lags behind the systems' potentials as workers learn newtasks, and there are costs associated with confusion that arises as the systemsare debugged. sometimes, workers may barely reach full capabilities before thenext generation of equipment requires changes to keep up with customerdemands for quality and responsiveness. one implication is that if the benefitsof a system are evaluated too early in its life cycle, they are likely to beunderestimated. the other is that learning effects, training requirements, backupsystems, extra supervision, and delays must be provided for in any completeplan for introducing new it systems.the time needed for workers to learn how to interact with a new systemmay be compounded by concurrent changes in ways outputs are produced.some systems may facilitate or may require the use of more expensive or morehighly trained knowledge workers in the place of less skilled workers. a nowfamiliar example is the movement away from centralized typing pools, first todistributed word processing by secretaries and then to direct preparation of textsby their professional or managerial authors. an analysis of word processing'spayoffs in the early 1980s would differ considerably from today's reality. if thecomplexity of a business problem also increases sufficiently, both the numberof workers and their skill requirements may go up24 (box 3.4).in other cases, the use of it may simplify tasks, so that the required skilllevels may drop, with the effect of deterring increases in wages.25 this patternhas been particularly evident in repetitive tasks such as product sorting, or inretail sales. a combination of lower skill requirements and wages in some casesmay encourage higher staffing levels than in the past, and hence reducemeasured productivity.26 on the other hand, the capacitybox 3.4 better cancer treatments may cost morenew cancer treatment procedures (e.g., bone marrow transplants)often require more precise and expensive equipment, greater training,higher wages, more laboratory facilities, and more people to operate (perprocedure) than the older chemotherapy treatments did. at the same time,the new procedures may be significantly more effective in terms ofclinically measured patient outcomes, including morbidity, mortality, andlongterm care costs.however, while the costs of new procedures may well be incurred bytreatment providers, none of these benefits may show up in their balancesheets or income statements. actual outcomes may be uncertain foryears, and prices established through diagnosticrelatedgroupcompensation caps may prevent prices for medical services fromreflecting the higher value added.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level130information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to use less skilled people may have the benefit of increasing employmentopportunities. this appears to have been the pattern in lowwage services suchas retailing or fast foods. such complexities obviate the use of any simplemeasures of productivity at the enterprise level.shifts in the basic nature of the businessas noted earlier in this chapter, the use of it may change the very natureof a firm's business. in this case, comparisons of a firm's productivity orperformance in two different time periods may not be a true "applestoapples"comparison. it may even be the case that performance metrics designed for theold business lag in reflecting changes at the enterprise level.27for example, in many large professional service organizations, tasks thatused to be the very core of professional practices (e.g., doing audit checks inpublic accounting or preparing bubble charts for portfolio analyses in financialservices or consulting firms) have become so routine and automated that theyare almost loss leaders, much of whose value is passed through in order to sellclients other services that are now the professionals' core competencies. inmany cases, the basic business of professional firms has become the capture,analysis, communication, and leveraging of highervalue current informationfor clients. such informationintensive tasks require a high level of specializedintellectual expertise from sophisticated knowledge workers. professional firmsoften obtain a competitive edge by leveraging their highpriced talent throughautomation of most routine tasks (e.g., literature searches, table lookups, androutine or standardized design calculations) and development of very powerfulanalytical algorithms, expert systems, and extensive networking capabilities.investment companies provide a highprofile example. high performancecomputing and electronic data systems have enabled development of complex,customized financial instruments that are difficult to create and support but thatare generating totally new kinds of business. state street bankšmanagingassets of over $1 trillion and enjoying a 20 percent growth ratešis typical ofthose working on this complex business frontier (specifically portfolio and trustmanagement). state street's carter noted:there are people out there all the time trying to create financial instrumentsthat give a better yield on a portfolio. we are working on the edges of a systemcreating complex instruments thatšright at the beginningšwill be inefficientoperations because of their new characteristics. yet these are expanding thecapital markets. the old instruments have become very stable, efficient, andeasy to serve. the average statistics may say you're not getting "productivity"increases. if you disaggregate it you'd see more productivity on the older(lowermargin) instruments than on the newer, highermargin ones. but as abusinessman, where do you want to be?impacts of information technology at the enterprise level131information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and conclusionsexecutives invest in it programs with the intent of increasing expectedreturns as compared to other alternatives, for example, not investing orinvesting in other programs. the returns they derive from these decisions maybe vital to the success of the enterprise but may not show up readily in standardmeasures of industry revenues or sector productivity. information technologyhas enabled service firms not just to do things better in the old way (efficiency)but also to do entirely new things that provide greater benefits to outside parties(effectiveness). many of these improvements in performance may not bereflected in increased roi, sales, or margins, or in macroeconomic statistics.thus, many of the difficulties in measuring the productivity and effectiveness ofit in services at the macroeconomic level have their origin at the enterprise level.impacts of it that may not show up in standard financial or data reportsinclude maintaining market share in a relatively mature marketplace, avoidingcatastrophic losses due to process failures, avoiding losses of market position orprofits if a competitor adopts a new technology and the firm does not,increasing flexibility to respond to unknown future market or process changes,improving employee relations or the work environment, improving the qualityof customer service, handling increasing complexity, and improving the scopeand responsiveness of the firm's service outputs. these are key elements ofservice performance, although they may not affect productivity.in the committee's sample of companies, techniques used for decisionsabout investments in it are comparable to those used for corporate decisionsabout investments in r&d or other complex technologies. as in r&dinvestments, none of the sampled companies could separate the effects of asingle input (r&d or it) from other factors that might affect the ultimatesuccess of a given project. nor could they always estimate or calculate financialreturns accurately. for this reason many firms use engineering metrics ratherthan financial measures to evaluate the potential and actual impacts of aninvestment in it. but these metrics also do not permit aggregation at theindustry or macroeconomic levels.within enterprises, investments tend to fit into a few basic categories:those supporting basic infrastructure, mandated requirements, cost reduction,new products, improvements in quality, new strategic potentials, and newdesktop or workstation information exchange networks. in some of these cases(e.g., costreducing systems, systems to support new products), financial returnsare relatively easy to evaluate through the use of wellunderstood formalinvestment analyses. in others (e.g., systems like those for basic infrastructure,improvements in quality, and new strategic uses), other metricsšlikeengineering metrics or results of customer surveysšmayimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level132information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be used to estimate impacts. even though managers may use the best techniquesavailable, some investments in it still are based to a large extent on theintuition or judgment of management.some of the more important problems in measuring impacts of it at thefirm level are (1) defining meaningful units of output that are consistent overtime, (2) defining the contributions of it as a component in the total investmentpackage needed to create a result, (3) capturing or measuring benefits passedthrough to customers or suppliers, (4) establishing financial measures of theimpact of intangible benefits (such as faster cycle times, greater reliability, or abroader selection of service products), (5) estimating the "opportunity costs" ofwhat would have happened without use of a technology, (6) dealing withpayoffs that are delayed due to learning factors and with (sometimes extensive)lags until actual outcomes are known, and (7) measuring changes inproductivity when it has changed the basic nature of a business and thecompetitive environment.granted all of these complications, a large majority (80 percent) ofrespondent companies felt that their investments in it overall had paid off well.a majority said that they had made special studies of it's payoff, although nonehad made routine measurements of overall it returns. a large majorityindicated that their special studies confirmed a positive overall payoff from it(see appendix d). most expressed concern that their earlier managementtechniques had not been as efficient or effective as they should have been. mostwere trying to improve these currently (see chapter 5).notes and references1. see, for example, keen, p, 1988, competing in time: using telecommunications for competitiveadvantage, ballinger publishing company, cambridge, mass.; u.s. congress, office oftechnology assessment, 1985, automation of america's offices 19852000, government printingoffice, washington, d.c.; and watts, l., 1986, "what price automation?," northeastern universitymagazine, december.2. denison, e. 1989. estimates of productivity change by industry: an evaluation and analternative, brookings institution, washington, d.c. denison makes a strong case for the lastexplanation, though there is disagreement in the community on this point.3. brynjolfsson, erik, and lorin hitt. 1993. "is information systems spending productive? newevidence and new results," mit sloan school of management, working paper 357193,september 24. (to appear in proceedings of the 14th international conference on informationsystems .)4. the work of sassone suggests that downsizing secretarial pools may have the unintended resultthat professionals end up doing many more nonitbased support tasks that were previously done bysecretaries. thus, on balance, the result may be lower measured productivity. see sassone, peter.1992. "survey finds low office productivity linked to staffing imbalances," national productivityreview, spring, pp. 147158.5. levitt, theodore. 1976. "industrialization of service," harvard business review, septemberoctober, pp. 6374.6. brynjolfsson, erik, and bruce bimber. 1991. "information technology and the productivityparadox," working paper, brookings institution, washington, d.c., february 7.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level133information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7. porter, michael e., and victor e. millar, 1985, "how information gives your competitiveadvantage," harvard business review, julyaugust, pp. 149160; quinn, j.b., 1992, intelligententerprise, free press, new york; and wriston, walter b., 1992, the twilight of sovereignty ,scribners, new york.8. loveman, gary, 1988, "an assessment of the productivity impact of information technologies,"mit management in the 1990's program, 88054, july.; and kendrick, john w., 1988, "productivityin services," in technology in services: policies for growth, trade, and employment , bruce r.guile and james brian quinn (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c.9. the inadequacy of financial metrics alone for assessing the performance of a firm is discussed ineccles, robert, 1991, "the performance measurement manifesto," harvard business review,januaryfebruary, pp. 131137.10. a bellcore study showed that the number of employees per 1000 access linesšone of theoperating company's key performance metricsšhad dropped from 110 to 40 (or about a 10 percentper year compounded improvement) between 1970 and 1990.11. roach, stephen, morgan stanley & co., unpublished data, april 1993.12. fudenberg, drew, and jean tirole. 1985. "preemption and rent equalization in the adoption ofnew technology," review of economic studies 52:383401.13. bresnahan, timothy f. 1986. "measuring the spillovers from technical advance: mainframecomputers in financial services," american economic review 76(4, september):742755.14. institute of medicine. 1991. the computerbased patient record , national academy press,washington d.c., pp. 8587.15. the meaning of aggregated statistics is also clouded by the fact that parameters such as relativeunit volumes, revenues, costs, timing factors, number of clients, and so on may have little realmeaning as indicators of productivity when ultimate outcomes are unknown. for a bank, the facevalue of loans or the number of loans handled is meaningless without knowing the quality of thoseloans or the creativity they represent. the number of procedures performed at a hospital comparedto their cost is useless information, unless one knows their success rate and the relative health ofpatients at the time they were served. even the success rate must be qualified by the subsequentquality of life or care costs patients encounter.16. mark, jerome, 1986, "problems encountered in measuring single and multifactor productivity,"monthly labor review, december, pp. 311; baily, martin neill, and robert j. gordon, 1988, "theproductivity slowdown: measurement issues and the explosion of computer power," in brookingspapers on economic activity, vol. 2, william c. brainard and george l. perry (eds.), brookingsinstitution, washington, d.c., pp. 347431; and brynjolfsson and bimber, 1991, "informationtechnology and the productivity paradox."17. kutscher, r., and j. mark. 1983. "the service sector: some common perceptions reviewed,"monthly labor review, april, pp. 2124.18. bresnahan, 1986, "measuring the spillovers from technical advance: mainframe computers infinancial services."19. federal communications commission. 1991. trends in telephone service, fcc, washington,d.c., february, p. 25.20. standard & poor's corp. 1992. current statistics, october.21. both the committee's interviews and independent studies testify to the ubiquity of thisphenomenon. see, for example, brynjolfsson and bimber, 1991, "information technology and theproductivity paradox."22. curley, kathleen foley, and philip j. pyburn. 1982 "'intellectual' technologies: the key toimproving whitecollar productivity," sloan management review, fall, pp. 3139.23. guile, bruce r., and james brian quinn (eds.). 1988. managing innovation: cases from theservice industries, national academy press, washington d.c. also brynjolfsson, erik, thomas w.malone, and vijay gurbaxani. 1988. "the impact of information technologyimpacts of information technology at the enterprise level134information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on markets and hierarchies," sloan school of management, working paper 211388,massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, mass.24. osterman, paul. 1986. "the impact of computers on the employment of clerks and managers,"industrial and labor relations review 39:175186. also, krueger, a. 1993. "how computers havechanged the wage structure: evidence from microdata, 19841989," the quarterly journal ofeconomics 39(february):175186.25. bright, j. 1958. technology in automation, harvard business press, boston, mass. this is theclassic statement of this argument.26. baily and gordon, 1988, "the productivity slowdown: measurement issues and the explosionof computer power." also, hunt, h., and t. hunt. 1986. clerical employment and technologicalchange, upjohn institute for labor studies, kalamazoo, mich.27. stalk, g., and t. hout. 1990. competing against time: how timebased competition isreshaping global markets, free press, new york.impacts of information technology at the enterprise level135information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4impacts of information technology at theactivity levelintroductionfaced with a myriad of pressures to change the way they do business,many managers in different types of firms have found it fruitful to focus onactivities or major processes, rather than just on products, organizational units,specific tasks, or reporting relationships. they are attempting to redesign thework flow from beginning to end, breaking it down into component segmentsand asking hard questions: what should we be doing? what is the best way todo it? which components should remain within the firm? how should theactivities that continue to constitute the firm be structured into a betterfunctioning whole? companies are using many of the innovative technologiesand organizational methods available to answer these questions. the currentattention given by researchers and corporate decision makers to ''businessprocess redesign" or reengineering is one approach to process innovation, themost recent to emerge in organizational literature.1today's information technology (it)šwhich embeds the tools for specifictasks and operations within networked infrastructures whose reach can extendwell beyond a firm's boundariesšprovides vehicles for such changes. itpermits many of a firm's informationbased tasks to be reconfigured and linkedin alternative ways to generate new work flows and processes. put differently,the use of it permits the uncoupling and rearranging of key organizationalprocesses to achieve much more effective organizational designs.impacts of information technology at the activity level136information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past efforts to deploy it have often focused on the level of tasks orsubactivities and limited the scope of changes to existing and/or narrowlydefined processes. the result has often been suboptimization (although thecommittee does not intend to suggest that each task or activity must beoptimized), or, at best, optimization of a subset of existing tasks. by contrast, apurposive and holistic focus on the activity levelšwhere activities are regardedas relatively complete elements of a firm's work flow that often crossfunctionaldepartments (e.g., departments such as marketing, production, or research anddevelopment)šwill often yield better results. examples of activities includeproduct design, logistics, orderprocessing, purchasing, maintenance, andaccounting. more complete redesign of processes and changing organizationalrelationships is possible when an activitieslevel view is taken.the committee believes that the investments in it made to date, in manyinstances, are on the verge of providing companies unprecedented degrees offlexibility in changing the ways activities are designed and organized. this is sofor several reasons: a broader installed base of technologies makes new, more complex orintegrated applications possible. for example, widely deployedworkstations, interconnected network software, and sophisticatedcommunications links are required for many collaborative and crossorganizational work applications to be effective. it vendors are beginning to produce software that is easier to use andwhose capabilities match user and customer needs more closely. as aresult, relatively untutored users can do substantially more, morequickly, with the it at their disposal. early implementation experiences provide opportunities for learningabout both the technology and the management of change. thusmanagers are beginning to have more realistic expectations for what itcan and cannot do, and to understand better the time frames required toachieve dramatic changes. new technologies are being designed and introduced to increasecapacities as well as integrate capabilities provided by oldertechnologies. resulting changes in activities in turn make possiblemore farreaching changes in enterprises.overall, the use of it has the effect of diminishing the parts played byplace, time, and hierarchy in the structure and management of organizations.2furthermore, the range of activities to which it is being applied is stillexpanding.the committee believes that activity level analysis yields a deeperunderstanding of process innovation and its effects on performance. focusingon activities means paying detailed attention to the actual work being doneimpacts of information technology at the activity level137information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or being planned, taking into account the interplay of work flows,organizational structures, staffing, and toolsšincluding it, both within andbetween firms. interfirm effects are particularly interesting where they involvemultiple firms in different industries or shifts in work among firms.box 4.1 conceptual frameworks for analysis ofactivities and processesthe valuechain model. work processes are sometimes understoodthrough the use of value chains that depict the sequence in whichactivities typically occur and how they interact. in the simplest model, alinear one, each activity receives an input from the previous activity, addsvalue to that input, and passes it on to the next activity as an output. (ofcourse, value chains are not necessarily linear.) the valuechain modelprovides a useful lens for looking at how activities are linked one toanother to generate the overall net benefit of an organization'sprocedures, and the analytical problem is the determination of how muchand what kind of value is added by each activity.the process management model. the principles of processmanagement can serve as a disciplined basis for analyzing how work isdone at the activity level. recently, enterprises in all types of industrieshave applied process management techniques to varied activities. theirgoals have included both continuous or incremental improvement andradical change oršin popular termsšreengineering of their businessprocesses.sociotechnical systems analysis. from this perspective, activitiesare sets of tasks carried out by people whose work is united by output andby workflow technology. the analysis treats social and technologicalaspects of task processes as inherently interrelated and thus suggeststhat social and technological issues in process redesign cannot beseparately resolved. the sociotechnical systems approach affordsinsights into both how activities may be conceptualized and whytechnological change should be expected to have significant impacts onactivities as well as their linkages.activity level analysis is a more refined level of analysis than hastraditionally been used in assessing the aggregate outcomes of investments init. activity level insights are also not captured either in sector or firmlevelanalyses. thus, hard data are generally unavailable, and the literature suffersfrom a paucity of analytic models and substantial empirical research at theactivity level.3a number of ideas from the current organizational literature may beapplied to assist with analysis at the level of activities (box 4.1). although theseideas do not exhaust the paradigms that might be helpful in understandingimpacts of information technology at the activity level138information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role and influence of it's use at the activity level in firms, they are useful asworking constructs for an exploratory investigation.activity level analysis may well require the development of new metricsfor performance (especially ones that reflect the changing values andexpectations of "customers")šin part because the output of service activitiesmay be intangible.4 the committee hopes that the discussion presented in thischapter can stimulate further research at the activity level that will eventuallyprovide a more thorough empirical base and a foundation for new paradigmsand concepts with which to conduct activity level analysis.the discussion in this report is based on material derived from thecommittee's interviews with senior managers as described in appendix d, theexperiences of committee members, accounts from secondary sources,conceptual models in current organizational literature (some of which have onlyrecently appeared), and views developed in the course of the committee'sdeliberations.5 although the discussion in this chapter is more conceptual thanthat presented in chapters 1 through 3, the committee believes that it is essentialfor completing its exploration of the relationships between investments in itand service sector performance.what is an activityan activity is a structured set of tasks (work) leading to a specified outputfor a specified internal or external client. this report uses the term activity in abroad sense to refer to relatively selfcontained or complete work processesregardless of level of granularity. from this broad perspective, examples ofservice activities include many functions performed both in manufacturing andin specialized service organizations, such as accounting, research, design,planning, marketing, advertising, or distribution firms. so viewed, serviceactivities contribute value, in varying degrees, to an organization's majorproducts. (box 4.2 illustrates how one analyst relates activities to other concepts.)within particular enterprises and work groups, activities can be definedmuch more specifically in relation to tasks and outputs: writing insurancepolicies, opening bank accounts, selling products in a department store, routingairline tickets, and providing nursing care in a hospital may all be treated asinstances of activities in the sense intended in this chapter.activities have several important characteristics: activities operate on inputs from other activities (either internal orexternal to the firm). activities have customers. in other words, there is a recipient for theoutcomes of all activities in the work flow. activities may or may not correspond to functional departments inorganizations, and their linkage into the overall work flow of theorganizationimpacts of information technology at the activity level139information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 4.2 process hierarchyalmost everything we do or are involved in is a process. – from themacroview, processes are the key activities required to manage and/orrun an organization. newproduct definition is a good example of amacroprocess. – a macroprocess can be subdivided into subprocessesthat are logically related, sequential activities that contribute to the missionof the macroprocess. – every macroprocess or subprocess is made up ofa number of activities. – activities are things that go on within allprocesses. as the name implies, they are the actions required to producea particular result. – each activity is made up of a number of tasks. –normally, tasks are performed by an individual or by small teams. theymake up the very smallest microview of the process.source: harrington, h.j. 1991. strategy for total quality,productivity, and competitiveness, mcgrawhill, new york. may or may not correspond to reporting structures on an organizationalchart. activities may span external organizational boundaries on eitherthe input or output side (or both). to the extent that activities form relatively complete segments of awork flow (starting with an input and ending with an output to aclient), they lend themselves to many forms of measurement (e.g.,throughput time, client satisfaction). activities are often the target ofinvestments in it, which are undertaken as projects to support changesin relatively selfcontained processes.these characteristics of activities underlie the utility of activity levelanalysis for understanding service sector performance and the potential effectsof it. most important is the builtin customer orientation: the customer'sexpectations and value system can be used to set the standard against which theservice activity is judged.6 and it is at the activity level that it is possible toassess whether the customer may be better served even if measured productivitydeclines. for example, it is being applied to a growing range of complexmedical diagnostic procedures (such as magnetic resonance imaging or genetictesting) without apparent improvements in productivity in terms of cost but withother benefits to customers.the independence of activities from functional and organizationalboundaries is critical, since clients, whether internal or external, do not careabout formal organizational boundaries nearly as much as they care aboutresults. the measures of value added by activities (such as time to produce,time toimpacts of information technology at the activity level140information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.delivery, cost, and the quality of an activity's output) enable analysts to trackchanges in the performance of an activity over time and to compare or"benchmark" against similar activities within the same enterprise or in othercompanies. (the latter measures are especially important complements tointernal measures of client satisfaction in cases where performance that satisfiesthe shortterm needs of recipients in the organization's work flow may berelatively unsatisfactory from the perspective of the ultimate customer or thefirm as a whole.)some observations about service activitiesthe pervasiveness of service activities, their growing importance ingenerating value, and their generic nature make activities a critical level ofanalysis for understanding the impact of it on service sector performance.service activities are everywhereservice activities occur in all enterprises, not just those in socalled serviceindustries; this is the essence of the service economy. even within amanufacturing company, these activities often account for 60 to 75 percent ofall nonmaterial costs. in fact, within most enterprisesšwhether in themanufacturing, services, government, or nonprofit sectorsša majority of allemployment (well over 80 percent) is in service activities. service activitiesthus provide units of analysis that are directly comparable betweenmanufacturing and service firms.table 4.1 summarizes the employment distribution from the most recentbureau of labor statistics projections.7 total u.s. employment is projected togrow by about 20 percent from 1990 to 2005. during this period, all bluecollarcategories (agricultural workers, production and craft workers, and operatorsand laborers) will grow at rates substantially below the average, whereas mostwhitecollar categories and service occupations8 will grow substantially fasterthan average. these projections are fully consistent with a continuing shift oflabor to service activities as applications of it lead to organizationalrestructuring and job redefinition.service activities are increasingly importantnot only are service activities present in all enterprises, but they also nowcontribute most of the value added within both manufacturing and service firms.their elevated role is especially striking in manufacturing, where more valueadded now derives from or intellectual activities than from physical productionactivities. for example, research and clinical activities (rather than chemicalprocessing, pill punching, andimpacts of information technology at the activity level141information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.packaging) create the major value in pharmaceuticals; sophisticated customerunderstanding and software concepts (rather than building circuit boards andboxes) create the predominant value in computers; understanding flavorings,customer preferences, and product texturing creates value in prepared foods;and so on.table 4.1 employment projectionsšemployment by major occupational group,1990 and projected 2005 (moderate alternative projection)number employed (thousands)percent changemajor occupationalgroup199020051975199019902005total, all occupations122,573147,19137.420.1executive,administrative,managerial12,45115,86683.127.4professionalspecialty15,80020,90759.932.3technicians, relatedsupport4,2045,75475.736.9marketing, sales14,08817,48955.124.1administrativesupport, includingclerical21,95124,83533.913.1service19,20424,80636.129.2agricultural,forestry, fishing, andrelated occupations3,5063,6659.94.5precisionproduction, craft,repair14,12415,90928.912.6operators,fabricators, laborers17,24517,9616.74.2note: the data on employment for 1990 and 2005 and the projected percentage of change from1990 to 2005 are derived from the industryoccupation employment matrixes for each year. thedata on the percentage of change from 1975 to 1990 were derived from the current populationsurvey (cps), because a comparable industryoccupation matrix for 1975 is not available.source: adapted from silvestri, g., and j. lukasiewicz. 1991. "occupational employmentprojections," monthly labor review 114(november), table 1, p. 65.service activities are generic and elementalservice activities have two features that make them amenable to itbasedchange. the first is that many service activities have a generic quality. that is,service activities within a given enterprise may be fundamentally similar tothose performed in other, quite different enterprises. for instance, most largefirms have departments that are responsible for accountingimpacts of information technology at the activity level142information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.payroll processing, legal services, and so on. commonalities may prevail evenamong firms in entirely different lines of business, and so it is not surprisingthat xerox (a durablegoods manufacturer) opted to compare its distributionactivity against that of l.l. bean (a catalog retailer) despite the differences inproducts and industries. similarities between activities in differentorganizations may reflect the influence of common bodies of law, professionalstandards, or general practitioner knowledge.9the fact that activities operate on relatively welldefined inputs andgenerate specific products for their customers makes activities elemental. thatis, they are subject to separation from each other and to recombination; they aremodular components of a business or enterprise. thus linkages betweenactivities can be restructured, limited only by the technology and managementinfrastructure available to support interconnections.the elemental and generic nature of service activities is the foundation forattempts to improve activity performance by the use of it. if the activities thatcompose an organization's work flow are relatively complete componentswhose inputs and outputs can be received from other sources and transmitted tocustomers via itbased links (and perhaps largely performed via it as well), theit infrastructure opens up new possibilities for designing or reorganizingprocesses and entire firms; even industries may be restructured as aconsequence. the conceptual independence of activities from organizationalboundaries assumes increasing significance given the growing perception thatorganizational and functional boundaries often stand in the way of opportunitiesfor improvement.roles for information technology in theevolution of activitiesthe use of it has been an important contributor to the prominence ofservice activities. for example, computerassisted design has helpedmanufacturers deliver more sophisticated goods (from automobiles to integratedchips) in less time. for such goods, service activities become the vehicles forcustomization and differentiationšwhether upstream (through design), ordownstream (through marketing and postsales service). similarly, serviceproducts (such as loans and insurance policies) can be tailored to the needs ofparticular clients directly using it; data on customers are more easily collectedand analyzed; forms are more easily modified; change orders are more easilydeveloped and communicated; and so on. as one executive in a service firm putit, "there's a sense in which we never sell the same product twice." in otherwords, "mass customization" is increasingly the order of the day; service firmswould ideally deliveršto every customeršservice products that arecustomized to his or her own individual needs.10impacts of information technology at the activity level143information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in general, it is being used to play an important role in the flexible andrapid adaptation of outputs to suit the needs and expectations of clients.according to executives interviewed by the committee, new and anticipatedapplications rely heavily on databases, clientserver systems, and local andwidearea networking generally; as the scale and scope of databases grow andas sophisticated modeling becomes more practical, high performance systems,such as massively parallel technology, are being contemplated. noted a seniorvice president of a major supermarket chain,in the 1970s and 1980s, 90 percent of the weighting given by decision makerson it has been on hard savings, 10 percent on soft. i think the future is goingto be very much oriented toward "soft savings," and it might even go to 60 to40 on that side. the important thing is the credibility and accuracy of theinformation coming out of the front end. – in the past the drive was on thehard savings, productivity end of it. in the future it will be in the utilizationfor merchandising and marketing of all that wonderful data that's coming off.in addition, the demographic information from a customer standpoint issomething we're just getting into now. if the customer walks in with amagneticstripreader card and identifies herself as customer x, we can trackevery single thing she buys and do all kinds of wonderful things with thatinformation. – we can have frequentpurchaser programs, and so on.new tools and tasksas process technology, it enables changes in the ways that the tasks thatmake up an activity are undertaken. applied to informationintensive services,the use of it can change the nature of what is delivered to clients (such ashighly customized business or financial services) as well as the processes of itsproduction. examples of both sorts of changes abound, such as the shift fromkeying in data to optical scanning for data entry, the use of telephonecomputersystem combinations to solicit new business in lieu of "coldcall" field visits,and the use of online databases instead of paper files and reports to delivercustomer financial data. for example, larry bacon, senior vice president,information systems department at the travelers companies, described theimpact of putting policy information online.if you look back a few years, our personal lines operation, for example, had 80to 100 field offices. and all of the policies – were in tub files and desks inthose offices. so if you wanted to see all the policies you would have to go to90 offices and read through 2 million policies in tubs and desks. then all of asudden a person could just issue a few commands to the computer and we'd zipthrough it for him. that's a huge change.bacon went on to enumerate such benefits as accurate and consistentcalculation of premiums. another example is provided by merrill lynch &impacts of information technology at the activity level144information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.company, which was able to substantially reduce its printing requirements byshifting to electronic delivery of information. explained howard sorgen, seniorvice president and chief technology officer,during the threeyear period from 1989 through 1991, we reduced our annualoutput of computergenerated print from 1.3 billion to about 400 million pages.and that's not because the information provided wasn't needed by our internaland external clients. what we did was to change the way we provide thatinformation, by shifting to downloading print files electronically to clientdesktops and providing the ability to view information directly from computerscreens.it has been used to reduce the number of tasks involved in an activity, tochange the nature and sequence of tasks, to change the total time involved in anactivity, and so on (box 4.3). by supporting changes in what tasks are done, aswell as when, where, and how they are done, it opens up new options fordesigning and structuring service activities.11for example, according to larry bacon at the travelers companies, acomputerbased system containing essential and optional pieces of text enablesinsurance sales representatives to construct group insurance policydocumentation with the customer and deliver laserprinted copy the next day, incontrast to the previous approach of repeated iteration among representative,client, company lawyers, and others over a period of 3 to 9 months.box 4.3 accounts payable at the ford motorcompanyprior to reengineering its accountspayable process, ford motorcompany employed more than 500 people. the process involved a laborintensive matching of three documents: the purchase order (from theordering department), the receiving document (from the materials controldepartment), and the invoice (from the vendor). when these documentsmatched, payment was issued. as a result of reengineering, the orderingdepartment now places information about the order into an onlinedatabase. when goods are received in materials control, the database ischecked to see if they correspond to an outstanding purchase order. if so,they are accepted, their receipt is logged into the database, and a checkis automatically issued. invoices are eliminated because ford asksvendors not to send them.the result? a reduction by 75 percent in the accounts payable workforce.source: hammer, michael. 1990. "reengineering work: don'tautomate, obliterate." harvard business review, julyaugust, pp.104112.impacts of information technology at the activity level145information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a more elaborate example is provided by josh weston, chairman and chiefexecutive officer of adp, who described the evolution of his company's payrollprocessing service.the original adp payroll system had a lot of little vehicles going out on routesevery morning, where drivers picked up paper from our clients having all thenecessary information to do a payroll. then we went into data entryšin thosedays it was called keypunchšand took over from there. and when everythingwas all done, the vehicles went back and delivered all that paper to the clients.in today's mode, just to take a few aspects of contrast, the vast bulk of ourpayroll input is coming from clientsite pcs, where pcs dial directly into ourmainframes with no people in between. and because the data is comingthrough a clientsite pc, it's been edited and error checked before it ever getsto us, which eliminates a whole round of recycling that often used to happen.and when our mainframes are done, in a good number of cases ourmainframes talk right back to those pcs, without people, communicatingcertain information to the clientsite pcsšwhich they can then massage asthey see fit. – also, – previously you'd have to have hundreds of preprintedchecks that had to be preregistered before you could print the checks for clientx, and then you had to change the paper for client y. thanks to lasertechnology, now, in one single pass, the mainframes drive laser printers thatabsorb blank sheets on the way in, and not only does a paycheck come out withall the logos in the background and so on, but the laser printer also ''signs" thechecks. it makes life much simpler.as weston's example illustrates, the movement from relatively distinctinstances of automationšsuch as the original adp processing systems and theoriginal client systems that generated the paper printout used by adpšto farmore integrated systems that involve direct computertocomputercommunication can provide a much greater degree of streamlining and otherperformance benefits. this movement toward greater integration over the pastfew years is expected by many technologists to increase the contributions of it12šin ways that can be best understood by examining changes at the activity level.one consequence of such itrelated changes in tasks is that there are manynew ways to substitute goods and services for each other, enablingorganizations to provide what a customer really wants by different means. forexample, as discussed in chapter 3, companies can invest in it that allows themto use less of their own labor and invoke more labor effort by the customeršallthe while providing more convenience and possibly lower costs to customers.13this concept is fundamental to many instances of doityourself "services"provided by businesses (e.g., credit card gas pumps, longdistance dialing,machineoperated parking facilities, automated teller machines, corporatetreasury systems). further, a product itself may embody tradeoffs betweenusing goods and services to meet customer needs;impacts of information technology at the activity level146information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for example, software such as income tax preparation packages and willwritingpackages may represent a good that has service built into it as part of its"functionality."box 4.4 the cosmos tracking system of federalexpressfederal express provides guaranteed delivery of highprioritypackages. however, much of its success is based on the fact thatinformation about the status of packages in transit is often as important tothe senders and receivers of those packages as the actual delivery of thepackage. federal express developed the cosmos system to locate andtrack packages anywhere within the federal express network. thiscapability is based on a bar code attached to every package that is readat every package transfer point (e.g., from truck to airplane). customersthat provide a packagetracking number can thus inquire about where thepackage is and when it is likely to arrive; it is also possible to orderrerouting of packages in transit should that be necessary.note: for a good discussion of cosmos, see nehls, carl, 1988, "custodial packagetracking at federal express," pp. 5781 in managing innovation: cases from theservices industries, bruce r. guile and james brian quinn (eds.), national academypress, washington, d.c.another consequence of itrelated changes in tasks has to do with the timevalue of information. because it can be used to make more finegrainedinformation available, and provide it more rapidly, new attitudes may emergeabout the importance of different kinds of information at different points inbusiness processes. these new attitudes can, in turn, lead to new services. forexample, major packagedelivery companies offer the service of informingpeople about exactly where a package in transit may be, permitting changing itsdestination as well as forecasting the delivery with great precision (box 4.4).while the initial (and still major) use of it is the automation of routinetasks such as accounting, inventory management, handling of personnel data,and the like, it is increasingly being applied to support knowledgebasedactivities (e.g., domain modeling, decision making). for example, the productmanagement and engineering vice president of a major communicationscompany observed that its new credit card business "was really launched out ofan understanding developed through the analysis of data that's beenaccumulated over a number of years – from both internal operations as well asother, demographic databases which are commerciallyimpacts of information technology at the activity level147information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.available and integrated with the information that the company capturedroutinely." the production of value in most fields now increasingly depends onthe management of the knowledge that creates such new services and thecoordination of these intellectual processes toward something of particularvalue to customers. this pattern cuts across industries, further blurring thetraditional distinctions between manufacturing and service industries.14the implications of tapping such uses of it are farreaching. for example,instead of simply providing a way to replace human effort with it, some of thenewer uses of it are not so much replacing employees as enhancing knowledgeworkers. this type of application is becoming more common in finance. forexample, howard sorgen of merrill lynch explained thatin our business, the really large profits come from products and services whichare heavily dependent on analysis and computation. the speed with which aparticular firm can respond to a new opportunity for, say, a new derivativeproduct depends directly on the sophistication and processing capability of theanalytic software provided to the knowledge worker. even though thetechnology is complex, the costs to exploit this technology are low comparedto the potential gain. a good example would be the use of risc [reducedinstruction set computer]based multiprocessors to perform the calculationsnecessary for derivative products such as interest rate or foreign exchangeswaps or mortgagebacked securities. this is in sharp contrast to the highvolume, commodity type of technology application such as check processingšwhere the expenditure for equipment and staff is high relative to theprofitability of the product being supported. in the latter example,enhancements to technology (better and faster check sorters) are deployed toreduce dependence on human labor, not to enhance the job of the laborer.further, the greater use of systems to complement knowledge workersimplies a need to change the skill set that employees usually bring to their jobs.employees must know how to construct queries, analyze data, interpretinformation, and draw conclusionsšand do all of this using computers.expected changes in skill demands related to new kinds of tasks, in turn,present significant challenges for an organization's human resources, as asection below, "consequences for employees," describes.new linkages and transformations in firmsgiven that a company's activities can be linked to each other in manydifferent ways, how should they be linked to produce the best value for thecompany? prior to the advent of it, the answer was driven by issues suchimpacts of information technology at the activity level148information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as ease of management and physical proximity. however, in addition to thedirect incorporation of electronic tools into many service tasks, it provides thecapability to link activities in many different ways, and it creates the basis fornew organizational forms, such as crossfunctional teams or processes and evencrossfirm systems of linked activities.new linkages have resulted chiefly from improvements in the variety,nature, cost, and quality of communications technologies, plus enhancements inuser interfaces, database systems, and other elements of computing technologythat generate and process information prepared or shared throughcommunications links. advances in "groupware" are expected to boost thistrend by facilitating group preparation of, for instance, planning documents,project proposals, or activity reports. to date, however, most improvements ofthis type have come about through electronic mail (email), computernetworking, and related enhancements. for example, leading retailers such asfederated department stores have been installing and upgradingcommunications systems linking branches to headquarters to more quicklymonitor and analyze sales data, permitting more timely changes in ordering andmarketing strategies.15 the spread of email generally has been credited withincreasing the pace of decision making and the scope of interactions in anenterprise, since it facilitates communication unconstrained by hierarchies.also, as noted by craig goldman, senior vice president and chief informationofficer at chase manhattan bank, email tends to cut short the cycles ofiteration associated with generating more formal, "letterperfect," paperbasedcorrespondence or memoranda. cryptic and often poorly punctuatedcorrespondence has become totally acceptable in the world of personal emailcommunications.larry bacon of the travelers companies discussed the many ways thatbetter telecommunications has fostered improvements:it's the ability to communicate instantly and cheaply that allows me to putworkstations and people wherever they need to be but let them think thatthey're working with someone that is right next door, whereas they could beanywhere they need to be. so we can have a service center that's very good atdoing service centertype things; it's very efficient. at a service center youhave an 800 number, you have good management, you have the optimalnumber of people that have wonderful voices and are highly service oriented,in whatever location in the country you need to be at to get that kind of laborforce and that kind of good communications economics. and they're doingtheir thing wherever they are. meanwhile, we may need to have a salesman onevery street corner of america or we may need to have doctors or nurses thatare experts in certain fields, wherever they need to be. but we only need thesepeople at certain times on certain pieces of business. the problem is, how dothey get into the loop? communications makes them all able to work together.impacts of information technology at the activity level149information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.within a firm, the potential for linking activities in different ways has animportant effect on management choices regarding how centralized ordecentralized activities should be. conventional wisdom suggests that enhancedcommunications options are associated with greater decentralization, and recentempirical research has supported that inference. for example, distributed and,increasingly, mobile computer systems that can communicate with an office orheadquarters as well as with one another will support a variety of marketing,sales, service, and analytical activities (such as order entry, market datacollection, insurance policy terms and formats). explained roger ferkenhoff,formerly vice president, information services at sears merchandise group, andnow retired,at sears, any individual, based on authorization, can access anything he or sheneeds at any sears location. – our district folks are constantly on the road andon their way to the next store. they all have portable terminals. as soon asthey walk into a storešwe say their office is "next store, next terminal"štheyhave full access to any information they need. so it really has enabled us tochange the structure rather dramatically.distributed systems obviate the necessity for all tasks to flow through anoffice or headquarters. in fact, continuing to route many processes through acentralized office may vitiate the speed and flexibility potentially afforded byreliance on electronic networked systems. for example, pacific bell has reapedbenefits from a mobile terminal system developed by bell communicationsresearch to support service technicians. jack hancock, executive vicepresident, product and technology support, explained thatthe technician access network, or tan, – is a handheld device that alltechnicians have. – [w]hereas before when technicians went out on servicecalls, they had to get access to a telephone pair, plug into the pair, and then callback to the maintenance center to order tests, and so forth, now the tandevice permits them to plug in directly because it is a handheld device, atelephone. in addition it has a display so they can conduct their tests with thissingle handset. they can also get instructions for the next job that way, and soit has automated much of what the technician does.despite the many benefits being discovered for distributed systems, theadvent of microcomputers has not led to the demise of centralized informationsystems functions. rather, there have been changes in their size, tasks, andknowledge requirements while technical responsibilities of their clientdepartments have grown. the kinds of distributed systems mentioned above canhave significant costs for internal support services. in addition, someapplications may require at least some centralization. for example, pacificbell's hancock argued that telephone central office inventory systems, whichtrack millions of items relating to the ability to establish or act ontelecommunications service to a particular location, are too vast to bedecentralizedšalthoughimpacts of information technology at the activity level150information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distributed access to the systems is possible. similarly, email directory servicesrequire firmlevel coordination.thus itbased structural change has not been in a single direction.instances of both centralization and decentralization may be found even withinthe same organization. some organizations that have already made a shift fromcentralization to decentralization are now considering the recentralization ofselected activities (box 4.5). the activities targeted for (re)centralization canstill be dispersed, but greater central control and standardization may beasserted through links to common, central systems. the result could be calledthe virtually centralized (or decentralized) organization. both kinds of choicesšmoves toward decentralization and moves toward virtual centralizationšaremade possible by advances in it, coupled with declining telecommunicationscosts.other linkages that contribute to performance are those between firms. itcan be used to link value chains across firms and shift work involved in variousfunctions between organizations. marshall carter, currently chairman and chiefexecutive officer of state street bank, provided an example relating to theprocessing of financial information:mutual fund companies each year have to do an annual report for theregulators and for other people. prior to 1991 they prepared this report on theirown with plenty of typing and all kinds of gathering of data. we've devised away to print the reportšready for the cameras and the printing pressesšwithinformation that's stored in our databases just by pulling up the rightinformation and arraying it, calculating exactly. it saves the mutual companiesan enormous amount of money and time. but what we're doing there is addingvalue to the information; we're really changing the data into value addedinformation for the client, and he's willing to pay for that.box 4.5 recentralization of previouslydecentralized activitylocalarea networks (lans) are often installed on a departmentalbasis within an organization. as such, they are oriented toward specificneeds of departments, which may not be uniform across all departmentswithin the organization. however, data and information residing ondepartmental networks may have value to the entire organization, andmaintenance of departmentally based lans may be costly and distractthe department from focusing on its core tasks. as a result, someorganizations are beginning to recentralize control over their manydistributed lans.source: dostert, michele. 1992. "lan control falling to is,"computerworld , december 21, p. 37.impacts of information technology at the activity level151information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he went on to describe how, building on technology, his business hadshifted from a focus on transactionprocessingšproviding information for theclientšto a focus on strategic alliances and doing things with the client.considering interfirm links on a broader scale, electronic data interchange(edi) connects companies to their suppliers, buyers, and even to their banks.providing a shared body of information and a common set of standardizedforms, edi transforms the ordering, invoicing, shipping, tracking, and customerservice functions, among others, for a growing number of enterprises.interfirm connectivity can both affect existing activities and at the sametime make new businesses possible. for example, organizations with a welldeveloped inhouse service activity and excess capacity may decide not only toperform the work for themselves but also to take on external clients for theservice. this is what american and united airlines have done with theircomputerized reservation systems, which are now dominant in the airlineindustry. in these cases, the technology has become the basis for a new line ofbusiness.a different type of reconfiguration is the new business that results from anitbased integration of complementary service activities. for example,american airlines and csx, a rail transport company, have developed a jointventure, encompass, for global logistics that relies on it. travel agencies relytoday on the availability of information concerning airlines, auto rentals, hotelreservations, and other information in comprehensive information systems. bylinking these systems, customers will be able to obtain "onestop" shopping fortheir travel needs.finally, enhanced abilities to link physically separate activities create thepotential for their geographic independence (such as the remote computeraideddispatching described for pacific bell above or the teleservice center describedabove for the travelers companies). dependence on regular and reliablecommunication has always been fundamental to large organizations withdistributed establishments. but it is being used to support ever greatergeographic dispersion of personnel, as cheaper and easiertousecommunications technology encourages more organizations to experiment withtelecommuting or other modes of longdistance work for some staff. forexample, companies such as insurance agencies and airlines engage in extensivetelephone interactions with their customers; these companies can usenationwide tollfree numbers to route customer service calls to personnelphysically located in lowwage areas, perhaps even outside the country, whilenetworking and data communications between these customer service agentsand corporate databases enable the prompt servicing of customer requests.16multinational enterprises are not new, and companies have for manydecades set up operations in other countries to make use of unique facilitiesimpacts of information technology at the activity level152information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or capabilities, to benefit from lowercost production labor, or to satisfy localcontent laws or regulations associated with selling in foreign markets. today,however, there are signs that the global division of labor is extending to suchwhitecollar service activities as research (switzerland), software coding anddevelopment (programming in india), data entry (korea), and insurance claimsprocessing (ireland). among the several reasons for this pattern is it, which canbe used to connect remote parties more easily, less expensively, and veryquickly. the prospect of greater globalization in turn raises questions relevantto public policy about potential reductions in local employment opportunitiesand changes in work force skills.the broad distribution of capabilities to access information, solveproblems, take action, and communicate has motivated new theories oforganization, challenging conventional wisdom on, for example, the need forhierarchically structured bureaucracies for the coordination of complexmultiperson tasks. the movement toward flatter organizations, in manyinstances, provides testbeds for new ideas on organization. for example, a vicepresident of a major communications company describes how they movedtoward a more matrixlike organization because of options made possible by it.it has enabled decision making to be driven lower in the organization. it hasbeen an aid in helping to reduce layers of management within the organization.as information becomes more readily available from the customer facingpeople, it has allowed us to reduce layers because we have speed of decisionmaking and we have information that has – been developed by thoseintervening layers of the organization. – thirdly, it has begun to increase theflexibility with which we can change the character of the organization. we'retending to work in more of a matrix, rather than a hierarchical, form with moreteams. –new and imaginative metaphors for technologically transformedorganizations are beginning to appear, including the organization as network orweb (versus discrete units), as jelly fish (versus dinosaur), and as intellectualholding company for electronically linked activities. it is important to note, ofcourse, that while it enables such forms, they are still in experimental stages inmost companies, and the full capabilities of it have not yet been fully exploitedfor these purposes. thus new organizational forms should, at present, be treatedessentially as possibilities. new models will ultimately be needed, or earlierparadigms for understanding organizations revised, to better understand howactivities might be reorganized to exploit it for better (or higher) performance.outsourcing and industry transformationperhaps the greatest impact of increased flexibility in configuringcomponent activities is seen in a company's decision to provide a necessaryimpacts of information technology at the activity level153information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.service activity internally or to buy it from an outsideršthe decision aboutwhether to "outsource." the ease with which different it operations can becoupled across institutional boundaries (e.g., through standardized electronicdata interchange and networking protocols) and the external specialty servicefirms that are enabled by such coupling increase the range of options forredesigning overall work flow. activities that are highly generic in nature (suchas payroll) are most susceptible to being provided by external servicespecialists, even when rapid turnaround is required. in fact, the development ofitservice industries (contract software development and maintenance, thirdparty networkbased services, systems integration, computing facilitiesmanagement services, and so on) reflects in part a longterm trend towardoutsourcing service activities (from legal work to accounting to data processing)to firms that specialize in them. to obtain faster cycle times and lowerinvestment costs and risks, hightechnology companies often outsource manyspecialized activities, from component design and product styling to distributionand field warehousing.outsourcing a given service activity may make particularly good sensewhen that activity involves what might be called "economies of knowledgescale." typically, the competent provision of a service subject to economies ofknowledge scale requires highly specialized (and thus costly) information toolsas well as the specialized expertise required to use these tools effectively, forexample, some specialized databases or knowledge systems. an individual firmthat needs such a service may not find it worthwhile to use its resources todevelop or provide this service inhouse at truly competitive levels of cost orquality. however, an external unit might launch that activity as its corebusiness, taking advantage of its ability to spread costs over a large number ofexternal users and to develop specialized expertise that enables it to performthat activity particularly well. in this way, itenabled specialization isespecially valuable for entrepreneurs seeking to focus an entire business on agiven activity or set of activities.decisions to outsource a critical service activity can have negativeconsequences as well. outsourcing may require a company to expend muchmore effort in establishing and maintaining stable, reliable, and highqualityinteractions with external providers of services, since outsiders are by definitionnot conversant with the relevant corporate culture. opportunities for synergymay be lost, since outsiders may be less motivated to look for ways to improvea client's operations, less knowledgeable about a client's operations, and lesslikely to seek frequent interactions between themselves and the clientorganization. further, employees at the outsourcing company may lose jobs,although other jobs will be created in supplier companies.perhaps more serious for managers is the potential of losing control over acritical aspect of a company's operation. reliance on external service providersmay well lead to the loss of specialized skills (indeed, reducingimpacts of information technology at the activity level154information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personnel costs may have been a major reason for turning to an externalprovider), making it difficult for the client company to audit the quality and costof the services being provided. asking for changes in the nature of the servicesbeing provided may become more difficult if the external provider is largerelative to the buyeršor if the company's dependence on the external serviceprovider increases for other reasons. unless the company has availablesubstitute suppliers, external service providers can raise the prices they chargefor their services as the cost to the client of switching to an alternative serviceprovider increases.it may influence the perceived costs and benefits of a decision tooutsource. the capacity to coordinate large programs has undoubtedly led to agreater number of strategic and operational alliances in recent years. whethermanagement decides to undertake an activity internally or to have it done by anoutside source depends on many factorsšsuch as the number of suppliersavailable and the criticality of the activity to the core business (this may beilluminated by valuechain analysis); an activity's synergy with orcomplementarity to other, critical activities; the relative costs of conducting orbuying the activity; the extent to which economies of scale and scope arepresent; the firm's capacity to manage outsourcing; and so on.consequences for employeesit is associated with a number of direct and indirect effects on peopleworking within organizations that use it. most directly, the introduction of itcan trigger redesign of jobs, restructuring of work flows, or changes in thephysical location of work. these effects arise because of the nature of it; itconsists of tools that affect what people do and how they do it. less directly,applications in one part of an organization can alter the work and workingconditions elsewhere: management systems can be used to craft reorganizations,database and communication systems that supply information at top and bottomlevels can eliminate the need for certain middle levels, and so on.the activity level is where the first effects of change will be experiencedby employees, effects that will then influence performance at the firm andindustry levels. users are important stakeholders in the introduction of newinformation tools. employee expectations that the benefits as well as theburdens of continued technological advance will be equitably shared may be akey factor in the successful implementation of it. further, although employeesatisfaction with new job designs often depends upon choices that may be madefor reasons unrelated to satisfying worker interests, accommodating employeeconcerns by explicitly dealing with them during the design phase frequentlyresults in both improved task design and employee acceptance. obtaining themaximum return from investments inimpacts of information technology at the activity level155information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it may hinge on providing avenues for employees to exercise their knowledgeand skills, and it is possible to design and implement it systems that encourageand reward extra effort and ability on the part of users.for many employees, a first concern, naturally enough, is fear of job loss.the inherent capabilities of it, combined with job and organization redesignpermitted by the technologies, can result in substantial reduction in the demandfor, or outright elimination of, particular activities. for example, a top executiveof a major supermarket chain described the reduction in labor requirementsassociated with supermarket scanning systems.a large supermarket will carry 30,000 to 60,000 items. every day, everyweek, there's a dynamic system of price changing and updating and deals witheverything that is happening in the marketplace across all those tens ofthousands of items. a typical store has some kind of pricing activity on 1500to 2000 to 3000 of those items depending upon what inflationary, deflationary,or other outside environments it is exposed to. in the past, that meant thatsomebodyša personšphysically had to go out there, erase every price offevery one of those items, stamp a new price on it, put a new tag on it, and – todo that in a store took about 100 to 150 hours a week.thus the relative growth in jobs associated with service activities, asindicated in table 4.1, does not guarantee substantial job growth in absoluteterms. the one whitecollar category showing much less than average growth isadministrative support occupations, including clerical workers; this is alsoconsistent with the observation that pcs and other office technologies areenabling professional and managerial workers to bring more of their work tocompletion with less need for administrative assistance. for example, larrybacon of the travelers companies described a major shift in the insuranceindustry from clerical to professional personnel, with workstations beingmanned by professional customer service representatives, underwriters, claimsspecialists, and nurses, for example. in addition, changes in professional,technical, and managerial jobs that are evident at the activity level suggest thatgrowth rates in these job categories will slow (and are indeed beginning to doso).17 since service sector job growth has been concentrated in industries withrelatively low efficiency, the potential for those industries to streamline theirprocesses using it or other means suggests further constraints on service jobgrowth, other things being equal.18 nevertheless, merely installing itbasedsystems does not guarantee job reductions. for example, as an executive of amajor diversified service firm observed, the use of it in a lean company doesnot necessarily result in less staff in frontofthehouse activities: the checkinline may be shorter and the service faster and more accurate, but the number ofclerks may stay the same.nonetheless, fears of job loss in the work force as a whole can stronglyaffect the ability of an organization to adopt new tools and systems in aimpacts of information technology at the activity level156information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.timely and costeffective manner. moreover, these fears may arise even whenmanagement adopts it for reasons other than staff reduction. this issue shouldbe addressed directly and dealt with to the greatest extent possible through theadoption of such actions as expansion of internal retraining programs, shifts ofaffected personnel to other activities within the organization, sweetening ofearlyretirement packages, and when necessary, provision of substantialoutplacement services. these measures can help foster a positive attitude aboutchange.applications of it also affect career prospects more generally, includingprofessional development, pay and promotion opportunities, the ability to stayin a given geographic area, and reporting relationships and requirements. thisbroad complex of changes in the content of jobs will affect job satisfaction andthe quality of working life. both the levels and the extent of supervision maychange with new applications of it. as organizations become flatter and moredecentralized, the line between staff and line functions will continue to blur.one executive at a major communications company described the changing roleof managers:the whole character of the relationship between a manager and employeeschanges. teams are empowered, which means that the role of the managerswitches from being a director of activities to a facilitator, a coach, and athought leader.line managers may not only decrease in numbers, as suggested by flatterorganizations, but are also likely to need new substantive and managerial skills.even when job loss is not perceived as a potential result of the introductionof it, employees may resist change because they do not understand what isbeing imposed on them. smooth transitions depend on employee acceptance,and a major factor in obtaining that acceptance is the extent of employeeparticipation in planning. moreover, early and genuine employee involvementin system planning also enables the resulting system to incorporate andcomplement employees' domain knowledge and process skills. for thesereasons, employees and their representatives should be involved as early aspossible in technologyrelated decision making and implementation processes.it applications alter the knowledge and skill requirements of personnel.they are likely to increase the intellectual demands on knowledge workersštheworkers who are responsible for interpreting, analyzing, and taking action onthe basis of information received throughout the company. for example, accessto previously unavailable data enabled by the use of it (e.g., hourbyhour salesin a retail establishment), and the potential of such data to lead to competitiveadvantage, create a requirement for knowledge workers to develop appropriateanalytical skills, both to interpret relevantimpacts of information technology at the activity level157information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data and to disregard irrelevant data. in addition, the cooperative work that itenables among dispersed workers means that these workers must now knowhow to cooperate and share information with each other in order to usegroupware (collaboration technology) and shared information resources to thebest advantage.substantially redesigned activities (e.g., complete redesign of insuranceclaimsprocessing procedures) generally require much more extensiveeducation and training programs. for example, the product management andengineering vice president of a major communications company noted,we're expecting people to be able to be more than just technically able. we'reexpecting them to have the capacity to make decisions. that's what we'retrying to do. our objective is to move decision making lower so we're askingpeople to be able to acquire skills to do that, and, of course, working in teamkinds of arrangements people, by necessity, have to have much, much strongerinterpersonal skills.on the one hand, as indicated by larry bacon of the travelers companies,the resulting jobs may be more professional than the original ones. on the otherhand, some applications of it may require less cognitive effort on the part ofemployees (as in the case of itbased systems that can provide realtimeguidance or advice to users, or even itbased cash registers and barcoding thateliminate the need for cashiers to do arithmetic).19combined changes in organization, job content, tools, and infrastructurewill make it necessary for managers to develop new skills and new hiringstrategies; they may also change demand for retraining.20 the new skills go farbeyond those traditionally associated with ''retraining" or it, such as the skillsneeded to use spreadsheets or word processors. in many cases, specific trainingrelated to new it applications may need to be supplemented with broadereducation in a variety of areasše.g., supervising a different kind of work force,integrating a variety of separate activities into team processes, making betteruse of enhanced communications capabilities, leading technological change,and so on.questions about who will train whom, how, when, and where, need to beanswered before any hardware or software changes are instituted.21 further,given the anticipated rate of technological change in the decades to come, (re)training can be expected to be a continuing rather than a onetime or infrequentneed. depending on how it is implemented, it affects learning curves for bothindividuals and organizations overall.individuals at all levels of the organization may be affected as the use of itpermeates a company's activities. many may have increased responsibilities, inpart because using it may make it possible for each individual to do more.employees may feel more empowered or have a greater sense of ownership ofwork, although not necessarily as a result of intentionalimpacts of information technology at the activity level158information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational redesign. for example, highlevel managers can use it toexercise a greater degree of control over their work, even when assistants wouldbe available to perform such work. such ownership may lead to the reduction orelimination of intermediate rungs in the corporate hierarchy (a jobloss issue),but as importantly it may also lead to a more finely tuned match between theultimate work product and the understanding and insights of seniormanagement. at the same time, greater ownership may tempt managers toappropriate the benefits of using it more for themselves than for theirenterprises; specifically, some managers may try to decrease their personal risksof error by uneconomically increasing the amount of data they seek beforemaking decisions.22 such changes in organization and management are oftennot anticipated initially by companies embarking on new applications of it butemerge as the use of it diffuses through the company. companies that do notpay deliberate management attention to organizational issues often find thatpreviously existing roles and relationships reassert themselves in ways that puta ceiling on how much benefit can be achieved with the new technology and/orsubvert and undermine the changes that the new technology has enabled,thereby pushing the organization back in the direction of the status quo.itenabled decentralization is often associated with changes in job contentand hierarchies.23 specifically, it can be used to combine multiple tasks withinjobs and to support crossfunctional teams. customer service affords anexample: telephone and computer systems provide tools for a single individualto receive and handle a variety of inquiries. crossfunctional jobs and teamsimply more comprehensive knowledge and the ability to manage flexible andloosely coupled staff resources. for example, one communications companyvice president described the movement toward crossfunctional jobs as a trendtoward "caseworkers"24 for applications in customer service, provisioning, andnetwork configuration activities, suggesting that database and expertsystemtechnology made such jobs possible. this approach to reengineering hasreduced time requirements by a factor of 10 and costs by a factor of 3 to 4.similarly, it can be used to support the flattening of hierarchies, as fewerpeople and fewer jobs are needed to relay and concentrate information whenelectronic databases and communications provide some of those functions.middle managers, as well as technical and administrative staff in serviceactivities, thus face special challenges in their work and careers. as currentlydeployed, it systems handle particularly well activities that require complexcollections of repetitive and routine tasks, including such things as datacollection, information transfer, reproduction, monitoring, scheduling, and thelike. for example, roger ferkenhoff described a recent restructuring of sears'vertical business groups (automotive, home appliances, and so on) where theelimination of a layer of management was madeimpacts of information technology at the activity level159information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.possible by companywide access to computing and communications systems.both elimination or simplification of some jobs and enhancement of others arepossible.finally, itbased systems may also be a necessary part of a workenvironment that is on the cutting edge of expanding business frontiers. theleaders of an industry seek the best talent available, and such people are mostoften attracted by the challenge of working on stateoftheart businessproblems. craig goldman of chase manhattan, for example, pointed to thevalue of investing in good desktop technology to reduce attrition of technicalstaff. to the extent that exploitation of it is a necessary component of asuccessful approach to such problems, firms that hope to lead an industrycannot afford to scrimp on the technology needed to stay at the cutting edge.conclusionsintense domestic and international competition, a lackluster economy, andother business pressures are leading companies to look beyond incrementalchange. they are redefining their purposes, goals, and images, redesigningwork processes in fundamental ways, making major changes in bothmanagement structures and work locations, and reconstituting their employeework forces. such changes will continue throughout the coming decade, andmany analysts feel this circumstance will become the norm for the foreseeablefuture.25although it is not possible, in a general sense, to say that a "right way forfirms to use it" has emerged, it can be used by firms to develop a vast newarray of alternatives for organizing activities. some of that opportunity forchoice can be seen in the different approaches (in terms of technologies andprocesses overall) that companies in a given industry have taken to carry out thesame fundamental activity. however, it can also be used with homogenizingresults. for example, producers of a wide range of products may beinterconnected by the same edi system, a system that imposes a commonprocess for orderrelated activities. the trend toward interconnectivity and thepossibility of a national information infrastructure suggest that, to at least someextent, technical standards will increase commonalities for itrelated tasksacross organizations.the chief conclusion to be drawn from the committee's activity levelinquiry is that use of it has so greatly increased the opportunities for designingservice activities to meet a variety of performance goals that new perspectivesare required for organizational learning, understanding, and assessment. neitherresearchers nor decision makers have a base of empirical evidence or wellestablished precedents on which to rely in understanding how it can be usedmost effectively to support work flows within and across enterprises. further, asdiscussed in other chapters, the actual outcomesimpacts of information technology at the activity level160information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of such efforts are influenced by a number of factors in addition to it (such ascompetition, employee skill base, and especially managerial capability inorganizational and activity design). it alone does not create impacts; itseffects reflect a host of decisions made and actions takenšwisely or notšby a range of stakeholders including senior managers, technicalprofessionals, and users.because the rapid pace of it change does not appear to be slowing, newpossibilities for designing activities, restructuring them within firms, andlinking them across firms will continue to emerge. and because continuouschange is to be expected, today's right answer is perhaps tomorrow's wrongsolution. moreover, as suggested by merrill lynch's howard sorgen, what is aright answer today is not always clear.what we are going to suffer through, i believe, for the next 3 years in theapplication of information technology is a significant number of false starts, astechnology organizations attempt to deploy workstationbased solutions forlargescale problems. since many of these organizations lack the managementexperience and technical maturity to make the proper choices in hardware andsoftware, some of their experiments will failšdue not only to their own lackof appreciation of the requirements of a robust "productionready" operation,but also because the support tools available for many years for the mainframeenvironment are simply not mature enough to support highvolume,transactionprocessing applications on a workstationbased technical platform.at the same time, smarter decisions can be made today about how to useinvestments introduced some time ago. this observation was made by larrybacon of the travelers companies:one of the things we've seen has been enormous cost reduction over the last 2or 3 years in our industry, and a great deal of that has been that people havereached down and really gone and taken advantage of the things theyautomated years ago. so if they automated something and they could eliminate200 positions, maybe they reduced 150 initially. now they go back and theynot only get the other 50 they should have, but they say, "now that we're doingbusiness this way, i can do this and i can do that, and i can do these thingsbetter, and maybe i can close these 6 offices because now i can do it with thisnumber of offices." they have made much bolder strokes. but that's arecognition of where they are today rather than a premeditated, "we're going toautomate and do this."the volatility in the application of it and the restructuring of activitiesentails an organizational need for flexibility, an ability to change quickly, andthe capacity to experiment regularlyšwith the expectation of some successesand some failures. the cost of continued experimentationšand the likelihoodof both successful and unsuccessful trialsšshould be considered explicitly infirms' strategic planning for technological change. moreoverimpacts of information technology at the activity level161information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.within organizations "training" will, in consequence, become an everyday issue.however, it has been observed that within firms the pace of implementation ofnew technologies has slowed; technology push is being weighed againstorganizational needs, available resources, and capabilities for assimilation. thismore cautious approach to the use of innovative it may result in betterplanning, evaluation, and implementation.how to value or assess the performance of service activities is an issue thatcalls for more data and analytical models than are currently available.repetitive activities are much easier to measure than others, and serviceperformance metrics in the past have usually been based on what is easy tomeasure.26 since it is difficult to measure the more complex and nonroutinethings that organizations do, it is inherently problematic to determine whetherthe acquisition of new it has made their performance better. this conclusionunderscores the need for new activity level metrics.the availability of such metrics would have important policyconsequences. the capacity of both service enterprises and service activitieswithin manufacturing and other enterprises to create value added for customersand to increase their own real productivity is important to the levels of wealthcreated by the nation. with 77 percent of all u.s. employment in serviceindustries and another (approximately) 10 to 12 percent in service activitieswithin goodsproducing companies, increasing the productivity of serviceactivitiesšwhether within a company or in a separate service companyšseriously affects the nation's capacity to increase real wages over time.one of the more important conclusions that emerges from the study of theimpact of it on service performance at the activity level is the profound effect itwill have on employees. use of it is an important factor in helping to increasethe value added, and hence the wage potentials, of service jobs at all levels fromthe highpaying professional and managerial levels to the lowpaying entrylevel. because service jobs provide the entry and early developmentalleveljobs for the countryšand many of these depend on extensive use of it to createhigh value addedšeffective deployment and implementation of it in servicesare critical to developing the output potentials of recent entrants into the nation'swork force. moreover, as companies redesign their processes and structures,their needs for particular skills and numbers of employees in their work forceswill undergo major shifts. these changes call for preparations and responses byindividuals, employers, and government at all levels.the itenabled ability to relink activities in a myriad of configurationswill profoundly influence the structure of u.s. industry, the organization ofcompanies, and the nature and location of future jobs. how firms and industriesrestructure themselves will have major policy implications for job design,changes in occupational mix, and education and training. the outcome of suchrestructurings will have profound effects on productivityimpacts of information technology at the activity level162information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in all industries, the competitiveness of u.s. companies and industries ininternational markets, the number and nature of employment opportunities, andthe effectiveness of huge and ongoing investments in it.notes and references1. it should be noted that process innovation is not a new construct. however, unlike productinnovation, process innovation has not been widely recognized until relatively recently as a potentialsource of significant organizational performance improvements. for further discussion of this point,see, for example, tornatzky, l., t. solomon, t.k. bikson, and others, 1982, "contributions ofsocial science to innovation and productivity," american psychologist 37(7):737746; tornatzky,l., w. hetzner, j.d. eveland, and others, 1983, the process of technological innovation:reviewing the literature, national science foundation, washington, d.c.; and tornatzky, l., andm. fleischer, 1990, the processes of technological innovation, lexington books, lexington, mass.2. kiesler, sara, and lee sproull. 1992. "group decision making and communicationstechnology," organizational behavior & human decision processes 52(1):96123.3. recent changes in services at the department and process levels of organizations have spawnednew families of measures, but the committee believes that most of these efforts are still narrowlydefined (see the master measurement model of employee performance. n.d. the society ofincentive travel executives foundation, new york). an activity level analysis can help broaden theviewpoint and open the way to making revolutionary changes.4. when the use of new technologies and approaches leads to new combinations of previouslyseparate activities, for instance, traditional measures of performance are problematic at bestšandperhaps outright misleading or useless.5. the committee also examined the work of several prominent european scholars on the impact ofinformation technology on work in service industries. however, since these individuals tend tostudy nonu.s. institutions, and institutional and national differences between the united states andeurope (e.g., the german apprenticeship system, government funding of industry) are oftenprofound, it is very hard to compare macroeconomiclevel issues such as productivity. in addition,the work of these people focuses on levels of analysis that are finegrained than even the activitylevel, with no particular ties to economic performance. thus, such work was considered relativelyperipheral to the issues the committee was addressing.6. a good treatment of the use in measurement of data indicating customer satisfaction can be foundin zeithaml, valarie a., a. parasuraman, and leonard l. berry, 1990, delivering quality service:balancing customer perceptions and expectations, free press, new york.7. bureau of labor statistics employment projections are developed using a detailed inputoutputmodel and a variety of economic and demographic data. in addition, analysts determine factors thathave previously exerted a strong influence on the behavior of important projection results, and thenmake assumptions, based on past experience and professional judgment about future trends inspecific industries and occupations, about their influence in the future. this exercise includesevaluation of particular technologies in specific jobs or industries. the entire process is repeatedevery 2 years.8. service occupations include cleaning and building service occupations, food preparation andservice occupations, health service occupations, personal service occupations (such as barbers andchild care workers), private household workers, and protective service occupations.9. this is not to deny the existence of activities that are relatively industryspecific, such as patientcare activities in the health care industry. billing, an activity that is relatively generic across manyindustries, is handled in a unique way within the telecommunications industry due to industryunique regulatory requirements.impacts of information technology at the activity level163information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10. see boynton, a.c., b. victor, and b.j. pine ii. 1993. "new competitive strategies: challengesto organizations and information technology," ibm systems journal 32(1):4064.11. the close intermingling of properties of new technologies with properties of technologydependent tasks is not a new outcome; indeed, such reciprocal effects have long been described bysociotechnical systems theory. still, that theory has typically been applied to help explainrelationships between new manufacturing tools and tasks involving the production of goods; itbears a similar relationship to informationintensive service activities in both manufacturing andservice firms.12. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1991. keepingthe u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integration, national academy press,washington, d.c.13. the increase in convenience can be contrasted with the notion of "quality service" defined as ahigh level of service. thus in some instances it and other tools are helping to provide morepersonalized service, while in other instances, it is helping customers be served more quickly bydiminishing interactions with serviceprovider personnel.14. camp, robert c. 1989. benchmarking: the search for industry best practices that lead tosuperior performance, quality press, milwaukee, wisconsin.15. strom, stephanie. 1992. "computerized recordkeeping for retailers," new york times, may20, p. d6.16. see, for example, carey, susan. 1992. "airlines seek to cut backoffice costs by establishingoffshore operations," wall street journal, november 30, p. b6d.17. see prokesch, steven. 1993. "service jobs fall as business gains," new york times, april 18,p. 1.18. baumol, william j., sue anne batey blackman, and edward n. wolff. 1989. productivity andamerican leadership: the long view, mit press, cambridge, mass.19. a good discussion of this issue can be found in bulkeley, william, 1992, "computer use byilliterates grows at work," wall street journal , june 9, p. b1.20. however, when an activity remains substantially unchanged (e.g., typing reports on a wordprocessor rather than a typewriter), specific task training may be all that is necessary.21. note that some needs for new skills can be met by the use of it, both through itbased trainingsystems (satellite classes, computeraided instruction systems, and so on) and through theincorporation of knowledge and reference information into production systems (help functions,knowledgebased systems, and so on).22. doorley, t., a. gregg, and c. gagnon. 1988. "professional service firms and informationtechnology: ongoing search for sustained competitive advantage," managing innovation,national academy press, washington, d.c.23. for more discussion of this point, see zuboff, shoshana, 1988, in the age of the smart machine:the future of work and power, basic books, new york.24. this term is attributed to business analyst michael hammer, who has written and consultedwidely on reengineering.25. davenport, thomas h., 1993, process innovation: reengineering work through informationtechnology, harvard business school press, cambridge, mass.; davenport, thomas h., and jamese. short, 1990, "the new industrial engineering: information technology and the business processredesign," sloan management review, summer, pp. 1117; and hammer, michael, 1990,"reengineering work: don't automate, obliterate," harvard business review, julyaugust, pp.104112.26. in addition to the reference provided in note 3, see also thor, carl, 1986, "using nominalgroup technique to establish a whitecollar productivity measurement system," productivitybrief, no. 51, american productivity center, houston, texas; and thor, carl, 1991, "performancemeasurement in a research organization," national productivity review , autumn, pp. 499507.impacts of information technology at the activity level164information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5improving decision making aboutinformation technologyanalyses at the macroeconomic, industry, firm, and activity levels haveattempted to assess the impact of using it at those levels. at the enterprise levela number of studies and articles have indicated (1) shortcomings in how somecompanies have managed it, particularly when they first began investing in it,and (2) a lack of correlation between the amount a company invests in it andits return on assets, returns to shareholders, or profits per employee.to understand more thoroughly why companies have had such variableexperience with their investments in it, the committee asked experiencedexecutives a series of structured questions (see appendix d). the questionswere intended to probe for any important problems executives had encounteredin implementing it systems, how they had attacked those problems, and whatissues remained. while often admitting previousšand currentšmanagementproblems, many executives indicated they had made significant improvementsin their management practices and were currently modifying their processes toachieve further effectiveness. this chapter summarizes some of the interestingproblems and solutions encountered.paul strassmann, a former executive of the xerox corporation and directorof defense information at the u.s. department of defense, analyzed theinconsistent relationship between investment in it and service firmperformance between 1977 and 1987 (figure 5.1). he concluded, "a computeris only worth what it can fetch at an auction. it has value only if surrounded byappropriate policy, strategy, methods for measuring results,improving decision making about information technology165information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving decision making about information technology166information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 5.1 investment in information technology and service performance:an inconsistent relationship.source: reproduced with permission from strassmann, paul. 1990.the business value of computers, information economics press, new canaan,conn., p. xviii.copyright 1990 by information economics press.project controls, talented and committed people, sound organizationalrelationships, and welldesigned information systems. – the productivity ofmanagement is the decisive element in whether a computer helps or hurts."1the committee concurs in this assessment. box 5.1 provides a furtherillustration from software applications development. as figure 5.1 suggests,standard measures of output make it appear that some companies' investmentsin it have paid off well, whereas those of other companies with comparableopportunities have not. more often than not, good management has made thedifference. generally problems with obtaining a payoff from investment in it,when they exist, lie not in the capacity of the technology but in the planning andimplementation of systems. good management can overcome manytechnological deficiencies, while poor management can prevent returns fromotherwise productive technologies. the latter has often happened, for example,when corporate managers have left decisions to technical experts who were notknowledgeable about the strategic factors, operating variables, or organizationaldynamics involved in implementation. a variety of studies (listed inappendix a) have set forth many of the common shortcomings in themanagement of it.improving decision making about information technology167information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5.1 the impact of case tools on productivityexperience drawn from software engineering highlights theimportance of management. computeraided software engineering(case) tools such as programming environments and debuggers wereoriginally sold and marketed as tools that could increase the productivityof programmers by an order of magnitude. however, a variety of studiesindicate that the use of case tools makes far less difference toprogrammer productivity than does the choice of the particular individualsto do the programming job; when case tools are not used, programmersare unproductive, but the use of case tools is not a guarantee thatprogrammers will be productive. it turns out that when a programmingproject is competently managed, the impact of case tools is more easilyobserved.source: bill curtis, software engineering institute, carnegie mellonuniversity, pittsburgh, pa.common problem areas in the management ofinformation technologythe following section addresses some of the identified problem areas inthe management of it and summarizes observations about them made duringthe committee's interviews.lack of competitionone claim is that service companies have been protected by regulationsand geography from domestic and foreign competition more than theirmanufacturing counterparts.2 hence they have not been forced to compete andrespond to changes as quickly. however, this explanation is incomplete.interviews verified that these two factors might have slowed potential changesin regulated airlines, health care, banking, and communications companies. yetno professional service, retail, wholesale, entertainment, or internationalbanking company mentioned these factors as relevant. still, there is no questionthat more recent instances of restructuring in service industries have coincidedwith increased deregulation, crossborder trade, foreign direct trade, anddepressed domestic markets.these factors may help to explain previous slow responses to change insome types of companies but as a full explanation seem inconsistent with thefacts that (1) u.s. service companies have consistently been among the first toadopt new technologies, (2) other countries (particularly in europe, and japan)have been even more sheltered in key service industries like communications,transportation, distribution, and finance, and (3) u.s. serviceimproving decision making about information technology168information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.companies' performance in most areas has compared very favorably with that ofthe companies of other industrial countries. (see chapter 1.)inadequate planning and followupinadequate planning and followup have undoubtedly been significantproblems in implementing it projects for many service sector firms. althoughat the time of the committee's interviews many respondents indicated that theirprocedures for planning deployments of it were comparable to those used forinvestments in other technology, they often candidly admitted that they hadexperienced earlier problems. early investments were often pursued to acquireshortterm savings in laboršby merely automating existing practicesšratherthan to generate longerterm gains or strategic potentials. investments induplicative or incompatible programs sometimes occurred.in many instances, the costs associated with development and ongoingsupport required for major new information systems were underestimated. thiswas especially true for the maintenance, the updating of software, and theretraining costs associated with such systems. as was noted in chapters 3 and4, introduction of it frequently leads to a variety of job changes that may havefarreaching implications across an entire company. often, the nature and scaleof these implications have not been fully explored as part of planning for it. asa result, job changes were made less smoothly, and changes in performanceevaluation and reward systems unnecessarily lagged deployment of it systems.some respondents cited problems of underestimating incremental usagecreated by new systems that quickly exceeded acceptable utilization ratios indata centersšlater leading to unexpected costs for further central processingpower. unanticipated costs for support and additional computing powerincreased both total investments and the bureaucracies to operate data centersšand thus lowered longterm returns. as roger ballou, president, travel relatedservices group (usa), american express, noted,one place an awful lot of people get into trouble is by not looking at the fullyloaded costs of technology investment. if you analyze the costs of just bringingup the system and its ability to offset existing paper reporting, it can look veryeffective. but when you look at the full ramifications in terms of cpu [centralprocessing unit] utilization on an ongoing basis, staffing support to providehelpdesk functions for it, and so on, it can change both the cost and seemingreturns on the investment. we recently built an online reporting system usingexisting software. we did have to pay a few hundred thousand dollars for diskdrives and things like that. with programming, the total investment wasprobably several million. however, the ongoing operating costs of this systemare probably running at $300,000 to $500,000 a month. if you are not careful,you also keep using available cpu time incrementally, and all at once youhave to buy a large new chunk of cpu capacity for the next project.improving decision making about information technology169information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resistance and inefficiencies in work practicesas noted in chapter 3, the mere fact of access to desktop computing doesnot necessarily improve the effectiveness with which knowledge workers (i.e.,the individuals in an organization who are responsible for interpreting andanalyzing raw data and information and converting them to useful knowledge)can pursue their jobs. in many cases, knowledge workers have used it to domore busy work without necessarily enhancing outputšspreadsheets can berecalculated, presentations finetuned, or manuscripts revised more frequentlywith little noticeable benefit. in a related realm, respondents often questionedwhether they had achieved soughtafter communications benefits from morepowerful desktop tools. many said they had not yet found effective ways tostimulate or measure better communications through electronic mail or othercomputer communications systems.a serious challengešunderestimated by several of the companiesinterviewedšcomes from the long time that it takes to change traditional workpractices and corporate cultures. when personnel are uncomfortable with a newwork environment and lack clear direction, they often attempt to maintain theirold procedures in parallel. such employees often feel that their basic skills andorganizational worth are being undermined. knowledge workers, in particular,often seek new grounds to justify their presence and search out other things todo as work is removed from their queue.j. raymond caron, president of cigna systems, illustrated theseconcerns when he noted,when we began to automate some of our agents' activities, we thought wewould have less work coming into our central offices for the underwriters to doand there would be a shift in the workload. that didn't happen, primarilybecause we underestimated the amount of work required to change traditionalunderwriting practice. and without a design change in the overall process, wedidn't really achieve our goals. we now also have hundreds of financial typeswho are wizards at spreadsheet work. you have to ask the question, ''howmany times do you have to display this kind of data and who cares?"corporate policies that consciously promote continuity in employment andjob security may work against achieving institutional changes, although they dohelp address some of the employee concerns discussed in chapter 4. as danielschutzer, vice president, citibank, said,as a nation we have had a population boom and a need for full employment.we have had a reluctance until recently to lay people off, in part because wedidn't have global competition until then. now we're seeing a terrificdownsizing as a result of the technology introductions of the past decade ortwo. this is a permanent restructuring. we'll never see those jobs come backagain.improving decision making about information technology170information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excessive project scopefor many years, it vendors and popular journals overemphasized theimportance of largescale "system solutions." managers too often responded byseeking to install megaprojects with high visibility. such projects generallyhave multiple objectives that must be reconciled and integrated across severaldivisions. megaprojects tend to become very complex. and they often takeinordinate amounts of time, investment risk, and political compromises to bringinto being. as a result, even companies with wellestablished track records forinnovative uses of it have experienced difficulties with largescale it projectsšas the examples of federal express (successful with cosmos ii, unsuccessfulwith zapmail) and american airlines (successful with sabre, unsuccessfulwith confirm) testify. citibank's schutzer underscored these difficulties:when something becomes a big magnet project, everybody becomes focusedon it. they throw in everything but the kitchen sink that they think about butmight or might not really need. the business people don't necessarily knowhow easy or hard something is to do, and they are encouraged to be moreelaborate by programmers or by technical project engineers. before you knowit, you're designing for many more functions than you can possibly deliver orneed. the technical guys in an effort to promote the project have usually givenunrealistic schedules, which the business people may believe because theydon't know enough about the technology, or delve deeply enough into thedetails. then one of three things happens: (1) everything just gets socomplicated it blows up, and you get major business reverses. (2) people justget tired and kill it quietly. or (3) you announce a premature success andswitch the thing over too soon without adequate testing. in any one of thesescenarios, the result is a disaster and the hero whose ego is on the line usuallydies.respondents explained why such megaprojects had been major sources ofcorporate it investment inefficiency. first, because of their complexity, suchprojects cost more in time and investment terms. second, by the time they wereimplemented, competitors might also have come out with similar systems, oftenat lower costs because of cheaper technologies developed during the innovator'sprolonged development time. third, because of delays, large programs also rana much higher risk of not being matched to corporate or customer needs by thetime they were implemented. when queried, most respondents said they nowbroke largescale programs into a series of smaller projects and implementedthese incrementally. (for details, see section below, "compressing projectscope and payback time.")improving decision making about information technology171information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technologydriven investments in itrespondents reported that in earlier years, many purchases of it weretechnology or vendordriven, rather than being determined by business needsor opportunities. at that time, many service firms had relatively littleexperience with advanced technologies and often lacked the expertise toarticulate precisely their needs for it or to challenge it solutions proposed byvendors. because of rapid advances in equipment, vendors usually couldpromise much greater technical capacity and flexibility at lower cost. notwanting to lose competitiveness, top managers in service enterprises mightagree to equipment purchases based on optimistic projections by lowerleveltechnology champions and vendors. frequently, important support systemsšlike software, optical scanning, labeling, or materialshandling systemsšwereinadequate, making it difficult to use the computers' full capabilities.for example, many retail firms experienced major problems in usingelectronic scanning systems as a source of data for marketing, profitabilityanalyses, customer micromarketing, and other service features at the customerinterface. existing software was too expensive to implement on mainframecomputers; scanning equipment was not sufficiently accurate; barcodinglabeling was not as comprehensive or readable as retail applications required.only as needed subsystems became availablešespecially vendorgeneratedlabeling and decentralized microcomputing poweršwas full implementationpossible.substantial improvements in it, falling costs of it, increasingcustomization of it to meet user needs, diffusion of it expertise throughout theranks of senior management, and a much broader base of experience with ithave increased user sophistication substantially in recent years.difficulties in software developmentgiven the widespread availability of it hardware and "shrinkwrapped"software, the only significant technological advantage that most innovators cankeep as proprietary is software developed inhouse. as critical as software is,however, software engineering is often very difficult to discipline. for a varietyof reasons, software developers are often reluctant to take advantage ofstructured computerassisted software engineering tools or macro programs(like method 1,2) that would help to ensure the accuracy, completeness, andspeed of their work. meaningful metrics for tracking the output of softwaredevelopment have been particularly difficult to devise. commonly usedmeasures such as lines of code completed per day generally do not reflect eitherthe complexity of a problem or the quality of the code, while function pointsystems are difficult to implement. as animproving decision making about information technology172information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.example of the problem, jon d'alessio, then staff vice president and chiefinformation officer, mckesson corporation, stated,we don't have any formal measures of our own internal systems developmentproductivity. we don't do function points or lines, or anything like that. therehas been a great reluctance to do it by our systems staff. we have had majordebates on what to measure, how to measure it. basically, in the past we havehad a culture of very creative people who were artists in building systems.we're trying to move it toward an engineering, disciplined approach. butartists don't like to be measured, and i'm not sure the engineers do either.difficulties in software development and engineering are not unique to thebusiness community; software engineering remains a major challenge at theresearch frontiers of computer science.3 the biggest problem today in softwaredevelopment is the inability to produce software on a largescale. softwaredevelopment managers have treated software too much like an art form whoseprocess of creation cannot be improved through the application of sound designand engineering principles. however, developments in the 1980s suggest thatunderstanding of how to build large software systems efficiently and well isimproving, and companies are beginning to achieve significant returns oninvestments devoted to software development. to some extent, the knowledgebeing developed has been codified.4some companies like at&t, arthur andersen, and marriott havesystematized particular aspects of software development. but respondents to thecommittee's interviews said that new techniques and metrics for ensuringquality and productivity in software development are still required. the need forbetter standards and diffusion of software management capabilities willintensify as user systems become larger and more interactive. these may be thecrucial bottlenecks to future it progress.critical issues in the management ofinformation technologyother issues critical to the management of it were identified in thecommittee's interviews and in its own deliberations. many of the basic themesare not new, but the emphasis needed within each has changed. the mostpervasive themes for improving the use of it relate to (1) developing genuineinformation and it strategies focused on achieving competitive advantage, (2)implementing crossfunctional reengineering and restructuring of processes andorganizations, (3) actively involving users and customers throughout theprocesses of design and implementation of it projects, (4) developing customerdriven measures of quality, (5) compressing the scope and payback time ofprojects, (6) improving postproject audits, (7)improving decision making about information technology173information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.carefully benchmarking processes and performance against those of outsidesources, and (8) installing performanceevaluation and reward systems that arecustomerdriven and that develop intellectual capital.information and it strategy seeking competitive advantagemost interviewed executives acknowledged the importance of having anit strategy. however, the committee found that a majority of the firmscontacted described their it strategies as primarily components or extensions ofdivisional strategies. for the most part, programs were evaluated and prioritizedas a part of divisional planning processes and subsequent procedures forallocating capital. information technologies were regarded by a majority of theinterviewed companies primarily as enablers for other desired divisional orcorporate goals (e.g., cost reduction, newproduct development, qualityimprovement). these companies' "it strategies" were more longrange plans forinvestment in and installation of it than explicit plans for integrating it as partof a competitive positioning strategy. some companies also had a separatecorporate platform integration strategy with its own priorities. further, somecompanies reported having a special information systems committee at thecorporate level to review and coordinate individual strategic programs. timehorizons for it plans varied considerably, but 80 percent of respondentsoperated on either a 3 or 5year time horizonšupdated annually throughcapital budgets and specific operational plans keyed in at 6month to 1yearintervals. (see question box 1 in appendix d.)cigna systems provides an interesting summary example of suchpractices. j. raymond caron noted,we have eleven businesses within cigna, and we have a strategy for each.division by division is the way we put the plans together. in essence eachdivision first puts down its wants and needs. then the divisions prune this listby setting priorities in terms of capital availability and payoff. they draw aline in terms of what they agree to do and what they take off the table. inaddition there is a corporate "platform integration" strategy. this is a kind ofumbrella for all twelve systems in terms of data centers, computer platforms,communications, and applications. this largely has to do with cignalink,which is our pc lan communications interconnection facility for all ourbusinesses worldwide. decisions about those are made at the corporate level,and we set overall guidance and direction at that level. as each division putsits strategies, plans, and budgets together, it is incumbent upon them to usethose directions. the central infrastructure is budgeted and evaluatedseparately as a corporate investment, with a chargeback system based uponthe amount of use that each area makes of a service.improving decision making about information technology174information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a longterm plan for investing in it and installing it is an importantbeginning point, but a more strategic view (as has also been generated bycigna) is desirable. many interviewed companies said that they had hired attop levels professionally trained it managers familiar with the business. butwith only a few exceptions, neither top managers nor the new it managersdescribed genuine information strategies that (1) would lead to distinctivenessor competitive preeminence for their companies or (2) provided specificquantitative targets to ensure that the set objectives were met. the committeebelieves that any information or it plan is most likely to be successful when itis part of a wellintegrated strategic plan that contains such elements. asapplications of it move from an emphasis on traditional costcutting towardmore strategic concerns, a welldefined strategic process for integrating it andcustomer needs becomes particularly important. edward hanway, president ofcigna worldwide, described his company's approach:we are using a teamoriented approach and a lot of new software technologiesthat allow a "try it, test it, fix it" type of development effortšas opposed to ourhistoric approach, which was a long, involved, planning and documentpreparation process. we've been adamant in motivating these multifunctionalteams, pushing them to realize that the challenge is not simply to save money.efficiency is important, but the big issue is how successful we are with acustomer or in the market.another critical component of any comprehensive information and itstrategy is engagement in that strategy by all levels of the organization. themere involvement of chief executive officers, chief operating officers, and chieffinancial officers in developing the company's information strategy is notsufficient; true understanding and commitment are essential. to exploit thepotential of it in facilitating strategic change requires consistent longtermsupport across all divisions. only top management can provide the patience,consistency, and reward structures that make it possible to execute forwardlooking strategies despite urgent operating pressures. these are complex tasksrequiring toplevel finance, human resource, and operating champions to leadneeded changes. for many companies, ensuring such leadership may requiremaking major changes in the selection and promotion criteria used for topmanagers themselves.crossfunctional reengineering and reorganizationsuccessful installation of it increasingly requires that both informationtechnologists and user groups look beyond their old functional boundaries. bothapplicationsspecific expertise and familiarity with the latest it are critical.ensuring continuous integration between technologists and usersimproving decision making about information technology175information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.throughout planning and implementation both improves results and shortensdesign cycles. in the words of edward hanway,by closely integrating the people who do the is [information systems] workinto the management structure of the business units, we have gotten terrificresults in a much quicker time frame than we ever would have hoped forpreviously. attitudinally, there has been a major change. now, there is none ofthat ageold "we versus they," or "throw the requirements over the wall andexpect us to deliver" mentality. – the productivity of is people has increaseddramatically as a result.changing interfunctional processes usually requires readjustingorganizational structures across those functions. major restructuring, in turn,involves significant risk and takes time to accomplish smoothly. as a result,large organizations often implement such changes incrementally. to reducerisks they frequently run a series of smaller trials or experiments with potentialnew organizational modes, develop coaches for these modes, create systematicways to learn from their experiments, and then attempt to diffuse this learningthroughout the firm. all this takes time and continuous management attention.to exploit it effectively in such cases, the committee thought it helpful formanagers to develop an explicit transition plan involving certain key steps.critical among these is how to "reskill" the organization for its new rolesšparticularly for the flexible, multiskilled, teamoriented structures that seem tobe emerging. neither public education nor company training programs havebeen particularly attentive in the past to meeting the needs for new skills. manycompanies lack experience with new organizational and operating modes andmay need to seek the necessary expertise outside their own boundaries. as partof the process of change, companies often need new methods for evaluating thecontributions of individuals and teams. important among these are measuresand incentives for their line managers to develop people (and systems) as"knowledgebased assets" (a topic discussed below in the section "customerand knowledgedriven performance evaluation and reward systems").many respondents commented that the first performance gains from it'suse were often obtained by merely automating existing activities. but over 70percent of respondents said that in today's environment, careful process analysisand reengineering are key to improving benefits from the use of it. in itsclassic form, reengineering involves a series of rather wellunderstood steps:1. analyze the total process to determine whether it should be done atall, that is, whether its value added exceeds its costs;2. analyze each major step within the process to determine its valueadded versus its cost and whether it can be eliminated, simplified,or consolidated with another step;improving decision making about information technology176information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3. at each major step, analyze each component activity, eliminating,consolidating, or simplifying those that remain;4. map the remaining component activities into a new system andanalyze to see where further steps may be eliminated, consolidated,or simplified;5. install new organizational structures and systems specificallydesigned to implement the remaining activities as efficiently andeffectively as possible; and6. followup to ensure that the new process is operating as intended.when ineffective processes are not reengineered, the application of it tothose processes simply results in performing ineffective processes more rapidly.respondents often noted that important contributions to productivity andeffectiveness through the use of it frequently came less from thecomputerization of existing activities than from the transformation of a processitself.5 successful automation is often targeted first toward those steps that aremost onerous, complex, boring, or time consuming. by defining and analyzingthe steps and outputs of these processes down to their smallest repeatablemicroelements, itbased systems can be introduced that operate at lowest cost,yet still maximize flexibility, control quality, and capture essential informationfor future use. when these steps were carefully undertaken with user andcustomer participation, startling results were often reported. roger ballou ofamerican express described that company's process and gains as follows:if you don't reengineer the work flow to take advantage of the technology,you're just doing the same inappropriate things quicker. people have atendency not to think about what the technology will let them do once it's in;they just do what they're doing today. in a simple example, our business traveloperations historically had something like 31 manual checks done to ensureaccuracy, lowest fare, and things like that. in two stages we automated about75 percent of those quality assurance checks. to do this right we had toreengineer the whole work flow of the reservation process and ticketingfunctions in our offices.if we had just put the automation in, because of the 25 percent of checks thatstill have to be done manually, we probably would not have generated anysubstantial savings. but by designing a statistically valid sampling techniquethat could ensure accuracy levels above 98 percent on this manual 25 percent,we have been able to generate tremendous savings. we have a department ofprocess engineering that provides the technical expertise for these tasks, butthey do it in and with the offices affected. we call the process "brown paperreviews," because when they go into the offices they use big sheets of brownpaper to lay out the process engineering work flows of all steps, working withcounselors and with office personnel to get ownership of the solution.improving decision making about information technology177information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a crossfunctional and strategic orientation to process development iscritical. without it functional groups are likely to introduce it on an internal adhoc basis without considering performance gains that might be obtained bylooking outside their traditional organizational boundaries. such an approachoften has led to major suboptimizations. because most organizations tend togrow initially around specialized functional expertise, over time a number ofsteps may be built into business processes merely to accommodate functionaldecision making and the power politics associated with functional structures.appropriate reengineering can break down these structures and substitute crossfunctional processes and team decision making, offering new opportunities andpayoffs. increasingly, improved communications and capabilities for dataexchange enhance and enable these opportunities.at cigna corporation, melvin ollestad, senior vice president, claims,employee benefits division, described how his corporation's crossfunctionalreengineering is specifically matched to customer needs:the company has a systems development methodology (sdm) for crossfunctional design. in our division, first of all we now try to decide how wewant to run the business, what is the best way to serve customers. we try tounderstand exactly what that means and to reengineer how we want to delivereach specific service. then we put in place the technology to support us indoing that. we had become functionalized within the offices so that we hadone group of people opening the mail, a second doing basic inputs to record aclaim, a third group to do data entry, another group for the adjudicationprocess, other specialists on various kinds of claims for reference purposes,and still another group that generally answered questions, phone calls, and soon.the idea of putting together teams of people and dedicating them withappropriate it support to customers appeared to be a good way to get a neededtransformation. it has had the benefit of aligning us much better and moredeeply with our customers. the customers like it a lot. the employees feelbetter about having control, being able to make decisions, and being heard. wealso find that we need fewer management supervisory people, and the ones wedo have are in a facilitating mode, which is more rewarding to them as peopleget used to the process.interviewed companies repeatedly reported that, when crossfunctionalreengineering is focused on specific problems, total processing times could dropfrom days or weeks to a few hours or minutes. box 5.2 presents an examplefrom the literature. from the customer's viewpoint, crossfunctional structuresalso often prove to be much more effective with respect to quality, improvingboth efficiency and responsiveness to customers' needs.j. raymond caron of cigna systems described that company's approachto crossfunctional reengineering and the benefits received from that approach:improving decision making about information technology178information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5.2 reduction of application processing timeat the ibm credit corporationthe ibm credit corporation provides financing for potentialcustomers of ibm computers, software, and services. prior toreengineering of operations, a typical credit request took approximately 6days from submission to approval. several people handled each request:order takers, credit checkers, pricers, and the like. however, managersdiscovered that the actual processing time for the typical credit requestwas 90 minutes: for most of the 6 days, the credit request sat onsomeone's desk. the company reengineered its operations, replacingspecialists in the different departments with a single generalistša "dealstructurer"šwho processed an entire credit request from beginning toend. for difficult applications that might require more expertise for properprocessing, the deal structurer calls on a small pool of specialists. ibmcredit corporation cut its average turnaround time from 6 days to 4 hours;in addition, it now processes 100 times as many deals as before with aslightly smaller work force.source: hammer, michael, and james champy. 1993.reengineering the corporation: a manifesto for business revolution,harper collins, new york, may.we now have two kinds of reengineering. we have functional reengineeringand what we have termed strategic reengineering. in a functionalreengineering setting, we work with a claims department, an underwritingdepartment, or a marketing department, looking at the processes within thefunction. the more powerful and difficult approach is strategic reengineering.strategic reengineering looks at the way a business is performed from thecustomer's viewpoint, and slices it across our very strong functions. thisapproach clears things up very quickly in terms of what adds value, what doesnot add value, what gets in the way of meeting customer needs, and what thecost is of providing products and services. we try wherever possible to includein the effort customers, distributors, and all of the organizations within thebusiness that are involved with the value chain, as well as suppliers. this typeof reengineering takes a lot of effort to do because of our strong historicalfunctional organization bias. but we find it yields the most results.at bankamerica, martin stein, vice chairman, noted,one of the effects of it is that we now have really two types of organizations.we have our traditional hierarchical, vertical organization, where we tend tocentralize things like backoffice functions. but it has alsoimproving decision making about information technology179information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.created a real operating organization which goes the other way, and that'sbased on crossfunctional teams. our coin [customer online informationnetwork] system has worked because people formed a crossfunctional designteam to match this process where you couldn't tell users from technologypeople. the projects that succeed on a largescale appear to have thosecharacteristics; the ones that fail don't. we're at the point now where if wedon't see that type of informal crossfunctional work team organization, wewon't do the project.carefully implemented, crossfunctional process mapping andreengineeringšalong with use of selfdirected teamsšcan result in theelimination of numerous steps and often two or three organizational layersinvolved in managing interfunctional processes. for companies interviewed bythe committee, such approaches frequently resulted in realtime (computerbased) interactions and muchenhanced (personnelbased) responses tocustomers. for example, selfdirected ''800 number" teams supported by new itsystems often consolidated various orderprocessing, customerinquiry,customerresponse, fielddispatching, and troubleshooting activities that hadbuilt up huge functional bureaucracies in the past. such interfunctionalapplications were among the highest "quickpayoff" applications of it reportedin interviews.traditional hierarchical management structures are difficult to reconcilewith the needs of crossfunctional teams. successfully reengineered businessprocesses often result in very flat, network, team, cluster, inverted, or other neworganizational modes.6 indeed, the full realization of benefits from using itgenerally requires not just extensive investments in hardware but a completeoverhaul of the firm's traditional organizations, systems, practices, and culture.very few respondents said that they had an explicitly stated goal of flatteningan enterprise's organizational structure by using it. such goals, announcedpublicly, might generate considerable resistance to change. however, thepotential payoff is high enough to warrant conscious considerationšandplanningšfor organizational restructuring in any proposed process change. infact, a majority (60 percent to 80 percent) of companies interviewed by thecommittee found that the use of it had had an impact on their organizationalstructure (e.g., changing spans of control, facilitating organizational flattening,or encouraging use of selfdirected teams). but very few had made a fulltransition to supporting their new organizational structures with both newcustomeroriented measures of performance and new reward systems. manysaid that they were experimenting with such changes now. companies reportedboth increased centralization (usually in data centers or databases) andincreased decentralization (usually in operations) resulting from their use of it.(see question box 5 in appendix d.)improving decision making about information technology180information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuous user and customer involvementdirect and intimate user involvement in the specification, design, andimplementation of it systems was a strong contributing condition for success inthe vast majority (over 85 percent) of the companies interviewed by thecommittee. (see question box 6 in appendix d.) this is not surprising, sincethe applicationsspecific knowledge needed for effective implementation is farmore likely to reside in the minds of users (whose job it is to understand theapplication) than in the minds of information technologists (whose job it is tounderstand the technology).many of the companies interviewed by the committee found that externalcustomers also have a valuable role to play during the planning and installationof itbased systems. unfortunately, relatively few companies directly involvedsuch customers beyond early specification stagesši.e., in system design orimplementation. because customer needs ultimately define the nature andsuccess of many applications, direct input and feedback from externalcustomers can be very helpful in creating effective it systems. as itapplications become more strategic, involving external customers may becomeeven more important. modern software and improved development practicescan facilitate the kind of highly interactive prototyping that greatly increasesboth the quantity and quality of user input. the most effective user andcustomer involvement occurs when: users and customers participate interactively. since user and customerneeds are often difficult to conceptualize and articulate, close userinteraction with information technologists, or still better, interactionwith possible prototypes, can help uncover hidden but real needs.focus groups and experimental facilities for testing consumers'responses are important ways to obtain input, but observing usersinteracting with a prototype can add important new insights. a vicepresident of a major airline described that company's approach:we have consumer inputs for our system designs from the airports where wehave implemented test systems. in addition, we have user inputs from thepeople who are actually working at the counter. for them, we use aprototyping technique where we actually are coding and developing right alongwith the users. as we put in a feature, they will recommend changes, redesignit, implement it, continually modify it, until we have reached something we allfeel is satisfactory. users and customers are involved continuously. because many factorscritically affecting usability are decided not in original specifications,but in design and implementation stages, many companies have foundit very helpful to involve users and customers throughoutimplementation. as bankamerica's martin stein stated:improving decision making about information technology181information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.if we can't get user commitment, no matter how important the system is, wewon't do it. we try to do reengineering with each process change. but it is nota complete reengineering before installing the technology. it's almost anexistential process. we reengineer it as we go along. one of the things wediscovered is that if we are really smart, we get the benefits we say, but often itturns out that we don't get them from the places we thought we would. if youhave a situation where there is a clear general idea of what the payoffs are andthere are compelling economics, as you go along you get more perfectknowledge of where the gains are and can guide the process in thosedirections. each reengineering iteration seems to refine it. we useinterfunctional teams to let us design within these dynamics. groupware technology facilitates collaboration. collaboration amongtechnologists, users, and customers located in geographically separatedsites can be cumbersome and can make rapid changes and iterationsdifficult. moreover, maintaining multiple versions of a largedevelopment system can become a logistics nightmare. technologythat provides computer support for cooperative work, called"groupware," can reduce the impact of physical dispersion, as well asprovide for managing a system with multiple developers or multipleusers. at chase manhattan, craig goldman, senior vice president andchief information officer, reported,using lotus notes my developers, working with customers, can developapplications in hours and days that once took months and years. these are veryuserfriendly applications, with a high degree of rapid prototyping. now ourcustomers can actually see the development taking place before their eyes.what this has done is to make them believers that things can be done. theyhave wound up spending more time than they ever would have in the pastworking with the developers, interfacing with them, and actually developingthe technology. we have come up with better input and better ideas from thekey people using the technology, and also better products coming out the backend because there was greater involvement on the part of customers. in someof our areas, this involvement extends to surveys that go right out to ourexternal customers.customerdriven measures of qualityone of the more important trends in managing it is the attempt to developbetter metrics to measure and manage quality from the customer's viewpoint. asin manufacturing, companies' financial measures of revenues or returns mayprovide poor gauges of the quality of output, especially in the short run. severalrespondent companies had developed elaborate formal nonfinancial measures ofservice quality. the most straightforward of these involved internal engineeringmetrics. since service quality is often produced in the same moment that theservice is consumed, manyimproving decision making about information technology182information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.respondents had installed online (realtime) it systems to ensure the deliveryof crucial elements of quality that could not be achieved otherwise.thus when financial service representatives pull up the file on a newproduct, they are constrained by numerous rules, limits, and proceduresšbuiltinto the softwarešto ensure that all relevant data are checked and that noimpermissible commitments are made. the customer is served faster and moreaccurately, yet the costs of internal processing and errors are reduced. fastfoodoperations' electronic systems ensure that inventories do not go stale, staffinglevels are maintained, cooking temperatures and cycles are correct, customerbills are properly itemized and added, and so on. such systems allow relativelyuntrained people to perform tasks accurately that they previously could haveperformed only imperfectly, if at all. for more sophisticated professionalactivities, such as design or maintenance operations, architectural management,legal work, accounting audits, bioassays, realestate evaluations, and investmentbanking, online it systems have been implemented to ensure a thoroughness,consistency, and quality never before possible.however, despite their utility, engineering metrics and it systems thatmonitor the performance of internal operations can ensure only that internaloperations are proceeding as designed, not that those internal operations areproviding the customer with real value. moreover, what the company regards ashigherquality output (more customized service, or a faster response) may not infact be perceived by customers as more desirable, especially if they must paymore for it. companies have often found upon checking that customers caredfar more about reliability in delivery or pleasant personalities in contact peoplethan about fast response times. they can discover this only by interviewingcustomers.as a result, sophisticated companies are beginning to pay substantialattention to measures of quality that are customerbased. a surprising number(43 percent) of the companies interviewed by the committee had instituted suchmeasures.7 although companies try to collect as much data as possible throughautomated means, a complete evaluation procedure should also normallyinclude some random visits, customer sampling, and personal observations asassessment tools. these are especially important in understanding certainsignificant dimensions of pointofcontact service performancešlikecheerfulness, creativeness, responsiveness, professionalism, or other keycharacteristics of personal service.service companies in particular have taken a leadership role in developingcustomeroriented measures of quality. quality in services often requiresextensive interaction at the point of customer contact, is of prime importance tothe customer, and has a high potential impact on future sales. as inmanufacturing, there tends to be a strong positive correlation between servicequality and lower cost. the elimination of errors in producing aimproving decision making about information technology183information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.service decreases the costs of coordination and rework, customer service costs,and customer complaints (to say nothing of the unmeasured and possiblygreater costs of losses of goodwill at the customer level). two examples suggestthe kinds of approaches companies take to improve levels of customer servicewhile decreasing costs: mckesson has defined 42 "customer satisfactors" that it surveysexternally and measures internally on a routine basis. a sevenpagequestionnaire goes to over 1000 customers every year, and updates aremade quarterly on a smaller set of factors considered to be the mostimportant. mckesson is now trying to link these "satisfactors" to itscompensationincentive systems. at the strategic level, mckesson alsoemphasizes five themes for competitiveness: customersuppliersatisfaction, people development, market positioning, relative netdelivered cost, and innovation. for all of these factors, mckesson usesinternal and external metrics to track its own and competitors' positionsas perceived by customers. mci, in addition to using online measures of technical quality, does indepth customer surveys about twice a year and uses the results of othercustomer questionnaires administered at a lower level of detail (10questions) monthly. in addition it makes extensive use of focus groupsand other techniques to check its general image. every customer withmore than approximately $30,000 a month in billings is surveyed indetail once a year, either informally or through indepth interviews.the indepth interviews are done by an outside company. mci does itsown statistical analysis of the surveys that come in from the samplesfor residential customers. it also uses focus groups to get a morepersonalized feel for how those customers are responding to particularservices. mci uses formal measures of loss rates, geographically, bycustomer service center. in its business communications division, mcimeasures these quality factors by branch office at 132 branches. it alsomeasures loss rates by customer segment and does an extensiveemployee satisfaction survey every 18 months, considering that to bean important factor in customer service.respondents reported on a number of other experiments aimed atmeasuring service quality at the customer level. nevertheless, interviewsindicated little direct use of customerdriven metrics in measuring theperformance of specific departments. there was an even greater gap inconverting such measures into performance incentives for contact groups. andat the time of the interviews, no companies had converted either the results ofcustomer surveys of quality or data on customers' observations into usefulfinancial measures of service performance. these are important areas for futuremanagement attention.improving decision making about information technology184information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.compressing project scope and payback timeincreasingly, companies face the dichotomy that while they seek toincrease paybacks from it through more strategic (usually more complex andlongerrange) programs, the life cycle of each generation of technology isbecoming shorter. to manage this anomaly, many interviewed companies saidthat they now proceed incrementally on large it projects.these companies said that they consciously seek to break such projectsdown into smaller, more discrete segmentsšeach of which can (1) be justifiedindividually and (2) be integrated incrementally into an agreedupon systemarchitecture. the broad goals of the overall project and its general costs andbenefits are analyzed. then the output and input characteristics of each majormodule (and its needed interface standards) are established. these are used todiscipline all subsidiary project designs. then the program is broken down intodefinable smaller projects, each with finite timing and payoffs. as early projectsare successfully implemented, they help to reduce the real and perceived risk onthe total project. early paybacks lower the present value of the total investment.initial feedback from early projects can be used to guide those that come later inthe sequence. overall project management is simplified and more focused. andthere is less political resistance to largescale projects as early successes easeconcerns.to implement changes in large systems incrementally, companiesindicated that they often developed and tested individual modules on a smallscale or in a single operating division. as these projects proved their viability,they might then be integrated for testing with other successful projects on alocal scale or be rolled out as discrete projects across various divisions. as aresult of such practices, companies could achieve faster paybacks (by nothaving to wait for the entire program to be completed), and risks were reduced.despite the rapid rate of improvement and turnover that abbreviates thelife cycle of much it equipment, only a minority (30 percent) of theinterviewed companies said that they had a special "hurdle rate" for itinvestments visàvis other investments. (see question box 1 in appendix d.)instead, they adjusted for the relatively quick obsolescence of it equipment byintroducing faster depreciation rates into their calculations.as a prioritizing device, some companies sought 6 to 9month payoffs onit projects. others noted that among successfully implemented projects, thetime to actual payoffs rarely exceeded 3 years. for example, chase manhattan'scraig goldman said, "in the data center arena, you have to pay projectinvestments back in the year you make the investment. we are planning onreducing our absolute costs over the next 3 years, every year while we enjoy a25 percent volume growth; there's a program to support it." at cignacorporation, james stewart, executive vice president andimproving decision making about information technology185information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chief financial officer, stated: "increasingly we are shortening the planning timeframe. we are focused on shorterterm paybacks rather than building galacticsystems. the planning time frame has shortened from the traditional galactic 2to 3 years down to 6 months."planning for payback within shorter periods helps manage technologicalrisks. fast and effective implementation can also have strong strategicsignificance. as mckesson's jon d'alessio said,on the application side, you get the possibility of a competitive edge for awhile. but the lead time for your corporation is not very long; you clearly don'tget a sustainable edge because competitors can respond so quickly. howefficiently you implement, how effectively you do it, and how quickly and wellyou translate concepts into better customer servicešthose are the things thatdifferentiate companies.many companies interviewed by the committee had further improvedcontrol by (1) demanding that divisional systems follow corporatewideinterface and software standards for compatibility and interoperability, (2)employing corporatelevel allocation and followup processes forinterdivisional strategic and infrastructure projects, and (3) using moresystematic preproject analyses and postproject audits than in earlier years.postproject auditsthe committee found that virtually all interviewed companies reportedusing formal evaluation procedures for it projects (which lent themselves tosuch analyses) before investments were made. (see question box 2 inappendix d.) but postproject evaluations were less universally pursued. amajority (64 to 68 percent) did attempt audits on certain types of projects,notably costreduction and newproduct programs. audits for other types ofprojects were less frequent. (see question box 3 in appendix d.) postprojectaudits were often said to be erratic or spotty. this was of some concern to boththe committee and to many respondents, despite the fact that a large majority ofrespondent companies that had undertaken overall assessments claimedacceptable to high payoffs on their it investments. some examples illustratevarious viewpoints: at the travelers companies, larry bacon, senior vice president,commented,do we do post investment audits consistently across the board? no,it's very spotty. our decentralized style dictates that the divisions runtheir own businesses. some divisions do audits very rigorously; othersdon't. on each project, however, we try to make sure that we docapture the intended benefits.improving decision making about information technology186information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. at supervalue, h.s. smith, vice president, said,we do costbenefit analyses prior to the execution of each project.in the past we haven't really been very religious about auditing afterthe fact. we have audited our capital appropriations, but we don'tcapitalize software, so we have not audited the results of that. at citibank, daniel schutzer said,i think we are probably equally guilty with everyone else as far askeeping records and checking how well we succeeded on projects andwhether we really did achieve expected benefits. we constantly checkthe milestones for the development itself: whether we delivered in 2years for the $5 million proposed or whether we slipped and overran.but we don't really systematically ask: is the project increasingrevenue the way we thought? is it reducing costs or personnel?sometimes, if there is an immediate reduction of personnel, thatmeasurement may be taken. but for some of the other kinds ofincidental benefitsšrevenue increases, expense savingsšit's not clearto me that we do a good job of following up.many had installed more rigorous procedures in the last few years. theythought that installing such procedures would undoubtedly force operating andinformation systems managers to concentrate more on specifying and achievingplanned gains, and that this presumably would improve future measuredperformance gains from using it. however, in the committee's interviews veryfew companies mentioned going to the next highpayoff step of systematicallyanalyzing postproject audits to ascertain and catalog those success or failurepatterns that could assist in selecting and managing future it programs. therewas little evidence that formal post hoc evaluations were directly used to guidefuture capital or program budgeting allocations. further, such appraisals wereseldom used to evaluate line managers' performance or to set metrics forincentive plans. all these seem worthy considerations in improving futureprogram management.benchmarking against specialized outside providersbenchmarking examines how one's own performance of an activitycompares to that of others performing the same activity. benchmarking studiesgenerally provide better information about business processes than aboutspecific costs. definitions of data and what is included in various costcategories vary widely among companies. these definitional problems arecompounded by all of the usual problems about measuring service output.consequently, comparisons of bestpractice processes generally are moreproductive. companies can make significant gains (1) by evaluating andmodifying "best practices" observed externally and (2) by deploying their ownbest practices more widely internally. in addition to improvingimproving decision making about information technology187information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many processes directly, comparisons with outsiders can also send signals togroups within the company being benchmarked that their performance can bechecked against that of outside service groups and that they must keep up withcompetitive practices.the committee found that benchmarking had generally been undertakenonly relatively recently. most interviewed companies benchmarked primarilyagainst other competing peer firms. only a few (less than 30 percent)mentioned benchmarking against internal "bestinclass" activities in their ownfirms or in noncompeting external firms. fewer still benchmarked againstspecialized external service providersšlike adp services, eds, orservicemasteršwhich have widespread reputations for efficiency. althoughoutsourcing of data centers has become a $7 billion to $10 billion industry inthe united states and japan,8 few interviewed companies mentionedoutsourcing as a direct result of their benchmarking studies. more often theyupdated, consolidated, or modified their internal processes themselves. a majorexception was mci. richard liebhaber noted:where i get my view of 5 or 10year technology is by visiting vendors. peopleask me how many development engineers i have working for mci. i say i have19,000šbut they don't work for mešthey work for 74 vendors. i view allthose vendor engineering people as working for me. so, we go out into theirlaboratories, find out what they are doing, and influence what they are doing.a particularly useful type of benchmarking can result when groups ofcompanies voluntarily pool their own information and agree jointly to sponsor aconsulting firm to undertake a detailed study of comparative practices. data onrelative performance are then fed back to individual firms. each firm's own dataare specified for its internal use, but the identity of the remaining participants isdisguised by normalizing size (or other distinguishing features) and identifyingcompeting companies only as a, b, or c. for the companies interviewed, suchpractices offered useful relative calibrations, although not specific financialstandards for service performance. for example, cigna corporation used outside consultants to compare unit costs ofits backoffice and data centers versus competitors' unit costs for suchservices (in terms of tape drives, databases, cpus, and so on). thisengineering costdriven study did not address returns on investment ormake specific comparisons with specialized outsiders such as eds. bankamerica compared its it performance against that of othercompetitive institutions in terms of certain key measurements ofeffectiveness on an anonymous basis. it also used noncompeting peergroups (such as the member companies of the research board) forsimilar comparisons, but it had not specifically evaluated its overallinvestments in it with respect to paybacks.improving decision making about information technology188information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the following quotes summarize how some other successful companiesapproached benchmarking: at chase manhattan, craig goldman said,we have done some very specific studies both internally and withthe help of external sources to peg us visàvis competition in anumber of key areas. in one, we hired nolan norton. they took ourdata from five or six major facilities and compared them to a crosssection of other companies. there was a second study done by pricewaterhouse that said on an individual basis, each of those data centerswere efficientšand significantly more costeffective than if weoutsourced them. overall we found we are close to being as efficient aswe could get from an outsourcing contract today. by doing furtherconsolidations, we will be more efficient. in addition, we hired boozallen to look at our major competitors and to give us somecomparative data both on efficiency levels and relative performancetrends. we have also made major strides in migrating to commonplatforms and systems, looked around the network, and picked up themodules from each sector that made the most sense. nationsbank's patrick campbell, senior vice president, technologyplanning, described that company's approach:in dallas, we have a very strong it user community. for examplewe have j.c. penney's, fritolay, american airlines, southwestairlines, and so on. we have begun dialogues with representatives ofthese firms in "user communities" or "user groups." by exchanginginformation with noncompetitors, we can take pages out of their bookjust about every day and not have to reinvent the wheel. thisbenchmarking group is very selective about who can join. one of therules is that the prospects need to be dallasbased so we have closeproximity. basically, participants must be at the corporate office leveland hold the position of senior technology planner on the companyteam. none of the companies can compete directly with one another.we also benchmark our internal operations against establishedoutsourcing suppliers on a continuing basis. we do "bestinclass"analyses of their processes as well. we try to position ourselvesbetween the outside vendor community, like at&t or ibm, and ourcustomers. one of the benchmarks to which we compare ourselves isthe ability to provide it services to our internal and external users at acompetitive price. in other words, if at&t can perform a service for12 cents a minute, our gauge is to be less than 12 cents per minute. ifwe can do that, we are basically in a sound business position; we arenot a net overhead cost the way many organizations are.benchmarking has received widespread attention only in recent years.even so, the most common type of benchmarking appears to be a comparison ofa firm's performance in a given activity to that of other peer companies.improving decision making about information technology189information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.comparisons to specialized service providers, to smaller firms, and tofirms not in the same industry are much rarer. since activities are relativelygeneric (as noted in chapter 4), it should not matter to the benchmarkingcompany whether the bestpractice provider of a given activity is a peercompany or an external specialized service provider. including specializedexternal service providers in the comparison group can be especially useful,because such companies make their living by concentrating on an activity andproviding it more efficiently or effectively than others.customer and knowledgedriven performance evaluationand reward systemsa company's prosperity in the long run is intimately linked to the way inwhich its reward structures are aligned with its corporate goals. the committeediscussed in depth the question of whether in corporations of the future, themanagement of intellect (or intellectual processes) and the capital embodied inknowledgebased assets will be the primary bases on which they compete. eventoday, knowledgebased service activities such as research, design, product orprocess development, buying, trading, marketing, advertising, systemsintegration, software development, and logistics management contribute most ofthe value added in manufacturing enterprises. whole service industries likeconsulting, accounting, financial services, the law, health care, entertainment,and many aspects of the communications field also depend on the value addedby intellectual processes.the most valuable assets of firms in these industries typically lie in theirtechnological and professional knowhow, their flexible response andinnovation structures, and their knowledge about customers and markets. theseassets reside in the minds of individual staff members, in software programs, ininformation and management systems, and in the databases of the companies.indeed the management of intellectual capital may well be a major factor indetermining who survives and who does not in the coming years. to quotewalter b. wriston from the twilight of sovereignty, ''information, in the wordsof leon martel, is 'rapidly replacing energy as society's main transformingresource.'"9some studies have suggested that the managementevaluation andincentive infrastructures of companies have not yet been adjusted to take fulladvantage of the opportunities that the use of it offers.10 the committee'sinterviews support these contentions as they pertain to performance evaluationand reward structures. if a firm's competitive edge rests on its knowledgebasedassets and its superior customer service, reward systems need to be able tomeasure such assets, to recognize individuals and teams whose workcontributes to superior customer service, and to reward these peopleaccordingly (box 5.3 gives an example).improving decision making about information technology190information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5.3 a knowledgebased reward systemin 1992, salomon brothers was planning to install an employeecompensation system based on the knowledge that people bring to theirwork. a new employee with no knowledge about the financial businessreceives a certain level of base pay. employees are organized into teamsthat specialize in various products such as corporate bonds. to earn araise, the employee must complete an assignment on a certain set ofskills; as the employee masters a wider and wider variety of skills throughprogressively more difficult assignments, his or her compensation willincrease.salomon brothers expects that employees trained under this newarrangement will complete transactions more quickly. but it expects itsbiggest payoffs from how decisions about new products and evaluationsof new business are made.source: gabor, andrea. 1992. "after the pay revolution, job titleswon't matter," new york times, may 17, business section, p. 5.however, few respondents reported direct connections between (1) theircustomerbased measures of performance and quality and the incentives offeredto those handling contacts with end customers (although many said they werecurrently experimenting with such arrangements) or (2) improvements inknowledgebased assets and rewards given to managers. it is ironic thatfinancial markets often reflect the value of intellectual assets (through acompany's "q value," i.e., its market value versus the replacement value of itsphysical assets) but that the company's own books and performanceevaluationsystems rarely do. the value of such assets does not appear in publishedfinancial data or in the "asset" accounts used for internal controls. the omissionof such factors in performance evaluation and reward systems could pose majorlongterm problems for service companies competing in a customerdriven,informationintensive era.summary and conclusionsalthough a large percentage of interviewed companies felt they hadreceived adequate to high payoffs from using it, there were a number of areasin which the committee thought managers could seek greater performanceadvantages. principal among these were (1) developing and obtaining topmanagement commitment to genuine information and it strategies focused ongaining strategic advantage, (2) more extensive crossfunctional reengineeringand reorganization of processes affected by it, (3) expandedimproving decision making about information technology191information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.user and customer involvement in all aspects of the design and implementationof it projects, (4) improved customerdriven measures of quality installed andin use, (5) an increased focus on shorterterm payoffs for it investments withina longterm strategic framework, (6) betterdeveloped postproject audits, (7)more external benchmarking and increased consideration of "bestpractice"processes from outside specialist service groups, and (8) expanded use ofcustomer and knowledgedriven performance measurement and rewardsystems throughout the firm. even the committee's sample of sophisticatedrespondent companies often needed improvement in these areas. most of theproblems respondents reported in achieving payoffs from investment in itšwhen such problems existedšcame not from overinvesting in it, but frommanagement inadequacies in planning and implementing it systems. bothchapters 3 and 5 have highlighted some of the more interesting waysexperienced managers have found to improve their success in using it'spotentials. nevertheless, there is room for further improvement.notes and references1. strassmann, p. 1990. the business value of computers, information economics press, newcanaan, conn.2. roach, s. 1989. "pitfalls of a new assembly line: can services learn from manufacturing?,"morgan stanley, new york. also, roach, stephen s. 1991. "services under siege: therestructuring imperative," harvard business review, septemberoctober, pp. 8291.3. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1992. computingthe future, national academy press, washington, d.c. also, computer science and technologyboard, national research council. 1989. scaling up: a research agenda for softwareengineering , national academy press, washington, d.c.4. humphrey, watts s. 1989. managing the software development process , addisonwesley,reading, mass.5. in these cases, it itself is not irrelevant. it often provides a key element in the new process.6. a discussion of these organizational modes can be found in quinn, james brian, 1992, intelligententerprise, free press, new york, chapters 4 and 5.7. other studies indicate that many service institutions lack such formal feedback techniques formeasuring the quality of services. for example, one study found that 70 to 90 percent of all bankswere in this category. see giesler, e., and a. rubenstein. 1988. "measurement of efficiency andeffectiveness in the selection, usage, and evaluation of information technology in the servicesindustries," joint meeting of institute for illinois and industry information council, august 31.8. the national academy of engineering is currently studying some important aspects ofoutsourcing that will be discussed in a forthcoming national academy of engineering report,preparing a global economy: a new mission for u.s. technology.9. wriston, walter b. 1992. the twilight of sovereignty, scribners, new york.10. mckensie, r., and r. walton. 1988. "implementation of information technology: humanresource issues," mit, sloan school of management, management in the 1990s program,cambridge, mass.improving decision making about information technology192information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6information technology in services:implications for public policyinformation technology (it) has contributed to the growing economicimportance of services, and that contribution is expected to increasesubstantially. this report has documented, for example, the dramatic growth inelectronic transactions, yet the fact that most business transactions still involvedirect cash or paper checks suggests that what has been seen to date is only thebeginning of a longterm transition in the conduct of services. continuedadvances in computing and communications technologies, development of newfeatures and applications, and increases in their affordability and ease of usewill drive the further integration of it into services.1 pacing that integration willbe growth in the understanding of how best to select, introduce, support, andmanage it. inasmuch as people learn from early successes and failures, futureapplications are expected to be more successful on average than those of thepast. experimentation will continue; there will still be failures as well assuccesses in the use of it in services.the spread of it to date owes much to market forcesšthere has been noexplicit national policy aimed at promoting the use of it in services. asdiscussed in chapter 2, conditions in different industries have motivateddifferent types and rates of it application; as discussed in chapter 3, specificapplications arise from conditions, options, and approaches perceived byindividual management teams. the accumulated experience with it in servicesnow raises questions about potential market inefficiencies and implications forsocial welfare, concerns that may argue for public policyinformation technology in services: implications for public policy193information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.intervention. how rapidly and smoothly can adjustments be made to take place?how can the benefits and costs be widely and fairly distributed? how canpositive impacts be facilitated and negative impacts ameliorated? how canpolicymakers better track and anticipate relevant trends? this chapter firstdiscusses some important policy issues and then introduces some specific policyoptions related primarily to (1) employment shifts associated with the use of it,(2) investment in it, and (3) research relating to the application of it and thechanging structure of the economy that the committee believes should beseriously considered. the emphasis is on identifying areas of need rather thandetailed specification of recommended actions. implications for managementaction are discussed in chapter 5.implications for macroeconomic and fiscalpolicyas this report is being written, the slow economic recovery is motivatingpublic policy interest in economic growth. one important contributor toeconomic growth is investment, and one vehicle often suggested for stimulatinginvestment is tax incentives.2 however, this study indicates that there is noevidence that significant lack of investment in it has slowed growth inproductivity, while there is evidence that a number of (sometimes measurable)benefits have accrued in several industries. moreover, continuing improvementsin it's functionality and affordability suggest that it will be used to help lowerentry barriers in some markets as well as open possibilities for new kinds ofbusiness.3 any investment stimulus enacted by government should notdiscriminate against investment in it (software and support as well ashardware). the market should decide how to allocate investment dollarsamong alternative uses of capital.the findings of this study also suggest that the benefits of investment in itwithin the u.s. will not all be captured domestically. it is being used tofacilitate the globalization of business, enabling enterprises to manageeffectively over a wider geographical area and to shift some activities andassociated employment overseas. greater availability of capital overseas and theworldwide integration of markets and capital resources through it are otherfactors promoting globalization. thus, in the absence of mechanisms to rewardlocal spending, there is no guarantee that policies designed to encourageinvestment or demand will necessarily increase jobs within the united states.because of its collateral effects, investment overseas is not necessarily amacroeconomic problem, but it may create problems for local communities inwhich job losses may occur. local job creation may require incentives for localinvestment.one type of itrelated investment with many local benefits is investmentin the domestic telecommunications and information infrastructure.4information technology in services: implications for public policy194information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the proliferation of it to date has relied in part on a strong nationaltelecommunications network (specifically, a complex of local and nationalnetworks). large enterprises have built their own, private networkingcapabilities to contain costs, secure advanced capabilities, and gain competitiveadvantages, but smaller enterprises, in particular, depend on the publicinfrastructure that is provided by telecommunications service companies.5a second arena likely to benefit from a powerful telecommunications andinformation infrastructure is the private home. widespread access to networkedit in private homes is likely to lead to the creation of large homebased marketsfor new products (e.g., devices or services based on or enabled by multimediatechnology). consistent with the passthroughofbenefits phenomenondiscussed in chapter 3, these new markets will in all likelihood generate publicor private financial gains that far exceed those realized by the first companiesentering these new markets.the increasing integration of computing and communications, theassimilation of it as part of the infrastructure of an enterprise, and the growingdependence of enterprises on it all indicate that advanced informationinfrastructure will be important to achieving the benefits of it in serviceactivities. information infrastructure can also assist in the delivery of training,as recommended above; there is growing interest at all levels in the use ofelectronic networks to deliver educational services.to date, market forces have generally worked well in providing access toit benefits. but in some geographical areas, selectively stimulating the growthof information infrastructurešparticularly for small business, educationalinstitutions, medical care systems, and the homešcould enhance interactionsamong all these units, promote expansion in both the number and types of jobsin the service sector, and possibly lead to the creation of entirely new serviceindustries. given the potentially broad impacts, information infrastructurešincluding investment in relevant research and developmentšdeservesspecial consideration in public policy.6 however, wherever possible, theunited states should allow the market to optimize the allocation of resources.the country has an opportunity to expand on the relative advantage it currentlyhas in many areas of telecommunications. a number of countries (e.g., newlyindustrializing and central european nations) have obviously weakinfrastructures; but virtually all countries have targeted informationinfrastructure for improvement as a vehicle for economic development andgrowth.7background on employment issues raised byinformation technologyin servicesit is impossible to isolate the effects of it on employment from the manyother factors that affect it. in general, the application of new technologyinformation technology in services: implications for public policy195information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may initially give rise to job displacement and job change because by definitionnew technology changes the way output is produced as well as the output itself.historically, the evidence indicates that the displacement effects have beentemporary: over the longterm, new technology and production processes tendto promote productivity, competitiveness, and economic growth, all of whichcontribute to job growth over time.8 mit's robert solow and others haveestimated that 70 to 90 percent of economic growth has depended on theapplication of new technologies and technological innovations. thus, althoughjob opportunities diminished in agriculture and more recently in manufacturingdue to automation and other factors, the number of people employed overallgrew, particularly in service industries. lower prices and the introduction ofnew products contributed to growth in employment, particularly in services;serviceoccupation employment, for example, experienced substantial growthbetween 1980 and 1990.9 it is precisely this history that troubles some analysts:will the combined strengthening and slimming of services now trigger (oraccompany) new economic growth somewhere, or does the diffusion of it andother technologies from agriculture through manufacturing to services implythat there is nowhere left for sufficient growth in jobs to occur? in addressingthis question, several issues must be considered.as discussed in the macroeconomic analysis of chapter 1, it applicationsin services particularly affect whitecollar jobs. bureau of labor statisticsforecasts, executives interviewed by the committee, committee members, and anumber of studies all anticipate slower growth in some whitecollar occupationsin the near future, resulting (in part) from increased use of informationtechnologies. the first to be affected have been lowerlevel, administrative andclerical occupations; more recently, the number of paraprofessional andtechnician occupations has been contracting in some industries. it is alsoenabling the ongoing reductions in middlemanagement positions, and it isexpected to diminish growth in sales positions as salesrelated applicationsproliferate.10 for example, the increased use of it is likely to have contributedto the higher displacement rates evident in retail trade and "other services,"compared to manufacturing, during the 1980s.11although the executives interviewed for this study were asked primarilyabout strategic and technical issues related to the introduction of new itsystems, many indicated that reductions had occurred in the size of theircompany's work force. for example, larry bacon of the travelers companiesdescribed the elimination of 200 positions following the introduction ofautomation systems (chapter 4); at mckesson, the use of pcs by customers hasresulted in large cuts in the number of order takers, salespeople, buyers, andfunctional managers (chapter 3); ford reduced its accounts payable staff by 75percent through implementing it systems (chapter 4). certainlyinformation technology in services: implications for public policy196information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the shortterm, and in particular job categories, firms, or industries,introduction of new it can have significant effects on employment that may notbe fully offset by growth elsewhere.some of the observed displacement may reflect subtle and indirect shifts oflabor effort, including the shifts to efforts on the part of customers mentioned inchapter 3 and 4. such shifts reflect not only managers' decisions about how toreorganize work within an organization, but also changing levels of expertiseand changing preferences within the general population.12 increased use of itbased systems may also have fostered the recent growth in parttime andtemporary employment, some of which may be among people who would preferfulltime employment (and are therefore underemployed).at least some observed and anticipated displacement reflects slowmodernization of relatively lowtechnology industries. service job growth in thepast decades was concentrated in industries that have lagged in their (overall)use of computing and communications (e.g., health care, legal services, andretail).13 the comparative inefficiency of these industries casts doubt on thenotion that they will continue to support significant job growth.complicating the problem of assessing changes in employment levels isthe fact that it is used to facilitate the relocation of jobs at all levels, bothwithin the country and between countries. even if the absolute amount of workor jobs remains constant, people do not tend to move with jobs, and so jobmovement can have the effect of (local) job displacement.14 companies withheavy dataentry requirements (e.g., airlines, insurance companies, and somedatabase service providers) have used foreign clerical workers for several yearsto reduce costs.15 more recently there has been growth in the use of foreignprofessionals for software development, especially for lowerlevel coding butincreasingly for higherlevel work.16 while evidence of these trends is largelyanecdotal, that evidence suggests growth in the use of lowerwage foreign laborin service activities over the past 5 years.thus, while the absolute fraction and number of whitecollar jobstransferred to foreign citizens is still small, the trend raises questions about boththe number and quality or distribution of job opportunities that will remainavailable to u.s. citizens over time. entrylevel jobs are the first to go offshore,but higherlevel jobs are also moving. on the other hand, jobs are created in theunited states by foreignowned (as well as u.s.owned) enterprises. all ofthese trends are facilitated by improvements in communications technologies,and all are part of a pattern that has led some economists to posit an emergingglobal division of labor and economic activity.17it is difficult to forecast where new jobs will be created, which leads someanalysts to predict a rise in unemployment or a job shortage. however, overall,job growth is reasonable to predict. the past decade aloneinformation technology in services: implications for public policy197information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.witnessed growth in opportunities in such areas as health care, environmentalservices, and, particularly relevant, itrelated services (software development,networkbased services, training in the use of it, systems integration, remote itfacilities management, and so on). although job creation has been concentratedin small, entrepreneurial firms (across all industries), these firms and theiremployment patterns are relatively difficult to track.18the most obvious trends suggest principally that job growth (and joblevels) among traditional large employers will be depressed in the near term.however, the implications for overall employment levels are not clear.although large firms continue to be large and important employers, thepercentage of the working population that larger firms employ has beenfalling19 and the identity of the largest firms has changed over time.simultaneously, new companies and the new jobs associated with them havebeen growing. the enabling effects of using it in these new enterprises havenot been measured.an added problem lies in labeling: the conventional division of theeconomy into agriculture (plus mining and forestry), manufacturing, andservices suggests that we have run out of sectors. but the service sector is soheterogeneous that only a more finegrained identification of subsectors or newsectors is likely to illuminate underlying changes in employment patterns. it ispossible that new kinds of businesses will emerge from both the manufacturingand service sectors that would give rise to yet another kind of sector. however,it is unlikely that such developments will be recognized quickly, given thedifficulty of detecting them in economic data.whether or not there is a temporary rise in unemployment, the content ofjobs is changing. itbased systems have been associated with a shift towardintellectual activities, manipulation of information about things or people (asopposed to manipulation of physical materials), and increased attention to theinformation content or corollaries of products (e.g., airline reservations andfrequentflyer services as well as air transport, customization of insurancepolicies, and so on). with computer systems focused on the mechanics ofcollecting, storing, processing, and retrieving information, people have moretime to do what computers do not do as wellšpeopletopeople interaction,creating new ideas, and so onšmaking use of information delivered bytechnology. in addition, as the technology delivers more and more data, peoplewill be called on to use and work with it, in some cases to be more analytical.these are the changes in most jobs that lie behind observations about the rise ofthe "knowledge worker." ironically, the rise of the knowledge worker isassociated with renewed attention to process engineering: the essence ofreengineering is the gathering of information and the conduct of analysis to helpimprove "production" processes (food preparation and delivery, transport ofpeople and cargo, and so on).the average complexity of service jobs appears to have risen; by varyingdefinitions, there are more knowledge workers, and higher levels ofinformation technology in services: implications for public policy198information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.education are required for entrylevel jobs. flatter organizations and thepopularity of team organizations, both enabled by the use of it, imply that thework force of the future will need better communication and coordination skills.these changes in jobs are evident in many industries; they are occurring morerapidly and extensively in some industries (e.g., financial services) than inothers (e.g., retailing). other changes in skill requirements are predicted bymanagement analystsšthe need for a broader set of skills and more problemsolving ability to meet a wider set of responsibilitiesšbut it is not clear howbroadly these changes are taking hold in practice.the need for policy intervention to easeemployment transitionsalthough this report has concentrated on impacts in companies andindustries that use it, its positive benefits at these levels may be accompaniedby negative side effects, most notably impacts on the labor force. employmentimpacts may be direct or indirect, depending on how, where, and when it isused. as discussed in chapters 3 and 4, it is used as a tool by managers tosystematize or reorganize production processes and enterprises, effecttransitions from old to new lines of business, and shift activities within andbetween enterprises, locations, and time periods. layers are being eliminatedfrom the job structures of enterprises, implying broader job definitions, whilethe mix of activities within firms is often becoming more focused, implying anarrower band of functions for personnel in such enterprises. all of thesechanges are occurring in the context of limited economic growth and structuralchanges in service industries, as discussed in chapter 2, plus domestic andinternational competitive pressures that motivate businesses to seek greaterefficiency.20the trends listed above raise the specter of job displacement (theelimination of specific jobs or the reduction in growth for such jobs comparedto what would have been under the original conditions) and job change(changes in the nature and mix of tasks that make up jobs). these changes arelikely to continue, because computerbased technologies and their applicationsare often reconfigured over time and because people learn over time how to usethese technologies better.it is beyond the scope of this report to quantify potential displacementsassociated with it in services or their duration. broad trends and the difficultyof interpreting them are outlined above. based on those trends, the committeeconcludes that some displacement, including significant loss of currenttypes of jobs, is inevitable, although new and different jobs are likely to becreated. as with past technologyinduced displacements, public policyintervention may be necessary to ameliorate impacts on communities andindividuals.information technology in services: implications for public policy199information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changes in service activities addressed in this report are part of alarger pattern of changes in employment opportunities that has beencharacterized in workforce 200021 and other studies; the inferences from thisreport are in harmony with other, more broadly based analyses that create anexpectation for a more volatile job market. this study reinforces and amplifiesconcerns about the transitions in employment that are likely to take place overthe next 5 to 10 years.a central concern for public policy is how to ease worker dislocation,reducing negative social impacts (such as unemployment, underemployment,and reduction in household income) and facilitating the economic transition.the current economic system is characterized by shortterm notification ofdisplacement, loss of health insurance and pension plans with job loss, limitedoutplacement assistance, and limited unemployment insurance and employmentservice programs. absent change (such as movement toward portable, universalhealth insurance), the conditions described in this report suggest that a growingnumber of people may be faced with loss of insurance benefits as well as loss ofincome. such programs as advance notice, retraining, employment searchassistance, portability of benefits, and temporary income support during jobsearch have been suggested as appropriate by various parties. these measuresimply interdependent but separate roles for employers, government, andindividuals. this committee did not take a specific position on the relativemerits of these proposals.as has been noted by others, measures (such as training, retraining, andother types of adjustment assistance) will probably be needed;22 the challenge isto develop innovative and effective approaches. also important will beencouragement of job creation through economic growth, including theinvestment in new, entrepreneurial businesses and information infrastructure(see ''implications for macroeconomic and fiscal policy" above). calibratingpolicy measures will require closer monitoring and analysis of trends (see "theneed for additional research to guide policy making" below), to permittimely if not proactive responses.reinforcing conclusions developed by other studies, the committeebelieves that there is a clear need for increased training of many types. bothretraining for existing members of the labor force (in anticipation of new jobsand a new mix of jobs) and education and training to make prospective entrantsto the labor force more versatile (in anticipation of ongoing change in jobs andcareers and periodic retraining) will be needed. especially important, givenchanges observed in service activities (see chapter 4), will be the developmentof skills relating to the handling and use of information, including a solidfoundation of basic skills ranging from reading, writing, and mathematics toproblemsolving skills. developing such skills for individuals already in thelabor force implies a departure from the jobspecific, taskoriented trainingtypical of employerbased programs. in particular, it implies a need forrelatively frequent or ongoing training.23information technology in services: implications for public policy200information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this study underscores the need for training at all levels withinorganizations. in particular, job trends associated with the use of it raise addedconcern about training for the people at the bottom of the labor force, the peoplewith the least skills who would be suited for some of the jobs most likely to bedisplaced or changed through the use of it. inequalities in the earningsdistribution have widened recently, reflecting greater growth at lower wagelevels and reductions in middlelevel opportunities due in part to shifts in themix of jobs by occupation and industry.24 inasmuch as informationrelated andproblemsolving skills remain restricted to a small subset of the population,further shifts toward "knowledge work" will make it more difficult for peoplewith limited or weak skills to obtain good jobs.25 this study thus adds toconcerns raised by others about the quality of basic (k12) education (and alsovocational education); the majority of the labor force consists of people whohave at most a high school diploma. looking at the other end of theemployment spectrum, it should also be recognized that training will be neededfor professional and managerial personnel to facilitate their own use of it,prepare them to manage it better, and convey new approaches to theorganization of work.questions arise as to the degrees of responsibility held by individuals,employers, and government for training and retraining. many of the changesdiscussed in this report are beyond the ability of individual members of thelabor force to influence. a fundamental question is how to assist the employeein making transitions, with help from the employer as well as support fromgovernment (at all levels). as suggested above, portability of benefits illustratesone mechanism for facilitating transitions. since willingness as well as ability topay for these measures will affect what is done, incentives may be needed forindividuals and employers.the need for additional research to guidepolicy makinga recurring theme in this report has been that limited data yield limitedunderstanding. problems in collecting and aggregating data are significantreasons why available macroeconomic data neither prove nor disprove claimsabout the level of impact investment in it has had on performance in services.the conventional distinctions between manufacturing and services, whichunderlie the collection, analysis, and presentation of publicly available data,undermine useful analysis. available data do not help to track the changes andblurring of industry structures and identities resulting from shifts in who doeswhich activities, where, and when (e.g., the roles of both hospitals andinsurance companies in providing managed care, the retailerlike roles oftransportation service providers, and so on). and the data that are availableobscure the fact that production of goods and services involvesinformation technology in services: implications for public policy201information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many comparable activities. for example, data regarding employment frommajor companies that produce goods may be tallied only within manufacturing,thus obscuring large volumes of service activity (such as research, marketing,and training) also produced within those companies.26because each industry has different performance indicators, developing acomprehensive body of measurements is a huge task that is far from beingaccomplished.27 even with perfect measures of output, it may still not bepossible to separate out the effects of various factors, including the use of it,that affect output and other dimensions of performance. in addition totechnology, those factors include changes in the skills of management, theeducation and training of the work force, economies of scale and scope,technology change in general, government regulations, collective bargaining,and so on. detailed microeconomic studies building on the kinds of issuesrevealed by the committee's interviews, macroeconomic studies, andorganizational studies are necessary to better measure and understand thecontributions of multiple factors and how they interact.given the apparent significance of small firms to growth in the economyand in employment, valuable insights could be gained from more researchspecifically focused on how smaller enterprises use it and with what effects.insights available through the literature and through interviews tend to belimited to the experiences of large firmsšresearchers tend to find it easier toidentify and work with larger firms, and that tendency may bias understanding.28although the committee did not have the resources to investigate smallercompany practices systematically, members cited examples of individualsmaller companies that had developed extremely fast response capabilities,strong crossfunctional teamoriented cultures, team management and rewardsystems, and very productive desktop it systems for enhancingcommunications. these enterprises already exhibit many of the characteristicslarger companies seek through more disaggregated organization and activitybased competitive structures. smaller enterprises also differ in other significantways. they can often rely on direct persontoperson communications and moreinformal information systems. because of the increasing importance of smallenterprises in creating jobs, introducing it innovations, and utilizing it in newways, special study of small enterprises' use of it would seem a worthy goal forfuture research.finally, more systematic attempts to compare experiences with itinternationally may be useful, in part to benefit from different perspectives onelements of performance, concepts and measurements, and tradeoffs in the useof it and in part to capitalize on the extensive tradition in other countries(especially in europe) of studying social and organizational impacts oftechnology. since use of it will be a critical factor in internationalcompetition, it would be prudent to systematically compare and monitorprogress and impacts in other countries.information technology in services: implications for public policy202information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving federal macroeconomic data gathering andanalysisthere is a need for improved statistics about existing activities and forstatistics that capture the development of new services. policymakers, inparticular, need better data to monitor and plan for changes in the economy.better statistics could provide a clearer picture of the economy, illuminatingshifts in investment, employment, products, productivity, and other dimensionsrelevant to government and industry. in particular, there is a need for anexpansion in scope, i.e., data about more industries. as was noted, detailed dataare available for only a fraction of the serviceoriented economy. fundamentalto these is a need for a more refined classification of activities, firms, andindustries that would guide the collection and analysis of data. for example, itwould be useful to have more specific data on selected skill classifications andoccupations within each industry class. it would also be useful to separate outsignificant service business components within firms that predominantlyproduce goods. the complications and costs of obtaining more detailed data arewell recognized.broader and improved capture of changes in quality and measurement ofother factors that contribute value for customers could also help to put statisticson productivity into perspective. existing measures focus primarily onindustries whose outputs are captured by gross national product data. theservice sector interviews undertaken by the committee plus both anecdotal andmore formal evidence suggest that many of the performance gains in servicesšparticularly those associated with intangible improvements in quality or thoserealized as cost savings, greater convenience, or increased flexibility or varietyšmay not be captured by the industry producing the benefit.29 at a gross level,these shifts may be reflected in the financial performance of a company. butwhere competition within an industry is heavy and financial gains are passedthrough to customers or suppliers as savings, there may not be an obviouscorrelation between benefits to customers and the firm's or industry's financialperformance.30 progress in developing and using hedonic price indexes suggeststhat there are some opportunities to develop better measurements of outputquality and customer benefits, although delivering against those opportunitiesmay take time and be difficult to realize.the need for better economic statistics has been recognized for some time;it is made more urgent by the cumulative impact of cutbacks in federalstatistical programs during the 1980s. a number of recommendations forimproving statistics on productivity and services were made in an earliernational research council report (box 6.1). although progress has beenmade in implementing several of the rees panel's recommendations, morework is needed, and the committee therefore endorses those information technology in services: implications for public policy203information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.1 rees panel recommendations for betterstatisticsrecommendation 3: "the panel recommends that the bureau oflabor statistics and the bureau of economic analysis explore methods forestimating the implications of error reduction in component measures forthe reduction of overall error in productivity measures beyond thatcorrected by routine revisions." (p. 7)recommendation 4: "the panel recommends that the bureau ofeconomic analysis (bea) and the bureau of labor statistics (bls) seekto improve their existing price indexes and to develop auxiliary measuresof price change. these new auxiliary measures should take into account more adequately the types of quality change that are not nowmeasured. –among the adjustments that could be incorporated in the newmeasures are adjustments – for changes in value to users resultingfrom the introduction of improved products; estimates of the valueto users of improvements in performance that are achieved withoutincreases in real costs; and estimates of the present value of futuresavings in operating efficiency made possible by design changesand improvements. –" (p. 8)recommendation 6: "– the panel does agree that for the study ofmany important social problemsšfor example, improvement of the healthstatus of the populationšdefinitions of output and input that go wellbeyond those currently used to measure productivity are required.–" (p. 10)recommendation 14: ''the panel endorses – calling for the censusbureau to collect, as an integral part of each economic census, data onthe purchases of intermediate services as well as materials byestablishments." (p. 13)recommendation 17: "the panel recommends that governmentagencies support research aimed at improving knowledge about thesources of productivity change. these agencies should be especiallyattentive to research that focuses on measuring technical andorganizational change and new product and service innovation. –"(p. 15)note: emphasis added.source: national research council, panel to review productivity statistics. 1979.measurement and interpretation of productivity, national academy of sciences,washington, d.c.information technology in services: implications for public policy204information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendations. specific proposals were also captured in the recentpresidential economic statistics initiative (the boskin initiative). that initiativecalled for a 5year, $230 million effort, a significant portion of which wasaimed at improving service industry statistics.31 such an initiative, if funded,would help to ameliorate some of the problems of concern to the committee;momentum in this area must not become a casualty of the transition. it is hopedthat the clinton administration will enhance and build on theserecommendations with its own program. note also that the need for betterstatistical data is largely independent of issues related specifically to it andproductivity.the committee urges the federal administration to promote asignificant upgrading of statistical programs. at a time when more and moreenterprises are recognizing the value of information to the performance andexpansion of their businesses, it behooves the government to collect and makeuse of better information about the changing economy.improving data and accounting principles related toinvestments in information technologyavailable data provide information on investments in computing andcommunications hardware, which is treated for tax and national statisticspurposes as a capital investment. however, it hardware represents only afraction of the investment needed to make it effective. committee members(based on their experiences in developing, installing, operating, and maintainingsystems) and other analysts have noted that hardware may constitute only aboutonethird of the total investment in a system (and that proportion has beendeclining). other components of it system cost include, in particular, the costto develop, purchase, or maintain software plus associated training, support,integration, upgrading, and other services. all of these costs are expenses undercurrent accounting principles and practices and are not captured in a firm'scapital accounts. increases in the outsourcing of elements of informationtechnologyšfrom telecommunications to databases to software development todata center operationsštend to further raise the percentage of it costs that areexpensed rather than capitalized. a consequence of particular concern is that thevalue of software in generating income is not obvious to management,investors, or policymakersševen when a specialized software system, such asa computerized reservation system, is critical to strategic advantage. softwarehas become a major asset to corporations that is not reflected in their balancesheets.32improving the valuation of software will be difficult. there are differentand sometimes conflicting interests among analysts, investors and owners,managers of organizations using software, managers of organizationsinformation technology in services: implications for public policy205information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.producing software, and tax authorities, among others. these differentperspectives have come out recently in the development of legislation thatwould affect the tax accounting treatment of software, as one of several"intangible assets";33 similar issues arise concerning the treatment of researchand development spending. discomfort with capitalizing software over a longperiod of time arises from difficulties in predicting with reasonable precisionthe value and life of a software system; there is concern that any piece ofsoftware may have a relatively brief useful life, and it may be replaced orupgraded through an ongoing process of "maintenance" that blurs the identity ofthe software in question. the committee recommends that the financialaccounting standards board (fasb) and the congress look at ways toimprove the usefulness and monitoring of accounting data on investmentsin both purchased and internally developed it systems (especially software and databases) to better support fiduciary management and performance measurement.34increasing awareness of and investments in researchrelated to information technology in services and servicequality measurementscommittee interviews with executives suggest that corporate r&d on theuse of it to develop new service products and processes is underappreciated,underestimated, and probably underfunded.35 committee deliberations andinterviews with executives of large companies plus published materials reveal apattern of experimentation that takes place in service industries, in whichcompanies develop and try out new applications, software, and systems.36 suchprojects or programs are not necessarily classified or analyzed as research bythe companies that undertake (and pay for) them, but they contribute to a largerpattern of trial, error, and success that drives new applications of it in servicesand shapes the competitive landscape within industries.the committee concluded from its assessment that more emphasis needs tobe placed on research and development relating to services, including theapplications of it in services. this greater emphasis is needed across the boardšin firms, institutions, and government. such emphasis should include bothprocess and product innovation.it is not possible to estimate how much relevant r&d takes place in or forservices, but there is anecdotal evidence that support from both corporatebudgets and federal programs for academic research for these efforts is limited.this situation reflects a larger problem of limited support for r&d explicitlyfocused on process or organizational issues. academic analysts, includingcommittee members, have observed that it is difficult to get funding for suchresearch. enterprises should not be discouraged by accountinginformation technology in services: implications for public policy206information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conventions from experimenting with these technologies, given their provencontributions to competitiveness; rather, financial incentives for suchexperimentation should be considered. although r&d within an industry istypically funded by the industry directly, broader, longerterm, or academicresearch often presumes federal government support. this form of broadstimulus would fall within the realm of macroeconomic and fiscal policy,discussed above.another vehicle for motivating more innovation among serviceindustries may be an increased effort to apply the baldrige award toservices. according to literature describing the award, up to two awardsannually can be given in the three categories of manufacturing, services, andsmall business. however, of the awards presented through 1992, ten went tomanufacturing companies, four to small businesses, and only three to servicefirms; many consider the criteria for the award to be aimed largely atmanufacturing.37 although the baldrige award program has generated somecontroversy, it has increased attention to critical elements of performance,especially quality. it has helped spread qualityoriented attitudes, terminology,and measurements. the perceived availability of a special award in servicescould facilitate experiments and more widespread measurement of quality at thelevel of enterprises or firms.other policy issues identified by this studythe increasing use of it in services raises other concerns that shouldmotivate examination of existing public policies or consideration of new policy.those concerns relate to such issues as privacy, remote work, competitionpolicy, and intellectual property. although detailed exploration of such issueswas beyond the scope of this report, the committee believed it important toidentify them, to increase awareness and to signal that further analysis would beuseful to determine where private actions may be insufficient to meet publicinterests.one area where further policy action is already under debate is that ofprotection of an individual's rights to limit access to personal data, buildingon the base provided by the privacy act of 1974 (which was directed to thepublic sector). policy measures in this area will affect choices service and otherorganizations can make in selecting and implementing information technology.for example, as discussed in chapter 3, electronic databases are being used bymore and more organizations to store personal data to support customer serviceoperations, marketing, credit approvals, and other service activities. theproliferation of applications, equipment, networks, and networkinterconnections means that growing numbers of people have potential access tokinds of data (such as health, income, and credit records) heretofore physicallyless accessible.38 these circumstancesinformation technology in services: implications for public policy207information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.imply a greater risk of unauthorized access to or use of personal data. inaddition to these potentials for abuse, there are questions about the collectionand review of data by employers about their employees, a capability facilitatedby the use of it, some of it in the context of electronic monitoring of employeebehavior. this practice has already raised concern among some employees,unions, and privacy advocates as well as policymakers.privacy is not the only consideration. the ability of service providers to assemble information regarding so many different aspects of an individual's life so as to provide better service also provides the capabilityto deny service. for example, calleridentification telephone technologyenables a called telephone to display the number of the calling telephone. suchtechnologies can be used to call up a customer profile based on telephonenumbers associated with previous orders, and it can also be used to ignore orgive lower priority to service requests that come, for example, from lowincomeregions of a city. insurance companies can use detailed information about anindividual to generate a customized insurance policy for that individual, butthey can also use that information as the basis for denying insurance policies(e.g., for health care) to individuals deemed "highrisk" (e.g., those who testhivpositive).another impact of the use of it with social ramifications is the facilitation of remote work.39 this effect can result in the shifting of work toother countries.40 it can also have more positive effects locally, in the context of"telecommuting" and the movement of work to where people are rather than theconverse. telecommutingšwhether via satellite offices, home offices, or otherfield locationsšwill change the social structure of organizations, the geographyof industries (domestically and internationally), the demand for office space,and so on. presumably, these practices will grow because they are perceived tohave performance benefits and because falling costs for it will make themincreasingly affordable and easy to implement. there may also beenvironmental, safety, and energy conservation benefits inasmuch as workrelated travel is diminished. the potential for more homebased work couldaffect a wide range of people, including individuals who have difficulty gettingto or functioning in conventional work environments; such individuals wouldinclude the disabled, people with dependent care responsibilities, and thosewithout access to adequate transportation.41shifts in activities among industries engendered by the use of it raisequestions about laws and regulations aimed at constraining the competitivebehavior (e.g., pricing, collaborative ventures, mergers and acquisitions,and so on) of firms. developments within the service sector point to increasedcompetition across industries (and sectors), making it harder to target programsto specific industries. increases in outsourcing and in electronic linkages totrading partners raise questions about the boundaryinformation technology in services: implications for public policy208information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.between cooperation and collusion. for example, recent government attentionto the use of computerized reservation systems as a possible mechanism forcollusion on pricing illustrates some of the disagreement about how informationtechnology can and should affect competitive conduct.42 since electroniccommunication among businesses and across industries is expected to expand,and since it is expected to enable continued reorganization of businesses, itmay be that the goals of competition policies (such as antitrust policy) may bebetter served by a focus on specific kinds of transactions rather than oninstitutions. this is an issue that warrants further exploration by congress andappropriate executive branch agencies.43another area of business (and individual) behavior where current policy might need reexamination is intellectual property rights. protectionof intellectual property will be a factor affecting the rate, nature, and ownershipof investments in information infrastructure, including information andnetworkbased service businesses. software has already given rise to bothuncertainty and assumptions regarding the existence or lack of intellectualproperty protection.44 particularly relevant to services are the implications ofincreased electronic networking for the protection of intellectual propertyassociated with materials made available electronically over networks. thedebate has just begun in this area.finally, it could be better used to enhance the policymaking process itself. it can be used to facilitate both the collection of highly refined databy government and the use of that data for faster and better decisionmaking and therefore potentially better and more responsive services tocitizens. such government activities as approval of eligibility for entitlementand assistance programs could be made more responsive and accurate, drawingon experiences elsewhere; indeed, ongoing federal agency efforts to modernizetheir systems show that the potential is recognized. improving governmenteffectiveness by better use of it is an area of high potential payoff alreadyrecognized by the clinton administration.45 it deserves special indepth study.46notes and references1. it will be present not only on its own, but also in the form of embedded components in a widevariety of equipment and products that may themselves be linked to more conventional or obvious it.2. an option contemplated by the new administration is tax credits for incremental investments inequipment. see greenhouse, steven. 1992. "economists back clinton on investment tax credits,"new york times, november 16, pp. d1d2. also, see landau, r. 1988. "u.s. economic growth,"scientific american 258(june):4452.3. birch, david l. 1989. "statement by david l. birch before the u.s. house of representativessmall business committee," transcript of testimony, september.4. it must be recognized that information infrastructure in any one locale is increasingly likely to belinked to such infrastructure elsewhere, through regional, national, and international connections.information technology in services: implications for public policy209information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5. it should be noted that most private networking by large enterprises involves the use of "public"network facilities. through leasing of circuits and ports and through software, real or "virtual"allocations of facilities are made. virtual private networks, enabled by software to preempt access tocertain facilities, are expected to become more available to smaller users over time. nevertheless,conventional public infrastructure is expected to continue to provide a lifeline for smaller users whoneed occasional access to trading partners and service providers.6. public policy attention to information infrastructure has already expanded considerably during theclinton administration, and both the 102d and 103d congresses have introduced related legislation.in addition, both the legislative and executive branches have taken steps to develop and implement anational research and education network program (the nren component of the high performancecomputing and communications program), which is expected to contribute to and interconnect witha broader national information infrastructure. the hpcc program is premised in part on arecognition that technology development and infrastructure are interrelated. a new fifth componentis called information infrastructure technology and applications.7. national telecommunications and information administration. 1991. the ntia infrastructurereport: telecommunications in the age of information, ntia special publication 9126, u.s.department of commerce, washington, d.c., october.8. cyert, richard m., and david c. mowery (eds.). 1987. technology and employment: innovationand growth in the u.s. economy, national academy press, washington, d.c.9. rosenthal, neal. 1992. "evaluating the 1990 projections of occupational employment." monthlylabor review 115(8):3248.10. note that one form of sales that is fundamentally a creation of it capability and capacity,telemarketing, appears to be growing. meanwhile, the technology behind telemarketing (switches,storage units, call distributors, and so on) is becoming more sophisticated.11. podgursky, michael. 1992. "the industrial structure of job displacement, 197989." monthlylabor review 115(9):1725.12. the epitome of this phenomenon is the transformation of employment for telephone operators. itis by now a cliche that, absent automation, twothirds (or more) of the population might have towork as telephone operators to sustain contemporary calling volume. but rather than simplyeliminate operator tasks, many were shifted to telephone company customersštelephone users areoperators, based on old definitions of operator jobs. two developments made this shift possible.one was, indeed, computerization of the telephone system, especially the installation of computercontrolled switches, computerbased databases for customer and billing information, and so on. theother was the slow but inexorable training of hundreds of millions of people to memorize hugestrings of digits for input to the telephone system through a crude terminal, the touchtonetelephone. this training, or more specifically, the knowledge in the population of telephonecustomers regarding how to make directdial calls, is a vital complement to the technology in thedisplacement of operators.13. baumol, william, sue anne batey blackman, and edward n. wolff. 1989. productivity andamerican leadership: the long view, mit press, cambridge, mass.14. an exception may apply for highly skilled occupations and individuals. there was reportedlyjob growth, especially in itrelated occupations, among highskilled immigrants during the late1970s and early 1980s.15. carey, susan. 1992. "airlines seek to cut backoffice costs by establishing offshoreoperations," wall street journal, november 30, p. b6d.16. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1993.computing professionals: changing needs for the 1990s , national academy press, washington,d.c.17. wolff, edward n. 1991. "productivity growth, capital intensity, and skill levels in the u.s.insurance industry, 194886," the geneva papers on risk and insurance 16(59, april):173190.information technology in services: implications for public policy210information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18. although the diffusion of it into smaller enterprises could slow job growth within small firms,the launching of new businesses should continue to create new jobs both directly and indirectly. seebirch, david l. 1989. "statement by david l. birch before the u.s. house of representativessmall business committee," transcript of testimony, september.19. note that the fortune 500 share of total nonfarm employment has been decreasing from a peakof around 20 percent during the late 1960s and early 1970s. that share is now about 10 to 11percent. see "where the jobs aren't," wall street journal, august 10, 1992, table drawing onkemper financial services data.20. the most recent employment conditions reflect a recession and slow recovery. the concern inthis discussion is with secular or longterm trends as opposed to the inevitable shortterm shiftsassociated with the business cycle.21. johnston, william b., and arnold e. packer. 1987. workforce 2000šwork and workers for the21st century, hudson institute, indianapolis, ind., june.22. see cyert and mowery, 1987, technology and employment.23. for further discussion of this point, see zuboff, shoshana, 1988, in the age of the smartmachine: the future of work and power, basic books, new york.24. for a discussion of how many factors contribute to the growth in earnings inequality, see grubb,w. norton, and robert h. wilson, 1992, "trends in wage and salary inequality, 19671988,"monthly labor review 115(6):2337. note that some of the trends associated with it could entailshrinkage in current lowwage jobs; this is already evident in forecasts for slower growth in clericaljobs, for example. questions arise about the types of jobs that may be available for the people whowould have taken such jobs.25. kutcher, ronald e. 1988. "growth of services employment in the united states," pp. 4775 intechnology in services: policies for growth, trade, and employment, bruce r. guile and jamesbrian quinn (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c.26. what is tallied where depends on whether the services represent final, as opposed tointermediate (component), output. resources for final output are tallied directly; resourcesassociated with intermediate output are reflected in final goods and services. this practice supportsthe objective of measuring trends in final goods and services, but it obscures intermediateproduction trends of interest for understanding qualitative changes in the structure of the economy.27. an exhaustive body of data may neither be practical nor justify the expense. also, note that evenif that body of measurements existed, one could not simply add industryspecific measures togetherto generate an aggregate economywide measure. but more detail than is currently available isneeded to understand how activities, enterprises, industry, and the economy are changing.28. indeed, the relative growth in employment among smaller firms and, historically, smaller firms'limited success with it may be another factor explaining why measured service performance hasbeen weak.29. available data do not (and may never) capture adequately the contributions to standards ofliving that it may support. as measured, growth in productivity contributes to increases in thestandard of living, but it is only one element. the creation of whole new industries and the increasedflexibility and variety of products and services available are other elements.30. for example, computerized reservation systems for airlines and automated teller systems forbanks provide greater customer convenience, but, although they could not provide competitiveservice without these tools, even airlines and banks with leading crs and atm systems have hadfinancial difficulties over the past few years.31. if funded, the boskin initiative would have emphasized bureau of economic analysis (bea)programs (macroeconomic data on investment and output) and bureau of labor statistics (bls)programs (employment and productivity measurement), as well as bureau of the census programsthat contribute to bea and bls statistics. planned census bureau improvements,information technology in services: implications for public policy211information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for example, are aimed at better measuring the output of industries that provide multiple services,better measuring the purchases of services by manufacturing firms, and better estimation of theemergence of new services.32. the committee conducted many discussions on the shift from physical to intellectual capital.many factors obscure the value of software in the eyes of executives, investors, and policymakersmore accustomed to and familiar with physical capital: software's intangibility and inscrutability tothe layperson, its character as intellectual capital, and the seeming lack of durability of software,which is associated with its ease of duplication and potential to be quickly outmoded or bested byrival products. the situation has been compounded by traditional perspectives in the accountingcommunity, which are oriented toward the cost and proceeds of physical property, plant, andequipment and which reflect concern about the potential for misleading financial reporting as aproduct of estimating the value of intangibles or making changes in financial metrics. all of theseconcerns are valid, but all militate against a recognition of the shift from physical and money capitalto intellectual capital.33. in the case of software acquired through business acquisitions, that legislation provides forwriting off the cost over 14 to 16 years. the software industry has objected that that long period willraise costs and adversely affect international competitiveness, since the useful life of software isonly a few years at best.34. according to fasb literature, "the mission of the financial accounting standards board is toestablish and improve standards of financial accounting and reporting for the guidance andeducation of the public, including issuers, auditors, and users of financial information. – the fasbdevelops broad accounting concepts as well as standards for financial reporting. it also providesguidance on implementation of standards. –" fasb has come under some criticism lately, due inpart to its support for a proliferation of accounting standards, but it remains the logical entity tostudy this issue.35. inasmuch as service innovation is associated with entrepreneurial firms while research fundingtends to be concentrated in larger firms and universities, there may be a systemic constraint onservice research funding.36. for example, kmart developed and tested a new system to track traffic in stores and relatetraffic patterns to purchase patterns. see schwadel, francine. 1991. "kmart testing radar to trackshopper traffic," wall street journal, september 24, pp. b1 and b5. on a larger scale, federalexpress's pioneering attempt to introduce a fax network service and at&t bell laboratories' earlyattempts to introduce cellular telephony represented experiments in the application of it.37. although no service awards were made in 1991, awards went to the ritzcarlton hotelcompany and at&t universal card services in 1992 and to federal express in 1990.38. the public uproar over the equifaxlotus proposal to distribute customer profile data andcontroversy over the accuracy of and access to creditagency records are but two indicators ofgrowing public concern about data, although in general the public may not fully understand howmuch data about individuals is being collected and becoming available.39. cstb has launched a new study of technology for telecommuting.40. although some shifting from domestic to offshore employment may take place, thatphenomenon may convey positive benefits in the form of improvements in foreign standards ofliving and diminution of immigration pressures. however, such benefits would be realized over amuch longer term than the employment shifts that produce them.41. the comprehensive national energy policy act of 1992 (p.l. 102486) directed thedepartment of energy to conduct an analysis of telecommuting and its social and environmentalimpacts, impacts that would be fostered by it.42. tolchin, martin. 1992. "u.s. sues 8 airlines over fares," new york times, december 22, p. d1.43. those agencies would include the office of management and budget, the department of justice,and the federal trade commission.information technology in services: implications for public policy212information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44. computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1990.intellectual property issues in software, national academy press, washington, d.c.45. making government more efficient and more responsive, in part through the use of informationtechnology, is one of the priorities of the technology program introduced by the federaladministration in february 1993. see clinton, william j., president, and vice president albertgore, jr. 1993. "technology for america's economic growth, a new direction to build economicstrength," february 22. it use in government was given special consideration in vice presidentalbert gore's national performance reviewšfrom red tape to results, distributed electronicallyover the internet on september 7, 1993.46. the potential for using it to enhance government is not new to the federal government or lowerlevels of government. however, the stream of reports issued by the general accounting office andeven by the computer science and telecommunications board attests to the significant opportunityfor improvements in the acquisition, use, and management of it in government.information technology in services: implications for public policy213information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology in services: implications for public policy214information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes215information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes216information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix aselected research on economic andstrategic impacts of informationtechnologyappendix a217information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table a.1 selected research on economic and strategic impacts of informationtechnologyreferencetype of researchunit of analysisperformanceconstruct andmeasure(s)alpar and kim(1990)econometrictime series crosssectional (1979 to1986)firm/smallbusiness unit(759 banks)productivity(multifactor)applegate et al.(1988)theory,descriptionmanagersproductivityflexibilitycreativityattewell andrule (1984)review ofmanagementinformationsystems literatureindividualmanagementorganizationnumber and qualityof jobs,managementdecision making,organizationaldealings withclients andcustomersbaily andchakrabarti(1988)economicanalysis andsimulationcompanywhitecollarproductivitybaily andgordon (1988)methodologyreviewaggregateeconomy vs.industryaverage laborproductivity andmultifactorproductivitybanker andkauffman(1988)econometriccrosssectionalfirm/smallbusiness unit(508 branchbanks)competitiveadvantage(marginal bankbranch depositshare ascontribution toreducing costs)bender (1986)correlationalcrosssectional(1983)firm (132 lifeinsurancecompanies)operating costefficiencybenjamin et al.(1984)case studies andsurveys;prescriptive24 companiesstrategicopportunitiesbikson andeveland (1986)literature review,retrospectiveapplication ofsociotechnicalsystemsorganization(diverse range)''successful"implementation(user, managementsatisfaction)blumenthal(1987)theory reviewinternationalnationalproductivity andimpacts on industryand employmentappendix a218information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a219input measure(s)key findings (brynjolfsson and bimberhypothesis code)atotal information system expenses;labor; capital; time deposits10% increase in it associated with a1.9% decrease in total costs. itcontributed to reduction in demanddeposit amount and an increase in timedeposits. it is capital using and laborsaving.itdiscusses present and future impacts ofcomputers on managers. emphasizesincreased flexibility, new structures. (ie)computingsignificant disagreement and/orconflicting studies in every majordimension examined. (ie)electronics innovationproposes 3 potential explanations for theit paradox in whitecollar context:mismeasurement, distributional ratherthan productive effects, informationvalue problem: price decreases intechnology lead to more technologypurchased rather than decreased cost;also suggests may be just transitionaltime lag. (ic)output per hour, multifactoruncovers large measurement errors butfinds that they explain at most 0.5% ofthe 1.5% slowdown in aggregateproductivity. key contributing errors areundervaluing of variety, service quality,and convenience. adjustments applied tothe banking industry produce muchstronger productivity growth than dogovernment analysis/statistics ofproductivity growth. (ia)presence of atm at a branch.connection to regional shared atmnetworkuse of atms enables branch to protectrather than grow market share. bankcustomers evidenced willingness to payfor regional access to shared electronicbanking networks.total it expenseshigher it spending associated withhigher unit cost efficiency.itit can help firms establish new marketsand redistribute profits in existingmarkets. (ie)process of introduction of newtechnologywhat is needed is an integrated view, inwhich decisions about tools, uses, andusers are seen as essential properties of astrategy that is iterative and emergent,learning from its own successes andfailures over time and committed tochange as a continuous fact of life. (iie)programmable automationconfronts dilemma in the popular view:increased use of programmableautomation leads to increasedcompetitiveness and other benefits toindustry while threatening job loss andother negative consequences to workers.(iib)information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencetype of researchunit of analysisperformanceconstruct andmeasure(s)bresnahan(1986)econometricmethodologyfinancial sectorspillover tocustomersdownstreamcecil and hall(1988)prescriptive,descriptivecompanyperformancecron and sobol(1983)correlationalcrosssectionalfirm (138 surgicalwholesalers)profitability(return on assets;profits/sales;return on networth).competitiveadvantage (5year sales growth)curley andpyburn (1982)case studies of 13organizations,survey ofadditional 3346 manufacturingand serviceindustriesimprovedproductivity(managerial,clerical,professional)dertouzos(1989)descriptive,prescriptive,modelseconomyproductivityfeldman andmarch (1981)review ofliterature, theoryorganizations(wide range)use ofinformationfranke (1987)econometric(1958 to 1983)financial sector(insurance andbanking)productivity(average labor).capital (roi)fudenberg andtirole (1985)economic modeldevelopmentfirmnet cash flowgiesler andrubenstein(1988)descriptive,survey of 20banks andinterviewsbankcompetitiveperformancegraham (1976)firmperformanceharris and katz(1991)correlationaltime series (1983to 1986)firm (40 lifeinsurancecompanies)operating costefficiency(operatingexpenses/premium income)hirshleifer(1971)economic modelsprivate vs. socialkraut et al.(1989)case with lagged,timeseries design(methodologyemphasis)company (onepublic utility)productivity,quality of work,attitudes towardcomputersappendix a220information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a221information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencetype of researchunit of analysisperformanceconstruct andmeasure(s)loveman(1988)econometrictime series crosssectional (1978 to1984)firm/smallbusiness unit (60manufacturingsmall businessunits)productivity(average labor)malone et al.(1987)conceptualframework andprescriptionfirm and marketstructurescosts ofcoordinationmark (1982)methodologyreviewservice industrylabor productivitynelson (1981)critique andeconomic modeldevelopmentnoyelle (1990)correlationu.s. and frenchretailing industryproductivitymeasure andemploymentoecd (1988)descriptive, socioeconomic analysisindividual tointernationalemployment,productivitygrowthosterman(1986)econometric timeseries (1972 to1987)industry (40service andmanufacturingindustries)productivity(clericalemploymentvolume/output;managerialemploymentvolume/output)parsons et al.(1990)modelfirm (2 large banks)multifactorproductivitypentland (1989)survey (1988)individual (1100internal revenueservice agents),departmentproductivity(labor hours/audit), outputquality (clientreports)porter andmillar (1985)some caseexamples,prescriptivecompetitiveadvantageroach (1991)trendcomparisons(1950 to 1989)service sectorproductivity(employmentvolume/output)sassone andschwartz(1986)method toquantify benefitsdepartments (4) oflarge corporations(587 individuals)dollars saved byrestructuring workactivitiesappendix a222information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.input measure(s)key findings (brynjolfsson andbimber hypothesis code)atotal it capital stockincreases in shares of it capital haveinsignificant effects on productivity.(ia)electronic communications, electronicbrokerage, and electronic integrationit reduces the costs of coordinationand thus leads to more coordinationintensive organizational forms, such asmarkets. (ie)labordescribes the problems in measuringservice productivity and attempts of thebureau of labor statistics to correctthem. (ia)emphasizes evolutionary models overtraditional economic theory ofproductivity. (id)conventional productivitysevere measurement problems inservices.new technologiespossible reasons for failure ataggregate levels: (1) economy, (2) lagsin translating potential gains inproductivity into actual gains becauseof problems of organizational andinstitutional adaptation, (3)disequilibrating effects of technicalchange in relation to internationaltrade. (iie)aggregated number of mainframes;number of central processing unitseach 10% increase in computing stockassociated with 1.8% decrease inclerical employment and 1.2% decreasein managerial employment. foundlagged effect; displacement partiallyreversed after initial impact.it and operating datait coefficient in translog productionfunction small and often negative.laptop computer useno discernible improvement inproductivity. major discrepancybetween users' perceptions of improvedproductivity and actual results.itit affects competition in 3 ways: (1) italters industry/valuechain structure,(2) it supports cost and differentiationstrategies, and (3) it spawns entirelynew businesses. (ie)total it capital stocklargescale increases in ratio of itcapital stock to other shares of capital,coupled with stagnant productivity,suggest no payoff from it investments.(iid)office automationreports on poor status of costjustification procedures, difficulty ofmeasuring the dollar value ofinvestments in new technology. (iia)appendix a223information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencetype of researchunit of analysisperformanceconstruct andmeasure(s)strassmann (1990)correlationcompany (38servicecompanies)percent return toshareholdersthurow (1987)theoryšchallengeseconomicassumptionsprescriptiveservice sectorbusinessesproductivitygrowthvenkatraman andzaheer (1990)quasiexperiment timeseries (1985 to1987)individual (78insurance agents)productivity(number ofpolicies in force,number of newpolicies)effectiveness(total premiumsand commissions)weitzendorf andwigand (1991)model case studycompany (2)performanceacode gives elements of brynjolfsson and bimber hypotheses outlined below:i. economic hypothesesa. measurement error: outputs (and inputs) of informationusing industries are not being properlymeasured.b. lags: time lags in the payoffs fro information technology make analysis of current costs versuscurrent benefits misleading.c. redistribution: information technology is especially likely to be used in redistributive activitiesamong firms, making it privately beneficial without adding to total output.d. mismanagement: the lack of explicit measures of the value of information make it particularlyvulnerable to misallocation and over consumption by managers.e. business transformation: measures of gross output do not well capture the benefits that motivateexpenditures on information technology and information workers.appendix a224information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.input measure(s)key findings (brynjolfsson andbimber hypothesis code)avarious it ratios, weighted differentlyno correlations between various itratios and performance measures.movement to bonus system, value addedmaximization, delayed management fasttrackour institutions, styles, and beliefs havenot adapted to realities of newtechnologies, leading to too manymanagers and too much informationgathering. (id)electronic integration with insurancecarriersno improvement in operatingefficiency. no improvement ineffectiveness.itinteractive model of information use.ii. behavioral hypothesesa. quantity of work: for the production of a fixed level of output by a firm, theintroduction of information technology increases rather than decreases the volume ofwork required.b. nature of productivity: information technology increases the efficiency of individuals,work groups, or departments in the performance of certain tasks without contributing tothe overall productivity of the firm.c. quality: improvements in work quality from the use of information technology arenot affecting productivity.d. purchase decision: the decision to purchase information technology is not made onthe basis of maximization of quantifiable productivity.e. organizational factors: firms are failing to undertake the necessary organizationaladaptations to realize the potential productivity gains inherent in the informationtechnology that they have purchased.f. technology: other problems are so strongly depressing service sector and whitecollarproductivity that any small gains from new technology are not noticeable.sources: derived from the literature reviews in papers by brynjolfsson, erik, and bruce bimber,1991, "information technology and the `productivity paradox,'" working paper, brookingsinstitution, washington, d.c., feb. 7; brynjolfsson, erik, 1991, "the productivity paradox ofinformation technology: review and assessment," center for coordination science technicalreport #130, december; and wilson, diane d., 1992, "assessing the impact of informationtechnology on organizational performance,'' sloan school of management, massachusetts instituteof technology, (revised), may 1.appendix a225information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesalpar, paul, and moshe kim. 1990. "a microeconomic approach to the measurement ofinformation technology value," journal of management information systems 2:5569.applegate, lynda m., james i. cash, jr., and d. quinn mills. 1988. "information technology andtomorrow's manager," harvard business review, novemberdecember, pp. 128136.attewell, p., and j. rule. 1984. "computing and organizations: what we know and what wedon't know," communications of the acm 27:11841192.baily, martin, and alok chakrabarti. 1988. innovation and the productivity crisis. chapter 5,"electronics and whitecollar productivity," brookings institution, washington, d.c.baily, martin neill, and robert j. gordon. 1988. "the productivity slowdown: measurement issuesand the explosion of computer power," pp. 347431 in brookings papers on economicactivity, william c. brainard and george l. perry (eds.), brookings institution,washington, d.c.banker, r.d., and r.j. kauffman. 1988. "strategic contributions of information technology: anempirical study of atm networks," in proceedings of the ninth international conferenceon information systems, minneapolis, minn., december.bender, d.h. 1986. "financial impact of information processing," journal of managementinformation systems 3.benjamin, robert i., john f. rockart, michael s. scott morton, and john wyman. 1984."information technology: a strategic opportunity," sloan management review, spring,pp. 310.bikson, tora k., and j.d. eveland. 1986. new office technology: planning for the people. work inamerica institute studies in productivity, #40, pergamon press, new york.blumenthal, marjory s. 1987. "economic impacts of automation," oxford surveys in informationtechnology 4.bresnahan, timothy f. 1986. "measuring the spillovers from technical advance: mainframecomputers in financial services," american economic review 76(34, september).cecil, john l., and eugene a. hall. 1988. "when it really matters to business strategy,"mckinsey quarterly, autumn, p. 2.cron, w.l., and m.g. sobol. 1983. "the relationship between computerization and performance:a strategy for maximizing the economic benefits of computerization," information andmanagement 6:171181.curley, kathleen foley, and philip j. pyburn. 1982 "'intellectual' technologies: the key toimproving whitecollar productivity," sloan management review, fall, pp. 3139.dertouzos, michael l. 1989. "computers and productivity," lcs 25th anniversary volume,massachusetts institute of technology, mit press, cambridge, mass.feldman, martha s., and james g. march. 1981. "information in organizations as signal andsymbol," administrative science quarterly 26:171186.franke, richard h. 1987. "technological revolution and productivity decline: computerintroduction in the financial industry," technological forecasting and social change31:143154.fudenberg, drew, and jean tirole. 1985. "preemption and rent equalization in the adoption ofnew technology," review of economic studies 52:383401.giesler, eliezer, and albert h. rubenstein. 1988. "how do banks evaluate their informationtechnology?" bank administration, november.graham, john. 1976. making computers pay, john wiley & sons, new york.harris, sidney e., and joseph l. katz. 1991. "organizational performance and informationtechnology investment intensity in the insurance industry," organization science2:263296.appendix a226information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hirshleifer, jack. 1971. "the private and social value of information and the reward to inventiveactivity," american economic review, pp. 561574.kraut, robert, susan dumais, and susan koch. 1989. "computerization, productivity, and qualityof work life," communications of the acm 32(february).loveman, gary. 1988. "an assessment of the productivity impact of information technologies,"mit management in the 1990's program, 88054, july.malone, thomas w., joanne yates, and robert i. benjamin. 1987. "electronic markets andelectronic hierarchies," communications of the acm 30(6, june).mark, jerome a. 1982. "measuring productivity in the service sector," monthly labor review, june.nelson, richard r. 1981. "research on productivity growth and productivity differences: deadends and new departures," journal of economic literature 29:10291064.noyelle, t., ed. 1990. skills, wages, and productivity in the service sector, westview press,boulder, colo.organisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd). 1988. new technologies in the1990's: a socioeconomic strategy, oecd, washington, d.c.osterman, paul. 1986. "the impact of computers on the employment of clerks and managers,"industrial and labor relations review 39:175186.parsons, d.j., c.c. gotlieb, and m. denny. 1990. productivity and computers in canadianbanking. university of toronto, department of economics, working paper #9012, june.pentland, brian. 1989. "use and productivity in personal computing," proceedings of the tenthinternational conference on information systems, boston, mass., december.porter, michael e., and victor e. millar. 1985. "how information gives you competitiveadvantage," harvard business review, julyaugust, pp. 149160.roach, stephen s. 1991. "services under siegešthe restructuring imperative," harvard businessreview, septemberoctober, pp. 8291.sassone, peter g., and a. perry schwartz. 1986. "costjustifying oa," datamation, february 15.strassmann, p. 1990. the business value of computers, information economics press, newcanaan, conn.thurow, l. 1987. "economic paradigms and slow american productivity growth," easterneconomic journal 13:333343.venkatraman, n., and akbar zaheer. 1990. "electronic integration and strategic advantage: aquasiexperimental study in the insurance industry," information systems research1:377393.weitzendorf, t., and r. wigand. 1991. tasks and decisions: a suggested model to demonstratebenefits of information technology, working paper, institut für informationswissenschaft,graz, austria.appendix a227information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bmethods for deriving bureau of economicanalysis measures of outputas part of the national income and product accounts (nipa) series, thebureau of economic analysis (bea) of the department of commercepublishes annual measures of gross product originating (gpo) by industry incurrent and constant dollars to supplement the measures of gross nationalproduct (gnp) for the u.s. economy as a whole. these data are useful forunderstanding the diversity of movement in output among the variouscomponent industries of the economy. however, for a variety of reasons,principally data limitations, these measures do not have the same degree ofaccuracy as the overall measures of gnp.when requested, the bureau of labor statistics (bls), the federalgovernment agency that develops the government's measures of productivity,does make available the productivity measures that could be derived by relatingthese data on output to the corresponding data on labor input. because of thelimitations in the data, however, the bls does not publish these measures aspart of its regular set of productivity indexes.in the framework of the national accounts, the relevant measure of outputfor purposes of gauging productivity is the constantdollar gpo. to derive thismeasure the bea uses three principal methods.1 one is termed doubledeflation, another extrapolation, and the third direct deflation. the methodchosen for each service industry usually depends on the availability of adequatedata.in the doubledeflation method, constantdollar gpo is derived as thedifference between currentdollar gross or final output divided by anappropriate output price index, and the currentdollar intermediate input(materials and purchased services) divided by an appropriate input price index. inappendix b228information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the extrapolation method, constantdollar gpo is derived by extrapolating thebaseyear currentdollar gpo from some related series such as constantdollargross (not net) output, employment, or the number of hours worked. in thedirectdeflation method, constantdollar gpo is derived by dividing each year'scurrentdollar gpo by either a gross output price index or an hourly earningsindex.generally, the doubledeflation method is used whenever possible, since itis most consistent with the definition of gpo, namely, final output minusintermediate input. for the other methods to be appropriate approximations,certain assumptions are made. in the extrapolation method, the assumption isthat the change in constantdollar gross output is the same as the change inconstantdollar input. in the directdeflation method, the assumption is that thechanges in the output price deflators and the input price deflators are the same.in recent years there have been substantial improvements in the nipa data,and the number of industries for which double deflation is used has increased.table b.1 shows the methods currently used to derive the constantdollar gpofor the various service industries. as can be seen, double deflation is used for asubstantial number of service industries.however, the quality of the doubledeflation estimates varies considerably.table b.2 lists the various measures of output prices and other data and thesources of data used to derive the constantdollar gross output portion of gpoas measured by the doubledeflation method. these data come from bothgovernment and private sources, and the definitions in many cases differconsiderably from those underlying the currentdollar estimates.although doubledeflated gross output is generally calculated by dividingthe currentdollar output by an output price index, as shown in table b.2, insome cases, part of the constantdollar gross output is deflated and part of it isbased on direct extrapolation of baseyear quantitative output measures. this isthe case in local and interurban passenger transportation, where gross output fortaxicabs is based on revenues deflated by the consumer price index for taxifares; but gross output for intercity buses is based on baseyear currentdollarrevenues adjusted by changes in total passengermiles; gross output for otherlocal transit services is based on baseyear revenues adjusted by changes in thenumber of passenger trips; and gross output for school buses is based on baseyear revenues adjusted by changes in employment. thus, measures for local andinterurban passenger transportation by definition cannot take into accountchanges in productivity that may have taken place, and in some cases, theoutput price indexes used to deflate output are not price indexes but costindexes. as such, deflated output measures cannot take into account changes inproductivity.in developing measures of constantdollar input to subtract from measuresof constantdollar gross output, changes in the composition of theappendix b229information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table b.1 methods for estimating constantdollar gpo for various serviceindustriesindustrymethodtransportationrailroadsdouble deflationlocal passenger transitdouble deflationtrucking and warehousingdouble deflationwater transportationdouble deflationair transportationdouble deflationpipelinesdouble deflationtransportation servicesextrapolationcommunicationstelephone and telegraphdouble deflationradio and television broadcastingdouble deflationelectric, gas, and sanitary servicesdouble deflationretail tradedouble deflationwholesale tradedouble deflationfinance, insurance, and real estatebankingextrapolationcredit agenciesextrapolationsecurity and commodity brokersdouble deflationinsurance carriersdouble deflationbusiness and personal serviceshotels and other lodging placesdouble deflationpersonal servicesdouble deflationbusiness servicesextrapolationauto repair services and garagesdouble deflationmiscellaneous repair servicesdouble deflationmotion picturesdirect deflationamusements and recreationdouble deflationhealth servicesdouble deflationlegal servicesdouble deflationeducational servicesdouble deflationsocial servicesdirect deflationmiscellaneous professional servicesdirect deflationprivate household servicesdirect deflationgovernmentgeneral governmentextrapolationgovernment enterprisesextrapolationsource: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1991. survey of currentbusiness, january.appendix b230information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table b.2 sources of data for output price or other measures used in derivingdouble deflation gpo measures for various service industriesindustryprice or other measureatransportationrailroadsipd from revenue tonmiles and passengermiles from amtrak datalocal passenger transittaxicabscpi for taxi faresintercity busespassengermiles from abaschool busesemployment from blslocal transitpassenger trips from aptatrucking and warehousingtonmiles from dotwater transportationindex of tonmiles for deep sea from bea, tonmiles for other water transportation from dod,and tonmiles of marine cargo from dodair transportationseparate revenue passengermiles for domesticand international travel and freight tonmilesby dotpipelinestonmiles from aopcommunicationstelephone and telegraphppis for local telephone and toll telephoneservices and direct advertisingradio and television broadcastingindex based on cost per 1000member audienceelectric, gas, and sanitary serviceselectric utilitieskilowatthours from eeigas utilitiesbtus of gas for resale and btus of gas utilitysales from agasanitary servicescpi for water and sewage maintenanceretail tradeeating and drinking placescpisotherbaseyear margin times sales deflated by cpiswholesale trademerchant wholesalers1982 gross margin rateweighted sales deflatedby ppismanufacturers' sales officesfor equipment rental, ipd from bea capitalstock data; for rest, ppisagents and brokersppisfinance, insurance, and real estatesecurity brokers and servicescommissionsnumber of public securities orders from secand nysemutual fundsipd for securities commissionsunderwritingnew securities registrations from sectrading gainsipd for gnpcommodity brokersipd for gnpinsurance brokers and agenciesinsurance carrier deflators weighted bycommissions from a.m. best co.real estate servicesipd for pcebusiness and personal serviceshotels, rooming houseslaventhol & horwath roomrate indexlaundries and dry cleanerscpis from blsshoe repair shopscpis from blsappendix b231information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryprice or other measureaphotographic studioscpis from blsbeauty shopscpis from blsbarber shopscpis from blsfuneral servicescpis from blsautomotive rentalcpis from blsautomotive repair servicescpis from blselectric repair shopscpis from blswatch and jewelry repaircpis from blsfurniture repaircpis from blsmiscellaneous repair shopsaverage earnings from blsamusement and recreational servicesdance studios and schoolscpis from blstheatrical producers and entertainerscpis from blsbowling alleys and pool hallscpis from blscommercial sportscpis from blshealth servicesphysicians and dentistscpis from blsnursing and personal care facilitieshcfa input price indexhospitalscomposite deflator of hospital roomcpi and hcfa input pricesmedical and dental laboratoriescpis from blsoutpatient care facilitiescpis from blshealth and allied services, not otherwiseclassifiedcpis from blslegal servicescpis from blseducation servicesprivate schools and librariespce deflatorsprivate education housing and mealspce deflatorsaabbreviations:aba american bus associationeei edison electric instituteaga american gas associationfcc federal communications commissionaop association of oil pipelinesgnp gross national productapta american public transit associationhcfa health care financing administrationbea bureau of economic analysisipd implicit price deflatorbls bureau of labor statisticsme mccannerickson co.btu british thermal unitnyse new york stock exchangecpi consumer price indexpce personal consumption expendituresdod u.s. department of defenseppi producer price indexdot u.s. department of transportationsec securities exchange commissionsource: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis.appendix b232information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table b.3 sources of data for gpo series based on extrapolation and directdeflationindustrymethodsource of datatransportation servicesextrapolationbea employmentbankingextrapolationbea employmentcredit agenciesextrapolationbea employmentreal estatedirect deflationtrade source rent index for officebuildingsholding companiesextrapolationbea employmentbusiness servicesextrapolationbls employment weighted bycensus bureau receiptsmotion picturesdirect deflationbls prices and earningssocial servicesdirect deflationbea average wages and salariesmiscellaneous professionaldirect deflationbea average wages and salariesprivate householdsdirect deflationbls pricesgovernmentgeneralextrapolationbea hours worked weighted bymeasures of experiencegovernment enterprisesextrapolationbea and census bureauemployment and bls outputindexessource: u.s. department of commerce, bureau of economic analysis. 1991. survey of currentbusiness, january.material and other input have to be taken into account in deriving theappropriate input price indexes. to do this an inputoutput table, whichmeasures in some detail the purchases from one industry by another, is used.the last fully developed inputoutput table is for 1977. to update thisinformation for the current measures, changes in the composition wereestimated by assuming that both constantdollar gross output and input havechanged at the same rate since 1977.table b.3 provides information on the sources of data used to developgpo measures in those industries for which the doubledeflation method is notused. in many of these cases, and particularly for financial institutions,extrapolation was used, and the baseyear revenues were adjusted by changes inemployment or wages and salaries. in such cases, measures of output do notreflect changes in productivity that have taken place.note1. for a detailed description of the estimating methods used for the measures of constantdollargpo, see de leeuw, frank, michael mohr, and robert p. parker, 1991, "gross product by industry,197788: a progress report on improving the estimates," survey of current business, january, pp.2337.appendix b233information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cprocedures for deriving bureau of laborstatistics measures of productivity forservice industriesthe bureau of labor statistics (bls) measures of productivity are in theform of indexes of output per unit of labor input derived from dividing an indexof output for an industry by the corresponding index of labor input.industry level measurement of outputtable c.1 describes the procedures used by the bls to derive the indexesof output for each of the service industries for which it publishes productivitymeasures. a summary of those methods follows. table c.1 also providesstandard industrial classification code information to clarify industrydefinitions as they are used by the bls.transportationthe bls publishes indexes of productivity for five transportationindustries: railroads, intercity buses, intercity trucking, air transportation, andpetroleum pipelines. these measures cover 35 percent of transportationemployment.note: this appendix updates and expands on previous work presented in mark,jerome a., 1986, "measuring productivity in services industries," pp. 139159 intechnology in services: policies for growth, trade, and employment, bruce r. guileand james brian quinn (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c.appendix c234information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c235information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c236information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c237information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conceptually, the measures for the transportation industries are easier todevelop than those for other service industries because transportation industryoutputšthe movement of goods or passengers over distancesšis more easilyquantified. units of output in transportation have two dimensions, quantitiesand distance, that reflect how much has been transported how far. as such, tonmiles, passengermiles, barrelmiles, and so forth are the primary indicators ofoutput for these series of indexes.for the most part, historically, these data have been available from theregulatory agency of the particular transportation industry, such as the interstatecommerce commission (icc) or the civil aeronautics board. in many cases,however, there are data gaps that place certain limitations on the measures. forexample, it is sometimes impossible to adjust the measures of output adequatelyfor changes in the average length of haul. the labor requirements associatedwith the movement of freight and passengers are usually greater for short haulsthan for long hauls. therefore, a shift from a long haul to a series of shorthaultrips or viceversa could be interpreted as a change in productivity, althoughonly the mix of trips has changed.for the two major freightcarrying industries, railroads and trucking,undifferentiated data on tonmiles are reported for various classes of freightoperations. in trucking, the tonmile data are reported separately for generalfreight, specialized carriers, and carriers of household goods. but the measuresof output should reflect the kinds of commodities handled and the averagedistance they are moved, since they represent separate types of services. thepreferred way to develop such measures would be to combine the tonnage andaverage haul of each commodity with its respective requirements for labor inputand then aggregate the results for all commodities transported. unfortunately,this cannot be done with currently available data.however, for the railroad industry, information on tonnage for separatecommodities is available from the icc for about 170 commodity lines, rangingfrom agricultural and mining products to motor vehicles and scientificinstruments. several years ago similar information was available for thetrucking industry, but its collection has been discontinued. the bls uses thesedata to adjust the overall measure of freight tonmiles for changes in thecomposition of goods carried.although this adjustment for commodities hauled represents animprovement over undifferentiated tonmile figures, refinements cannot bedeveloped to the extent desirable. the adjustments to the index for thecommodity hauled are made in terms of unit revenue weights. the underlyingassumption, therefore, is that differences in labor requirements amongcommodities are similar to differences in unit revenues. since labor costsconstitute more than half of each industry's total operating costs, thisassumption may notappendix c238information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be unreasonable; however, the proportions could conceivably differ bycommodity. in deriving the index of total industry output for each of thetransportation industries, the freight tonmile measure (adjusted or not) iscombined with the revenue passengermile measure.the deregulation of many transportation industries has resulted in theelimination of some of the operating statistics previously published and used todevelop the indexes of output. as a result, some of the measures for thetransportation industry have had to be extended on the basis of more limitedinformation. the bls has been cooperating with other government agencies toensure that adequate statistics remain available for transportation industries.communicationsthe bls index of productivity for telephone communications covers about70 percent of the employment of the communications sector. the index ofoutput is derived as a weighted aggregate of revenues adjusted for changes inprice for four different categories of telephone service: local calls, measured tollservice (mts), widearea toll service (wats), and all other services, includingprivateline service. the data on revenue are collected and published by thefederal communications commission. deflators are derived from price indexescompiled and published by the bls under its producer price index program.the measure of deflated revenue includes revenues from privatelineservices. it also accounts for tv, radio, and computer transmission by telephoneindustry facilities as well as directory services.despite the detail that is included in the measure of output, improvementscould be made if information were available on the intensity of use of telephoneequipment by customers. the number of calls made can vary without revenuealso varying proportionately because of flat charges such as watsline or localcall charges. to the extent that the number of such calls varies over time, theindex overstates or understates changes in output.electric, gas, and sanitary servicesservices rendered by public utilities range from the provision of light, heat,and water to the disposal of solid and liquid wastes. in this area the blscurrently publishes indexes of productivity for electric utilities, gas utilities, anda combination of the two.the measure for electric utility output covers all privately owned utilities,which account for roughly 80 percent of the total output generated in the unitedstates. output is defined in terms of kilowatthours generated and distributed.the measure of the output of gas utilities is defined inappendix c239information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.terms of therms (one therm equals 100,000 british thermal units) delivered tocustomers by all privately owned companies (which account for 95 percent oftotal gas output).since the labor requirements per kilowatthour or per therm are higher forresidential than for commercial and industrial customers and are higher forsmall establishments than for larger ones, bls differentiates among bothkilowatthours and therms by type of customer.retail tradealthough the bls has been publishing measures of productivity for retailtrade industries since 1975, the number of such industries has increasedmarkedly in recent years. at present, indexes are available for 11 importantindustriesšretail food stores, franchised newcar dealers, gasoline servicestations, apparel and accessory stores, furniture and appliance stores, eating anddrinking places, drug and proprietary stores, and liquor stores. apparel andaccessory stores are further broken out into men's and boys' clothing stores,women's readytowear stores, family clothing stores, and shoe stores. also,furniture and appliance stores are disaggregated into furniture and furnishingsstores, and appliance stores. work is currently under way on measures forhardware stores, auto and home supply stores, and department stores.for most retail trade industries, data on gross sales in current dollars,deflated by appropriate price indexes, are used to estimate real output. thismethod can yield good measures of real output if adequate consumer priceindexes can be developed that reflect the price movements of the variouscommodities sold by the establishments. the recent improvements that havebeen made in the bls consumer price index program have enabled it todevelop indexes of output and productivity for more components of retail trade.indexes of productivity based on deflated value of sales output measuresreflect shifts among services with different levels of sales but the same tradelabor requirements. therefore, the overall industry productivity index can showmovements without any change in component elements.in retail industries a large portion of the value of sales is provided by themanufacturers and the wholesalers of the products sold. a measure of netoutput would be desirable since it would most closely correspond to thefunctions provided by the retailer. unfortunately, measures of net output basedon data with separately deflated final sales and cost of materials can result inlarge errors of measurement when the cost of materials is a large proportion ofthe final value. this is because all the errors in the current value of sales, thecurrent value of material purchases, the consumer price index, and theproducer price index affect this residual.gross or total sales will represent a good measure of net output or valueappendix c240information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.added with less measurement error if the value added as a percent of sales(gross margin) does not change over time. available data seem to indicate thatfor the industries published, average gross margins have not changedsubstantially over time. to introduce labor input weighting, the indexes forretail trade industries for the most part are developed in two stages. deflatedoutput measures are first developed for detailed merchandise lines. these areaggregated to higher levels, and the resultant indexes are then combined withlaborcost weights. for example, in retail food stores, sales for 13 keymerchandise lines are deflated using specially prepared price indexes based onthe bls consumer price index components. the indexes for the merchandiselines are aggregated to five department linesšmeat, produce, frozen food, drygroceries and dairy, and all others. these in turn are aggregated with laborcostweights to develop a measure of overall output for grocery stores.wholesale tradeuntil recently the bls did not publish any measures for wholesale trade.currently, only an index for scrap and waste materials dealers is published. themeasure of output is derived by combining the quantities of various types ofprocessed scrap into a broad product group and the various types of processedwastepaper into an overall wastepaper group. measures for these two groups arethen combined with employment weights to yield measures of overall output.the bls is currently examining three industries in considerable detail toderive reliable measures: metal service centers, petroleum bulk stations, andbeer, wine, and distilled spirits distributors. these industries include about halfa million workers, or 10 percent of the employment in the sector. data onphysical quantity are available to develop measures of output for theseindustries. the data on quantity for disaggregated commodities will becombined with fixedperiod labor input weights reflecting the services providedby the wholesalers to retailers and other users.several measurement problems with respect to these industries need to beresolved. some firms perform work on commodities that they distribute toretailers, but this practice varies substantially among wholesale distributors.whether the labor input weights can adequately take this variation into accountis questionable. in addition, in some instances a regional wholesaler distributescommodities to local wholesalers. this creates a problem of duplicate countingin the measure of overall industry output.financein the area of finance, the bls publishes a measure of productivity for thecommercial banking industry that reflects the three major services commercialappendix c241information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.banks render their customersšdeposits, loans, and trust services. while banksalso perform nonfundusing services, such as safe deposit services and customerpayroll accounting, lack of adequate data precludes deriving a measure forthem. however, because the proportion of employees engaged in such servicesis small, the overall validity of the measure is little affected by the omission.there has been a great deal of discussion over the years as to theappropriate measure of the output of banking. much of the discussion addresseswhether the appropriate concept is one based on what has been called theliquidity approach or one based on a transactions approach.1 in the liquidityapproach the banks are viewed as providers of money to hold, and their outputis measured in terms of the interest received on the volume of deposits held.such interest received by banks is assumed to be equivalent to the incomeforegone by depositors due to their preference for holding deposits rather thanfor investing directly. the interest the depositors forego represents the value ofthe banks' services for such liquidity preference. this approach can be extendedto all types of savings accounts, the assumption being that the foregone netinterest is the value of the banks' services.according to the transactions approach, the banks are providers of a seriesof services to their clients that are reflected in the transactions performed. thevolume of the banks' output is proportional to the volume of the transactionshandled. thus the final output of commercial banking represents an array ofservices provided to bank customers relating to the depository, lending, andfiduciary functions of banks. in developing a measure of productivity forbanking, the bls adopted the transactions approach for the measure of output.estimates of the number of transactions in each of the service functions ofbanks are derived. in some instances, no direct count of transactions isavailable, and so the number of transactions is estimated from data on the totalvalue of transactions and on the results of surveys of the average dollarvalue oftransactions. although these estimates have some limitations, the derived countof the number of transactions is the measure used to reflect the quantities ofservices provided.deposit activity is measured in terms of the number of checks transactedand the number of time and savingsaccount deposits and withdrawals. thedata for demand deposit activities are derived ultimately from federal reservebank counts and official benchmark surveys. for timeand savingsdepositactivity, the measure of output is derived from data published by the federaldeposit insurance corporation and the functional cost analysis conductedannually by the federal reserve board. lending services provided by banks arealso measured in terms of units. as in the case of deposit activity and trustdepartment activity, the bls does not use banks' financial data to arrive atmeasures of component output.appendix c242information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.business and personal servicesin the business and personal services sector, the bls publishes measuresfor four industriesšhotels, motels, and tourist courts; laundry and dry cleaningservices; beauty and barber shops; and automotive repair shops. the output foreach of these industries is measured by total revenues from the various activitiesof establishments within the industry adjusted by price changes. thesemeasures are then combined with employment weights to derive an index ofoutput for each industry. the bls uses special price indexes derived from itsconsumer price index program for deflating the receipts from the principalactivities of each of the industries. for example, in hotels and motels, thereceipts from room rentals, food sales, beverage sales, and so on are separatelydeflated by the appropriate price measures, and these measures are thencombined with employment weights. it would be desirable to differentiatebetween all the separate activities of these establishments, but because of thelimited number of price indexes that can be developed, some broader groupingshave to be used.governmentfor the last 2 decades, the bls has been conducting a program ofdeveloping indexes of labor productivity for all federal government agencieswith 200 or more employees. currently, the measures cover 390 organizationsin 59 agencies that account for 60 percent of civilian government employment.the agency measures are grouped into functional groups representing relativelyhomogeneous activities, such as library services, loans and grants, andinformation services.where possible, the output of a government agency is defined as its finaloutputšwhat it produced for use outside the government. therefore, measuresare also developed for agencies (and parts of agencies) providing services toother parts of the government, such as printing, personnel management,communications, and supply and inventory control. because of the inclusion ofintermediate activities and output, the index of overall productivity is not finalfor the entire government. the summary productivity measure reflects theaverage of changes in the productivity of the measured federal organizations.the measures of output used in productivity calculations are diverse,including such indicators as inspections completed and reports prepared (foraudit functions), statistical reports issued, maps produced, or weather forecastsmade (for public information functions), food inspections conducted, drugarrests made, applications and licenses issued, drugs approved, and patentsapproved (for regulatory functions). currently, output information is collectedon about 3000 indicators.appendix c243information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hospitalsfor several years the bls has been working to develop a measure ofproductivity for hospitals but has not yet determined whether the measure it hasdeveloped is adequate for publication.hospitals provide services designed to eliminate, retard, or preventpathologies. treatments, which can be regarded as producer technologies bywhich those services are rendered, are specified to produce desired outcomes.however, outcomes depend on factors other than, and in addition to, treatments,such as the preadmission health of the patient. there is thus some question asto whether a measure of output related to hospital labor and other resourcesshould be based on outcomes. the bls does not adjust for outcomes inderiving its index of productivity for hospitals and instead uses a differentapproach.clinically named illnesses have been classified according to diagnosis, anddiagnoses in turn are standardized into diagnosisrelated groupsšreferred to asdrgs. a drg implies a complex of treatments or procedures, which in turnare associated with the use of certain kinds and amounts of resources.all diagnosis codes have been condensed into 23 major diagnosticcategories (mdcs). the mdcs are generally based on diseases that tend to bediagnosed and similarly treated by specialists. hospital discharges are firstcoded by diagnosis and then into drgs.the bls measure of output for hospitals is derived from data on thenumber of inpatient discharges in each diagnostic category weighted by averagehospital operating costs and the number of outpatient visits for each diagnosticcategory.measures of labor inputproductivity calculations require data on the hours worked ofnonsupervisors, supervisors, unpaid family workers, and the selfemployed. theprincipal source of data on employment and hours for all of the serviceindustries for which bls publishes indexes of productivity is the bls survey ofestablishments' payrolls, the current employment survey (ces). this surveyprovides good measures of the employment and hours of nonsupervisoryworkers by industry, but it does not provide data on the average hours ofsupervisory workers or on the employment and hours of unpaid family workersand the selfemployed.information on the selfemployed and unpaid family workers is derivedfrom a survey of noninstitutional households, the current population survey(cps). based on 60,000 households in the united states, these data areadequate for aggregate measures such as those for the business economy asappendix c244information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a whole or even major sectors, but they present limitations when used for suchdetailed measures as those for specific service industries.currently, the average weekly hours of supervisory workers are assumedto be equal to those of nonsupervisory workers in the service industries. thisassumption presents fewer limitations for developing measures of change thanfor developing base labor input.the most desirable measure of productivity is one that uses only theamount of labor actually involved in the generation of the services provided andexcludes paid time off. the ces's data on hours are based on hours paid andinclude paid vacations, holidays, sick leave, and other time off in addition toactual hours worked. to the extent that leave practices change, the resultantmeasures of productivity overstate or understate the actual change in output perhour.to develop a better series of hours at work, the bls has been conductingan annual survey (now in its ninth year) of some 4000 establishments to collectdata on hours at work and hours paid for nonsupervisory workers in the privatenonagricultural business sector. from this survey, ratios are developed to adjustthe present measures of hours paid (based on the ces data) to reflect hours atwork. after careful study, ''hours at work" was defined as time on the job or atthe place of work and includes coffee breaks, short rest periods, paid cleanuptime, and other paid time at the workplace besides actual time worked.conceptually, this definition was considered to be the most acceptable one touse for extracting data from establishments' records. although the appropriateinformation is available on hours at work at an aggregate level, a substantialexpansion of this survey will be required to develop reliable data for specificservice industries.the bls measures of productivity based on the hours at work for allpersons assume that workers are homogeneous with respect to skillšthat anhour of one worker's time is as productive as an hour of any other worker'stime. however, a highly skilled worker can be viewed as providing more laborservices per hour than a less highly skilled one. shifts within the labor forcefrom less skilled workers to more highly skilled ones because of increasededucation or experience are not reflected as increases in the measures of laborinput. when skill differences are ignored, increases in skill levels are measuredas increases in productivity.to the extent that there are changes in the composition of the work forcewith respect to education and experience that result in skill differences, it maybe desirable to reflect those changes in measures of labor input, since they willotherwise be reflected in measures of productivity.to address this problem, previous studies have usually taken the positionthat relative wage or incomelevel differentials associated with specific workercharacteristics reflect marginal productivity of these attributes. generally, thecharacteristics included are the number of years of schooling,appendix c245information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.age, sex, and possibly industry and occupation. weighting the quantity of labor(hours of employment), classified by these characteristics of the work force, byrelative wage or income differentials results in an aggregate measure of laborinput intended to reflect the composition of the work force.but this procedure is not without problems. for example, workers withsimilar characteristics have different earnings in different occupations andindustries. however, the correlation between industry and occupation andearnings may also be due to influences other than productivity, such as regionaldifferences in the cost of living, degree of unionization, and so on.the bls has developed some experimental measures of labor input basedsolely on changes in the amount of work experience and schooling workershave.2 the methods used follow directly from the economic theory of humancapital developed by mincer3 and becker.4 the method rests on the assumptionthat increased schooling and onthejob training increase one's stock of skillsand productivity. it also assumes that economic returns to higher education andadditional work experience reflect the marginal productivity of thesecharacteristics. the bls has developed a multidimensional database that crossclassifies the annual hours of workers grouped by schooling and experience.the database has been developed from various models that make use ofdecennial census data, a matched sample from the cps, and social securityrecords.as mentioned above, it is recognized that hourly wages differ not onlybecause of differences in skills but also because of factors unrelated toproductivity. accordingly, simple averages of hourly wage rates for eacheducation and experience group are not necessarily appropriate approximationsof marginal productivity. consequently, the bls has developed an econometricmodel that provides measures of wages dependent on changes in education andexperience but that simultaneously controls for other types of variation.skilladjusted measures of labor input have been developed for thebusiness sector as a whole, and this work is currently being extended todetermine the feasibility of developing corresponding measures for specificindustries, especially service industries.notes1. gorman, j. 1969. "alternative measures of the real output and productivity of commercialbanks," pp. 155188 in production and productivity in the service industries, v.r. fuchs (ed.),columbia university press, new york.2. waldorf, w.h., et al. 1986. "new measures of the contribution of education and experience tou.s. productivity growth." paper presented at the annual meetings of the american economicassociation, december 2830, new orleans, la.3. mincer, j. 1974. schooling, experience and earnings, columbia university press, new york.4. becker, g. 1975. human capital, university of chicago press, chicago and london.appendix c246information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix dhow the committee conducted its studythe committee to study the impact of information technology on theperformance of service activities was composed of knowledgeable informationtechnology (it) executives from major service industries, nationally recognizedmacroeconomists concerned with productivity in services, executives fromhardware and softwareproducing groups, and representatives of government,labor, industry, and research. in addition, the committee sought input from chiefexecutive officers, senior it executives, and people with strong operating andfinancial evaluation experience in service industries, and it attempted to drawon the existing literature when appropriate.the charge given to the committee was to examine the impact of it onproductivity in the service sector. however, after examining themacroeconomic data, existing surveys and publications on how it has beenused in services, the taxonomy of it as it relates to performance, and themanagement practices of successful and less successful users of it in services,the committee determined that the proper issue for investigation was notdetermining the impact of it on standard measures of productivity in services,but rather understanding the impact of it on the overall performance of serviceactivities.as discussed in the main text of this report, many dimensions ofperformance are difficult or impossible to quantify, let alone to collect reliabledata on. nonetheless, the committee chose to regard performance broadly,including such considerations as fulfilling mandated requirements, reducingcosts, creating new products, increasing the quality or timeliness of output,appendix d247information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.avoiding loss of competitive position, developing new strategic capabilities,generating greater flexibility of infrastructure, improving capacity to handlecomplexity or customization, and so on. furthermore, it included all aspects ofit investments and expenses (hardware, software, training, support, andoperating) in its thinking, despite the fact that data on overall industryexpenditures for software, training, support, and systems operations aregenerally difficult to obtain in any systematic manner.the committee conducted analysis at the national, industry, enterprise, andactivity levels. thus it did not address international, individual, or group issuesin any significant detail. nor did it address small companies, although financialdata on smaller companies were included in the data that supported theindustry and nationallevel analyses.to conduct its national (or macroeconomic) analysis, the committeeinvestigated the current data relevant to evaluating how it has been exploited inthe service sector. much of this data is incomplete or inadequate in waysdiscussed in the text, and in any event such data cannot establish causeandeffect relationships between investments in it and the performance measured.once the committee went beyond the national level, the lack ofsystematically collected data became quite apparent. the committee thereforeundertook to interview a large number of outside sources. the committee didnot attempt to develop new databases, a task that would have been far beyondits expertise or resources to undertake. instead, it relied on experts, both its owninside the committee (through committee deliberations) and others outside thecommittee (through interviews), as well as on other studies when available.the industry level analysis was primarily for contextsetting. thecommittee drew on secondary literature and its own experts in the air transport,communications, commercial banking, insurance, retailwholesale trade, andhealth care industries. these industries were selected because they had a widerange of measurable improvements in productivity, high levels of investment init, and different contexts in which to introduce it; reflected importantimplications for employment and public policy; and exhibited extensive varietyin the sophistication and scale of the it installed. good data were available forsome of these industries as well.at the enterprise and activity levels, the committee sought to shed light onthe causal relationships underlying observed trends rather than merely toanalyze correlations of data. the enterprise and activity levels are crucial forunderstanding these relationships, because decisions about investment in it anduse of it are usually not made at the industry or national level; most are madeby executives within the enterprises that employ them. moreover, resources andappraisal procedures for investing in it are generally developed at theenterprise and activity levels, and appraisals of investments, it strategies, andsystem paybacks ultimately occur at these levels.appendix d248information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.use of interviewsapproach and limitationsto understand the causal relationships between it investment and use andthe performance of service activities, the committee drew extensively on a setof interviews it conducted with senior executives from firms in the serviceindustries. the purpose of these interviews was to seek insights (both from thepast and present) into patterns of behavior that could help explain why somecompanies or industries werešor were notšrealizing more payoffs from it.thus the committee conducted these interviews and analyzed the questionnairesin an exploratory vein, rather than searching for high statistical reliability.to select appropriate interviewees, the committee established a list of tenleading companies in each chosen service industry (financial services,transportation, retailing, wholesale distribution, communications, professionalservices, and health care). these companies were selected on the basis of size,rate of growth, profitability, recognition for innovation, and recognition asmajor users of it. these firms seemed most likely to have given systematicthought to the problems of assessing and managing it systems and to haveencountered the full range of problems in both activities. based on thecommittee's access to senior management, four companies in each group werethen selected for contact. such access was critical in order to obtain reliableresponses concerning each company's practices, experiences, and results.executives from two of these four topperforming firms were interviewedin each industry, in all a total of 80 individuals at 46 companies. all together,these firms had nearly $500 billion in revenues in 1991 and employed nearly 3million people.1 because the cooperation of key individuals was crucial, accessto the firm was sought at the highest possible level. in each company,interviewers attempted to contact the chief executive officer or chief operatingofficer, the senior executives for it, a major operating officer, and the chieffinancial officer. the individuals interviewed are listed in appendix e. allquoted statements in this report were verified by those who made them as beingcorrect at the time of the interviews.these interviews were conducted in a semistructured manner, and theyfocused on the following concerns:1. how companies decided to go ahead with a particular it project;2. how companies evaluated it projects postinvestment (if at all);3. the results of such evaluations;4. the impact of it's use on organizational structures;5. performance measurement and changes in reward systems made toexploit it effectively;6. causes of lessthansatisfactory returns from investments in it;appendix d249information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7. how companies evaluated intangibles like quality, flexibility,response times, or complexity effects; and8. what executives perceived to be the most important impacts of it'suse in their industries.the introductory information sent to interviewees prior to the interview isgiven in box d.1, and the interview guide for the interviewers is provided inbox d.2. to obtain more standardized data, a written questionnaire(figure d.1) was submitted to each participating company after the oralinterviews. seventynine percent of the questionnaires were returned.summaries of the responses to the questionnaire appear in question boxes 1through 7.in addition to the qualifications noted in chapter 3, some furtherlimitations of these interviews must be noted. although each interview wasconducted to gain understanding about both failures and successes inimplementing it in services, those interviewed understandably focused morereadily on the successes of their firms, though most were willing to discusssome of their failures or problems. the selection of companies "near the top" oftheir industries and avowedly major users of it resulted in a greater focus onthe "winners" or ''survivors." in addition, the focus on large firmsšbecause oflimits on committee resourcesšleft a large gap in the committee'sunderstanding of how small and mediumsize firms use and manage it. this isa gap that should be addressed in future research.although the data that emerged from the committee's interviews areprimarily qualitative, such data help to interpret the quantitative macroeconomicdata that do not adequately represent the wide range of impacts that using ithas had on the performance of firms in the service sector. thus, semistructuredinterviews conducted by the committee were useful in defining (not measuring)parameters, in interpreting correlation data, and in providing support for causalhypotheses. since the data from the interviews were not collected utilizing astatistical sample, common themes are reported in the text using qualifiers suchas "virtually all" (90 percent or more), "a great majority" (70 percent or more),"most" (50 percent or more), "less than half" (30 to 40 percent), "a few" (10 to30 percent), "a very few" (less than 10 percent), and so on. conclusions arelimited to the respondents' practices and views.note1. revenues and employment figures for 1991 were gathered from a search of the dunn andbradstreet market identifiers database available through dialog information services. for a smallnumber of companies, the 1991 data were not contained in this database, and 1990 figures wereused. thus the $500 billion in revenues and 3 million people employed should be regarded as roughestimates.appendix d250information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.question box 1does your company have an overall it strategy?yesnoonlyrecently70%13%17%what isthe timehorizon ofthestrategy?1 year2 years3 years4 years5 years10years4%12%42%4%38%0%does the decision process for it differ from other investments?yesno37%63%do the payback criteria differ from those for other investments?yesno31%69%observations and additional comments time horizons of it strategy are around 35 years, generally with updatesannually through capital budgets and specific operational plans keyed in atsixmonth to 1year intervals. it investment processes and payback criteria are essentially the same asthose for other investments. in discussion with interviewees, a majority described longrange plans forit investment and installation, rather than competitive positioning strategies.appendix d251information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d252information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d253information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.question box 4how do you account for different costs in your it evaluations?capitalizedexpensedhardware89%11%software34%66%training costs11%89%infrastructure costs17%83%observations and consequences a substantial portion of it costs do not show up in "investment" figures.appendix d254information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.question box 5overall, how, if at all, has use of it influenced the organization structure ofyour company?increaseddecreasedno changespans of control68%14%18%levels ofhierarchy4%63%33%centralization46%24%30%decentralization44%26%30%muchsomeslightnonedid it facilitate organizationalflattening, postproject?27%50%12%12%did it facilitate significant useof selfdirected teams?8%58%19%15%were performance measureschanged?11%56%4%30%were compensation systemschanged?4%33%15%48%n.b. rows may not add to 100% because of rounding.observations and additional comments the mix is about even between increased centralization (usually of datacenters or databases) and increased decentralization (usually of operations). most report increased spans of control, flatter organizations, more use ofselfdirected teams.appendix d255information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.question box 6are users involved in the design of it projects?rarelysometimesusuallyalways7%7%33%53%how were they involved?specifyingonlyin systemdesigninteractive indesigninteractivethroughout8%6%16%69%are external customers involved in design of it?specifyingonlyin systemdesigninteractive indesigninteractivethroughout46%24%18%12%n.b. rows may not add to 100% because of rounding.observations and additional comments users are involved in design of it projects at design and implementationlevels. external customers are often involved, but less frequently.appendix d256information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.question box 7what performance metrics are used?measured internallymeasured atcustomer levelresponse times tocustomers64%50%quality of performance5750financial payback tocompany8214financial benefits tocustomers4343internal engineeringmetrics544other important metrics711n.b. percentages are based on number of responses to individualquestions. columns are not mutually exclusive.observations and additional comments about half of the respondents reported using formal techniques to monitorperceived quality from their customers' viewpoint. formal metrics to measure the quality of service outputs are almostalways engineering metrics (such as system response times, computeravailability percentages, cycle times for operations, etc.) or customersurvey data (expressing customers' view of the services of the company)that cannot be converted into financial measurements of output quality.appendix d257information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box d.1 introductory information sent tointerviewee prior to interview1.purpose of interview and followup questionnaire: numerouspublications have suggested a seeming paradox. they contend thatthe relatively high levels of investment in information technologies(it) in services have led to little or no measurable productivityincreases. this may be a problem caused by difficulties inmeasurement. this questionnaire is intended to understand better:(a) to what extent companies have, or have not, fared better andimproved performance levels through use of it, (b) how companiesdetermine how much to spend on it and set metrics for anticipatedperformance, (c) how companies build it into strategic plans, (d) howcompanies evaluate benefits from their it investments, (e) how theseevaluations compare to anticipations, (f) what managementtechniques seem to work well or to cause problems in achievingproductivity from it, (g) what the most important impacts have beenof it on the organization's structure, management style, and industrycompetitive position.2.definitions used in interview and questionnaire: informationtechnologies (it) include the hardware, software, and implementationprocesses for a cluster of technologies that provide transactionsoriented and interactive computerbased capabilities for: collection,input, processing, communication, storage, retrieval, andpresentation of data and information. respondents should considerthe impacts of information technologies at several different levels: (a)strategic uses which change the nature and purposes of the entireenterprise, (b) systems uses which coordinate organizational unitsand databases to perform overall enterprise functions moreeffectively or efficiently, (c) operational uses which enable managingof single functions or units for greater efficiency or higher valueadded, (d) unit applications which improve performance at a singleworkstation.services include all items sold in trade which are neither products norconstructions. the services industries include: financial services,retailing, wholesaling, transportation, communications, public utilities(such as sewer, garbage collection, electric companies, etc.), healthcare and delivery systems, entertainment, professional services(such as accounting, legal, consulting, design, research, etc. firms),computer software, entertainment, and so on. services activities(which occur both within the "product industries" and the "servicesindustries") may include logistics, applied research, process design,product design, plant engineering, warehousing, market research,marketing, advertising, sales, distribution, repair, postsale services,legal, public relations, accounting, personnel, regulatory affairs,maintenance, basic research, or finance functions.appendix d258information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d2593.rules of the interview: all interviews will be taped for accuracy. allinformation will be held confidential unless specifically released byrespondent. all quotes or paraphrases will be cleared in context withthe respondent before publication. all publications will be sent torespondents free at the earliest date they are released fordistribution. interviews do not seek proprietary data, but usefulpatterns and insights having to do with measuring and improving theperformance of it in services activities. if copies of any relevantreports or company documents are available, they would helpensure accuracy.4.outline of interview: we will be focusing on four central questions.for each of these there will be some detailed questions theinterviewer will use to flesh out and make your responses compatiblewith those of other respondents. these questions include thefollowing:a. has your company made any major studies of the performance of itsinformation technology (it) investments? please describe thebreadth of the studies, levels of it included, or if performed onindividual projects, which projects were included. what were theresults? what methodologies and metrics did you use?b.how was the technology developed? internally? externally? jointventures, other approaches? how was the it function organized atthe time? what were the most important problems encountered inintroducing the technology? what have been, or are anticipated tobe, the most important changes resulting from the new technology?c.how, if at all, have you used it to affect the organizational structureof your company? spans of control? levels of hierarchy,centralization or decentralization of decisions? how has thetechnology affected your competitive edge in some aspect of yourindustry? how has it influenced the use of selfdirected teams?boundaries of units? horizontal relationships and communications?strategic alliances, and so on?d.in light of the above what would be your overall evaluation of the wayit investments enabled your company to improve servicesperformance? what are the most useful insights or patterns thatanalysis of past projects offers for future it investments?information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box d.2 interview guide for interviewers1.has your company made any major studies of the performance of its information technology (it) investments? if so, when? pleasedescribe the breadth of the study, levels of it included, or ifperformed on individual projects, which projects were included?were they successful? what performance measures were used?what was the general level of it investment involved? in software?hardware? over what time periods were results measured? why?what were the general conclusions concerning performance payoff?could this be measured for discrete projects? cumulative gains?what were the main sources of gain? what were the main causes ofgreater or less than anticipated benefits? what were the mostimportant problems encountered in measurement? how did you dealwith these? what were the major intangibles considered? how werethey evaluated? quality of outputs? faster response times?flexibility potentials? greater knowledge about customers? weresoftware costs (development and licensing) included? training andpersonnel development? if so, what were they? what would you saywas the precision (+/%) of the measurements?please pick two or three major projects (in terms of cost, impact, orgeographical scope) concerning which you are most familiar or forwhich such evaluations may have been undertaken. if possible,please choose some largescale projects which ''went well" andsome which "did not go well." for each of these projects, what werethe main goals of the project? what metrics were used in making thedecision? what is the decision process for it investments and howdoes that differ from other types of investment decisions? how is itintegrated into strategic planning? how was the actual evaluationcarried out? by whom? how were various critical factors balanced orweighted? what was the approximate size of the investment? insoftware? in hardware? what was the cost vs. other informationtechnology investments then installed? was this a new activity for thecompany? the replacement of earlier automation? replacement ofpeople? was there a specific investment return (hurdle rate) theproject had to meet? how did this compare to other it and nonithurdle rates? were other criteria stated explicitly in advance? howwell or badly did the project meet initial expectations, goals?2.how was the technology developed? through internal groups?extensive outsourcing? offtheshelf purchases? joint ventures?who was involved at each stage? when were users involved? whatwas the nature of the development? how was the it functionorganized? where are standards set? who had final decisionauthority? what important changes in organization or technicalinfrastructure were necessary to develop, accommodate, or exploitthe new technologies? what were theappendix d260information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most important other problems encountered in introducing thetechnology? what have been, or are anticipated to be, the mostimportant unforeseen changes resulting from the new technology?did the technology change economies of scale? economies ofscope? from the operations level to the systems level, or vice versa?how were the effects measured? what time span did it take tointroduce the project (from specification to outcomes)? was theproject organized as a separate division? crossfunctional teameffort? outsourced? what portions were expenses or capitalized?why?3.how, if at all, has the use of information technology affected the organizational structure of your company? spans of control? levelsof hierarchy? locus of control? centralization, decentralization ofdecisions? have there been shifts in staffing away from certainfunctions and toward others? has the technology enabled yourenterprise to shorten its response times? how much? what are theorganizational, control, and motivational implications of thesechanges? how have they affected the use of selfdirected teams?boundaries of units? horizontal relationships and communications?strategic alliances? how has use of the technology affected yourmethods of performance measurement? motivation systems? controlsystems? what are the most important (or likely) impacts of the newtechnologies on job skills, training requirements, wage structures?how does your company approach the issue of "managing anddeveloping people as intellectual assets"? does the technology allowyou to obtain a sustainable competitive edge in some component ofyour industry? how? what have been the major spinoffs or totallynew directions new information technologies have enabled for thecompany? to what extent were these anticipated? unanticipated?4.in light of the above, what would be your overall evaluation of theway it investments enabled you to improve services performance inyour company? why? what are the most useful insights or patternsthat analysis of past projects offers for future it investments?appendix d261information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d262information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure d.1 written questionnaire sent after oral interviews.appendix d263information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d264information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d265information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix elist of executives interviewednote: several executives interviewed preferred to remain anonymous and are notlisted in this appendix.appendix e266information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e267information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e268information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e269information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century levercopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e270