detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/2312health data in the information age: use, disclosure, andprivacy272 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309049955 | doi 10.17226/2312molla s. donaldson and kathleen n. lohr, editors; committee on regional healthdata networks, institute of medicinehealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health data in theinformation ageuse, disclosure, and privacymolla s. donaldson and kathleen n. lohr, editorscommittee on regional health data networksdivision of health care servicesinstitute of medicinenational academy presswashington, d.c.1994ihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, nw washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for this report were chosen for their special competencies and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the institute of medicine was chartered in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to enlistdistinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. in this, the institute acts under both the academy's 1863 congressional charter responsibility to be an adviser to the federal government and its own initiative inidentifying issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of theinstitute of medicinesupport for this project was provided by the john a. hartford foundation, the americanhealth information management association, electronic data systems corporation, and scienceapplications international corporation.library of congress cataloginginpublication datainstitute of medicine (u.s.). committee on regional health data networks.health data in the information age : use, disclosure, and privacy / molla s. donaldsonand kathleen n. lohr, editors ; committee on regional health data networks, divisionof health care services, institute of medicine.p. cm.includes bibliographical references and index.isbn 03090499541. medical recordsšaccess control. 2. confidential communicationsšphysicians. 3.medical informatics. i. donaldson, molla s. ii. lohr, kathleen n., 1941 . iii. title.ra976.148 1994651.5`04261šdc20 942613cipcopyright 1994 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures andreligions since the beginning of recorded history. the image adopted as a logotype by the instituteof medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient greece, now held by the staatlichemuseen inberlin.cover art: woodcut of galen, flanked by hippocrates and avicenna. source: galen, opera, lyon,1528, vignette on title page. courtesy of national library of medicine, bethesda, maryland.iihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on regional health datanetworksroger j. bulger,* chair, president and ceo, association of academichealth centers, washington, dcrobert h. brook,* professor of medicine and public health, uclacenter for health sciences, and director, health sciences program, therand corporation, santa monica, californiaelliott s. fisher, director, outcomes group, veterans affairs hospital,white river junction, vermont, and associate professor of medicine andcommunity and family medicine, center for the evaluative clinicalsciences, dartmouth medical school, hanover, new hampshirespencer foreman, president, montefiore medical center, bronx, new yorkjanlori goldman,ƒ director, project on privacy and technology,american civil liberties union, washington, dcclark e. kerr, vice president, government relations, bank of america,san francisco, californiajohn w. kirklin,* professor,department of surgery, school of medicineand medical center, university of alabama medical center, birmingham,alabamaanthony m. kotin, national medical director for marketing andspecialty products, national medical quality officer, the travelerscompanies, chicago, illinoisrobert m. krughoff, president, center for study of services,washington, dcrene lerer, senior vice president for corporate development, valuehealth sciences, santa monica, californiaelena o. nightingale,* senior program officer and special advisor tothe president of the carnegie corporation of new york, washington, dcmadison powers, senior research scholar, kennedy institute of ethics,georgetown university, washington, dcedward h. shortliffe,* chief, division of general internal medicine,associate chair for primary care, department of medicine, stanforduniversity school of medicine, stanford, californiaelliot m. stone, executive director, massachusetts health dataconsortium, inc., waltham, massachusettsadele a. waller, partner, gardner, carton & douglas, chicago, illinoiswillis h. ware,⁄ corporate research staff, the rand corporation, santamonica, californiaiiihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.study staff, division of health care serviceskarl d. yordy, director (until 10/1/93)kathleen n. lohr, director (as of 10/1/93), study directormolla s. donaldson, study directorhelen c. rogers, project assistant* member, institute of medicineƒ served through june 23, 1993⁄ member, national academy of engineeringivhealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacefrom the very first meetings, in the early 1970s, of the newly constitutedinstitute of medicine (iom) of the national academy of sciences, a majorobjective has been the engagement of the most important and difficult healthand science policy issues from the public's or society's perspective. the institutewas created so that a broadbased and multidisciplinary membership could workacross professions, within and without the health sciences, toward the solutionof these complex and difficult problems.from my personal experience as a staff member at the iom during the firstfour years of its life, i can attest to the early recognition of the importance of theprocess of having a balanced, multidisciplinary committee working on thepolicy issues at hand. the assumption was that the sum of the parts of such adiverse group was surpassed by the synergy of the whole; more often than not,this positive learning experience also produced a useful document or report. inmy personal experience with such groups, i cannot recall a failure either in theproduct and its value or in the process and its impact on the individualsparticipating. i must say, however, that the challenges facing this committee onregional databases were so great and our initial difficulties so intense inbecoming clear about and comfortable with the seminal questions embedded inour charge that i was not optimistic about either our twoyear experiencetogether or the product that i could envision emerging.our challenges were formidable because the very nature of the "regionaldatabases" was obscure to some, their potentials for good or harmprefacevhealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.were obscure to others, and the interweaving of such heavy strands of legalmaterial with information technology, data management, security maintenance,and the substance of health services research made it exceedingly hard for manyof us to get comfortable with our view and understanding of the completedpolicy tapestry.but we did it! never have i been on a committee with the doggeddetermination of this one; our relatively large committee seldom had a meetingwherein even one, let alone more than one, member was absent, and they stayedto the end. never have i been on a committee wherein the doctors, scientists,data experts, lawyers, representatives of the public interest, and experts from thebusiness world had such great expertise, such strong opinions, and such diverseperspectives.the key to the success of this project, it seems to me, was the gradualemergence of a commonality in shared values. somewhat to our collectivesurprise, we found ourselves unanimous in our acceptance of the followingfundamental assumptions: (1) use of populationwide databases developed fromindividually collected, computerized personal health data has become a workingreality; (2) potential benefits of such data sets used for financial, organizational,quality improvement, and research purposes to society are indeed great; (3)protection of the individual record from personidentifiable exposure mustinvolve all possible behavioral, systematic, and technical security measures; (4)relevant data sets and analyses including hospital, clinic, and providerspecificdata must be expeditiously made available to the public; and (5) bona fideresearchers must have access to personidentifiable records in order to providesociety with timely studies on health status and health care.these five foundational elements were essential to the committee'scollective thinking and its observations, conclusions, and recommendations asdetailed in the report.once the committee came together around these ideas, it was able to movesystematically through the myriad of policy implications that come fromreasoning from basic principles. this could not have been accomplishedwithout the indomitable persistence and prodigious intellectual work of molladonaldson and kathleen lohr. karl yordy made key contributionsintermittently as was appropriate for an iom division head.finally, it has become increasingly obvious to me (and i believe to the restof the committee) that the future we see emerging before us, as a result of ourparticipation in this study, has heavy implications for public education. in away, developing an informed and sophisticated public is what regionaldatabases and their analyses and reports are all about. the burden of theseeducation efforts may fall primarily upon health database organizations, but inmy view this responsibility belongs to all interested parties,prefacevihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutions, and professions. the purpose of these new informationtechnologies is to enhance the health status of society and to improve healthcare for the individual patient. we hope and trust that this report itself willcontribute to public understanding of these complex but important matters.roger j. bulger, m.d., f.a.c.p.chairprefaceviihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceviiihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthe committee on regional health data networks wishes to acknowledgethe assistance that they and the study staff received from many individuals andorganizations during this study. among these are a large number of individualsand organizations who met with members of the committee and staff during sitevisits and provided valuable insight into both the benefits to be gained and theobstacles to current efforts to establish and operate various kinds of healthdatabase organizations and regional networks.the committee benefited from presentations by guests invited to three ofits meetings. in march 1992 john p. fanning, ll.b., office of health policyand evaluation, office of the assistant secretary of health, department ofhealth and human services, spoke to the committee about privacy issuesrelated to the disclosure of data from various kinds of databases. lance j.hoffman, ph.d., professor, department of electrical engineering and computerscience, george washington university, gave an evening presentation on issuesof security and inferential identification. in june 1992 the committee was joinedby h. jefferson smith, ph.d., of georgetown university school of businessadministration; william goss of the health care management program atgeneral electric; robin stults, r.r.a., of the university of maryland medicalsystem; and edward j. hinman, m.d., of lincoln national. all theseparticipants discussed current practices in the use and protection of healthinformation from their various perspectives (employers, providers, computersecurity experts, and insurers and thirdparty payers). bert tobin of bentoninternational also presented a workingacknowledgmentsixhealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.model of an information repository. at both this meeting and the next meetingin october 1992, robert belair, j.d., explored with the committee a range oflegal and regulatory aspects of privacy and confidentiality. at the octobermeeting, the committee also heard from john baker, senior vice president ofequifax, inc., in atlanta, georgia, regarding the issues of privacy,confidentiality, and access in other databases.the committee also wishes to acknowledge the organizations, institutions,and groups, listed in appendix a, that participated in its five site visits. aconsiderable debt of gratitude is owed to the many individuals, too numerous toname here, who because of their association with those organizations gave thecommittee valuable insights into the many issues of use, disclosure, and privacythat make up the heart of the committee's report.the study would not have been possible without the support of the john a.hartford foundation, and the consistent and enthusiastic encouragement fromrichard sharpe, the foundation's program officer, is hereby acknowledged.generous assistance was also provided by the american health informationmanagement association, electronic data systems corporation, and scienceapplications international corporation.this study benefited from both previous and current iom studies,including work by the committee on improving the patient record in responseto increasing functional requirements and technological advances, thecommittee on employerbased health benefits, and the committee onassessing genetic risks. the committee is particularly appreciative of theassistance from marilyn j. field, ph.d., and jane fullarton, m.p.h., the projectdirectors for the latter two studies, who provided cogent presentations onprivacy and confidentiality matters at one committee meeting.finally, and in particular, the committee would like to express its gratitudeto the iom staff who facilitated the work of the committee. we are grateful forthe secretarial and logistical support provided by helen rogers and donaldtiller and for the assistance during the report review and preparation stage ofclaudia carl and michael edington of the iom's office of reports andinformation; the steady help of nina spruill, financial associate for thedivision of health care services, was also greatly appreciated. krys krystynak,while a participant in the federal 1992 ses candidate development program,spent some time at the iom assisting on the study. finally, the committeeacknowledges its considerable debt to karl yordy, director of the division ofhealth care services through september 1993, for his unflagging guidance andsupport during this project.acknowledgmentsxhealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents summary 11 introduction 27 advancing the prospects for comprehensive health databasesand networks 29 health database organizations 32 the institute of medicine study 33 study activities 38 organization of the report 38 comment 392 health databases and health database organizations: uses, benefits, and concerns 40 definitions 42 the benefits of health databases 61 users of information in hdos 63 uses of databases 65 ensuring the quality of data 85 summary 893 public disclosure of data on health careproviders and practitioners 91 previous studies 93contentsxihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. important principles of public disclosure 95 important elements of public disclosure 96 committee findings and conclusions 105 recommendations 106 strengthening quality assurance and quality improvementprograms 116 summary 121 appendix 3a 1234 confidentiality and privacy of personal data 136 historical perspectives and general observations on disclosure of information 136 sources of concerns about privacy and the confidentiality ofhealth records 140 definitions 142 expanded definitions 154 harm from disclosure and redisclosure of health recordinformation 156 privacy interests and hdos 162 relevance of existing laws to hdos 172 options for protecting privacy and confidentiality of healthrelated data in hdos 179 committee recommendations 190 comment 209 summary 212 references 214 appendixes 225a factfinding for the committee on regionalhealth data networks 227b committee on regional health data networks biographical sketches 232 glossary 239 acronyms 244 index 247contentsxiihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health data in the information age xiiihealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. xivhealth data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summaryan institute of medicine (iom) study committee has examined thepotential that existing and emerging health database organizations offer inimproving the health of individuals and the performance of the health caresystem. health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacyadvances recommendations related to the public disclosure of qualityofcareinformation and the protection of the confidentiality of personal healthinformation. the emergence of health database organizationsšwhether throughnational health reform, state legislative initiatives, commercial ventures, or localbusiness, medical, and hospital association coalitionsšprovides the impetus toexplore how such assembled patientlevel health care information can be usedappropriately.the problemthe desire to understand and improve the performance of the healthsystem begets a need for better health data for several purposes: to assess thehealth of the public and patterns of illness and injury; identify unmet regionalhealth needs; document patterns of health care expenditures on inappropriate,wasteful, or potentially harmful services; identify costeffective care providers;and provide information to improve the quality of care in hospitals,practitioners' offices, clinics, and other health care settings.this, in turn, motivates proposals for the creation and maintenance ofcomprehensive, populationbased health care databases that can provide suchsummary1health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information with ease and reliability. considerable obstacles lie in the way ofachieving these goals. some relate to the content and structure of current healthdatabases; others concern the difficulties and costs of creating and maintainingcomprehensive databases. furthermore, public health databases (e.g., thosemaintained by states) may themselves lack connections with one another. otherproblems include the need to create longitudinal records to understand howpatients fare ''in the system as a whole"; the need to adjust for importantcharacteristics about patients' sociodemographic circumstances or health status(risk and severity adjustment); and the need to have information on the health ofthe population as a whole, not just of those who use the health system. finally,the need for information on both end results (the outcomes) of care as well ason the processes of care poses great challenges to database developers.the current push for health care reform has made clear to many that thesuccess of reform optionsšas well as the ability to assess the effect of areformed system on the health of the publicšdepends on access to the kinds ofdata that too often are unavailable.finally, as the reasons for creating large health databases mount, so do thepossibilities that such databases (or, more correctly, their users) will do harm topatients, providers (institutions, physicians, and others), payers (government,private insurers, and corporations), and the public at large. the balance betweenthe advantages of such databases and their potential for harm, or at leastunfairness, to some groups is not yet clear, and the question of whether and howsuch entities ought to evolve has not been explored.recently, diverse groups of researchers, business leaders, andpolicymakers at state and regional levels have begun to develop databasesintended to overcome some of the problems cited above and to permitincreasingly sophisticated analyses of community health needs, practicepatterns, costs, and quality of care. the interests that have prompted such actioncover a broad range: the need to control business costs attributable to healthbenefits, the desire to use technological and computer applications to decreaseadministrative costs of processing insurance claims, the wish of experiencedhealth services researchers to exploit the potential of health databases toevaluate and improve health care, the responsibility of community leaders toplan expansion and contraction of health care facilities and services across thenation, and the need to transmit medical history information for an increasinglymobile population.coincident with these interests are the greatly enhanced electroniccapabilities for data management in many aspects of daily life. comprehensivecomputerbased health data files can be easily linked and information fromthose files moved instantaneously. many observers believe that an unparalleledopportunity exists to apply computer technologies creatively tosummary2health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.address many of the informational needs and data problems noted above. thereport focuses on steps that might be taken to foster such action and progressthrough what the iom committee terms health database organizations.the committee uses health database organization (hdo) to refer toentities that have access to (and possibly control of) databases and a primarymission to publicly release data and the results of analyses done on thedatabases under their control. although such entities do not yet exist, many aremoving forcefully toward implementation. prototypical hdos have severalcharacteristics; they operate under a single, common authority; acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sources andput their databases to multiple uses; have files containing personidentified or personidentifiable data; serve a specific, defined geographic area; have inclusive population files; have comprehensive data with elements that include administrative,clinical, health status, and satisfaction information; anipulate data electronically; and support electronic access for realtime use.for maximum accountability, protection, and control over access to personidentifiable data, hdos will need an organizational structure, a corporate orlegal existence, and a physical location. the value of hdos and their databasesmight be said to be the timely provision of reliable and valid information toaddress all the major questions in health care delivery facing the nation todayand in the coming years. the prospect of creating these entities has raisednumerous issues, including (1) worries on the part of health care providers andclinicians about use or misuse of the information hdos will compile andrelease, and (2) alarm on the part of consumers, patients, and their physiciansabout how well the privacy and confidentiality of personal health informationwill be guarded.institute of medicine studyin early 1992 the iom appointed a study committee to address theseissues. the project took place during the 18 months before the clintonadministration introduced its health security act in the fall of 1993; it wasneither designed nor intended to reflect specifics of that or any of the otherhealth care reform proposals that were debated beginning in late 1993. thestudy committee consisted of 16 individuals with expertise in administration ofmedical centers and academic health centers, the practice of medisummary3health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cine, administration of large (nonhealth) corporations, health insurance,utilization management, use of large administrative and research databases forresearch purposes, consumer services, health and privacy law, ethics, datasecurity, informatics, and state health data organizations. in addition to meetingwith experts in these areas and reviewing the literature, the committeeconducted five major site visits; it met with groups developing hdos inbusiness coalitions and other organizations, practicing physicians andrepresentatives of local medical societies, insurers and thirdparty claimsadministrators, health maintenance organizations, consumers, hospitaladministrators and hospital associations, researchers, state and county healthofficials, employers, and computer system developers. at the conclusion of thestudy, the report underwent formal external review following the procedures ofthe national research council and the iom.the iom committee took as a given that a variety of hdos were beingcreated and moving into operational phases and focused on two primary issues.the first is public release of descriptive and evaluative data on the costs,quality, and other attributes of health care institutions, practitioners, and otherproviders. the second involves the risks to and opportunities for protecting theprivacy and confidentiality of data that do (or may) identify individuals in theirrole as patients or consumers, not as clinicians or providers.uses and users of information in hdoschapter 2 examines users and uses of hdo data and issues related to dataquality. the major users of hdos include health care provider organizationsand practitioners, patients, their families, community residents, academic andresearch organizations, payers and purchasers, employers, health agencies, andothers. the committee emphasizes that hdos ought not necessarily to satisfyall such claimants. it does acknowledge, however, that the mere existence of adatabase creates new demands for access and new users and uses.consequently, those who establish health databases and hdos may be creatingsomething for which the end uses cannot always be anticipated. large databasessuch as those maintained by hdos will be dynamic; in the committee's view,policies regarding access to those databases should, therefore, be based on firmprinciples that are flexible enough to accommodate unavoidable changes andunanticipated uses.databasesa database is "a large collection of data in a computer, organized so that itcan be expanded, updated, and retrieved rapidly for various uses." althoughdatabases may eventually be linked (or linkable) to primary medisummary4health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cal records held by health care practitioners, the report addresses databasescomposed of secondary records that are generated subsequent to the primaryrecord or that are separate from any patient encounter. they are not intended tobe the major source of information about specific patients for the treatingphysician. the committee was particularly interested in linked databases thathave, at a minimum, two specific characteristics: (1) their linking involvesmovement of health data outside the care setting in which they have beengenerated and (2) they include personidentified or personidentifiable data.key attributes of databasesin reviewing the considerable variation in databases that might beaccessed, controlled, or acquired by hdos, the committee sought a simple wayto characterize them by key attributes. it selected two critical dimensions ofdatabases: comprehensiveness and inclusiveness.comprehensiveness. comprehensiveness describes the completeness ofrecords about patient care events. it refers to the amount of information one hason an individual both for each patient encounter with the health care system andfor all of a patient's encounters over time.inclusiveness. inclusiveness refers to which populations in a geographicarea are included in a database. the more inclusive a database, the more itapproaches coverage of 100 percent of the population that its developers intendto include. databases that aim to provide information on the health of thecommunity ought to have an enumeration of all residents of the community(e.g., metropolitan area, state) so that the information accurately reflects theentire population of the region, regardless of insurance category. conversely,inclusiveness is reduced when membership is restricted to certain subgroups orwhen individuals expected to be in the database are missing.databases may be (and often are) designed to include only subsets of theentire population of a geographic area. the potential benefits of the database,however, will increase as the database moves toward being inclusive of theentire population of a defined geographic area.other characteristics of databasesthe more comprehensive and inclusive they are, the more databasesfacilitate detailed and sophisticated uses. in turn, these attributes entail bothgreater anticipated benefits and possible harms. factors determining themagnitude of either benefits or harms can depend on several properties ofdatabases in addition to comprehensiveness and inclusiveness. among the moreimportant characteristics are linkage over time; the accuracy andsummary5health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.completeness of data; whether the databases are under public and privatesector control; and their origin (e.g., hospital discharge abstracts, selfcompletedquestionnaires from patients, insurance claims, computerbased pharmacy files,computerbased patient records).for purposes of this report, personidentified data contain pieces ofinformation or facts that singly or collectively refer to one person and permitpositive (or probable) identification of that individual. an obvious piece ofidentifying information is an individual's name. other identifiers may bebiometric, such as a fingerprint, a retinal print, or a dna pattern. thecommittee uses personidentifiable to characterize information that definitely orprobably can be said to refer to a specific person. it includes items ofinformation (e.g., the fact of a physician visit on a given day) that will allowidentification of an individual when combined with other facts (e.g., zip code ofresidence, date of birth, or gender). to render data nonpersonidentifiable,some data managers convert facts to a more general form before releasing thosedata to others. concerns with personidentifiable data arise because of theability of computers to combine and crossmatch data in various databases. it isthus the more inclusive of these terms.throughout its discussions, the committee focused on regional databasesšthose that pertain to a defined population of individuals living in, or receivinghealth care in, some specifiable geographic area. farthinking experts envisiona time when regional entities will be linked across the nation, even if theirgovernance and operations remain close to home; this creates the very longrange view of a national health data repository (operated by either a singleorganization or a consortium of regional or state entities) as a federation offunctionally linked databases from all regions of the country. some proposedand developing hdo models are based on state legislation that requiressubmission of health data to a public agency. other models are based onvoluntary community cooperation and may be based on provider or localbusiness coalitions.ensuring the quality of datathe real rewards from the development and operation of hdos willdepend heavily on the quality of their data, which must be reliable and valid fortheir intended purposes. developers must ensure that the data in their systemsare of high enough quality that analyses can be done in a credible, defensiblemanner. success in meeting this responsibility will call for attention to thereliability, completeness, and accuracy of the data. although the federalgovernment may have to take the lead in standards development and improvedcoding systems, the committee urges hdos to encourage and work towardnational standards for coding and definitions for core data elements. finally, thebasic structure and content of these databases oughtsummary6health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to be carefully designed from the beginning, but they must have sufficientcapacity for expansion and change to accommodate the health care sector as itevolves in coming years.to address these issues, the committee recommends that hdos takeresponsibility for assuring data quality on an ongoing basis and, in particular,take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) the completeness and accuracy of the datain the databases for which they are responsible and (2) the validity of data foranalytic purposes for which they are used (recommendation 2.1, see box sl).the absence of sufficient clinical information in most databases todayleads investigators to acquire needed information through manual abstraction ofrelevant information in hospital records, but this approach is costly and timeconsuming. some means are needed to obtain this information more directlyfrom patient records. the best method of enhancing the comprehensiveness ofhdo databases and the accuracy and completeness of data elements is to movetoward a computerbased patient record (cpr). this is admittedly a dauntingtask. accordingly, the committee recommends that hdos support andcontribute to regional and national efforts to create computerbased patientrecords (recommendation 2.2) including the development and adoption ofrelevant standards.box si committee recommendationsrecommendation 2.1 accuracy and completenessto address these issues, the committee recommends that healthdatabase organizations take responsibility for assuring data quality on anongoing basis and, in particular, take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) thecompleteness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which theyare responsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for whichthey are used.part 2 of this recommendation applies to analyses that hdosconduct. they cannot, of course, police the validity of data when used byothers for purposes over which the hdos have no a priori control.recommendation 2.2 computerbased patient recordaccordingly, the committee recommends that health databaseorganizations support and contribute to regional and national efforts tocreate computerbased patient records.summary7health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 3.1 conducting providerspecificevaluationsthe committee recommends that health database organizationsproduce and make publicly available appropriate and timely summaries,analyses, and multivariate analyses of all or pertinent parts of theirdatabases. more specifically, the committee recommends that healthdatabase organizations regularly produce and publish results of providerspecific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care.recommendation 3.2 describing analytic methodsthe committee recommends that a health database organizationreport the following for any analysis it releases publicly:ł general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of their data; a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files andof the variables in each file used in the analyses; information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables used inthe analyses.recommendation 3.3 minimizing potential harmthe committee recommends that, to enhance the fairness andminimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of evaluativestudies that identify individual providers, each hdo should adhere to twoprinciples as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) to makeavailable to and upon request supply to institutions, practitioners, orproviders identified in an analysis all data required to perform anindependent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysisprior to public release of the hdo results; and (2) to accompanypublication of its own analyses with notice of the existence and availabilityof responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanation of thefindings.recommendation 3.4 advocacy of data release:promoting wide applications of healthrelated datato foster the presumed benefits of widespread applications of hdodata, the committee recommends that health database organizationsshould release nonpersonidentifiable data upon request to other entitiesonce those data are in analyzable form. this policy should include releaseto any organization that meets the following criteria: it has a public mission statement indicating that promoting public healthor the release of information to the public is a major goal. it enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentiality andintegrity of data.summary8health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. it agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any otherindividual or organization. it agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.the committee also recommends, as a related matter, that healthdatabase organizations make public their own policies governing therelease of data.recommendation 4.1 preemptive legislationthe committee recommends that the u.s. congress move to enactpreemptive legislation that will: establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for personidentifiable health data andspecify a code of fair health information practices that ensures aproper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patientprivacy; impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate; provide for enforcement by the government and permit privateaggrieved parties to sue; establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be adefense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and exempt health database organizations from public health reporting lawsand compulsory process with respect to personidentifiable health dataexcept for compulsory process initiated by record subjects.recommendation 4.2 data protection unitsthe committee recommends that health database organizationsestablish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate andimplement information policies concerning the acquisition anddissemination of information and establish whatever administrativemechanism is required to implement these policies. such anadministrative unit or board should: promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection andanalyses based on such data; develop and implement policies that protect the confidentiality of allpersonidentifiable information, consistent with other policies of theorganization and relevant state and federal law; develop and disseminate educational materials for the general publicthat will describe in understandable terms the analyses and theirinterpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and theprotections accorded their data by the organization;summary9health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. develop and implement security practices in the manual and automateddata processing and storage systems of the organization; and develop and implement a comprehensive employee training programthat includes instruction concerning the protection of personidentifiabledata.recommendation 4.3 release of personidentified datathe committee recognizes that there must be release of patientidentified data related to the processing of health insurance claims. thecommittee recommends, however, that a health database organization notrelease personidentifiable information in any other circumstances exceptthe following: to other hdos whose missions are compatible with and whoseconfidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as theirown; to individuals for information about themselves; to parents for information about a minor child except when suchrelease is prohibited by law; to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information aboutthe patient; to researchers with approval from their institution's properly constitutedinstitutional review board; to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients inlifethreatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care isrendered; and to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (nonlifethreatening) situations, but only with the informed consent of the patient.otherwise, the committee recommends that health databaseorganizations not authorize access to, or release of, information onindividuals with or without informed consent.recommendation 4.4. restricting employer accessthe committee recommends that employers not be permitted torequire receipt of an individual's data from a health database organizationas a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits.public disclosure of data on health careproviders and practitionerschapter 3 examines public disclosure of data on health care practitionersand providers and presents recommendations about how hdos can ensure thatsuch analyses are fair to those identified and to the public.summary10health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hdos are presumed to have two major capabilities. one is the ability toamass credible descriptive information and evaluative data on costs, quality,and costeffectiveness for hospitals, physicians, and other health care facilities,agencies, and providers. the other is the capacity to analyze data to generateknowledge and then to make that knowledge available for purposes ofcontrolling the costs and improving the quality of health carešthat is, ofobtaining value for health care dollars spent. the committee characterizes theactivities that hdos might pursue to accomplish these goals as publicdisclosure, defined as the timely communication, or publication anddissemination, of certain kinds of information to the public at large. the aimsare to improve the public's understanding about health care issues generally andto help consumers select providers of health care.the committee stance favoring public disclosure takes two forms. one isthat the hdos ought themselves to carry out some minimum number ofconsumeroriented studies and analyses and publish them routinely. the other isthat hdos must make appropriate data available for others to use in suchstudies and analyses, where the expectation is that the results of such work willbe publicly disclosed.acceptance of hdo activities and products relating to public disclosureover time will depend in part on the balance struck for fairness to patients, thepublic in general, payers, and health care providers. fairness to patientsinvolves protecting their privacy and the confidentiality of information aboutthem. fairness to the public involves distributing the accurate and reliableinformation needed to make informed decisions about providers and health careinterventions. finally, fairness to providers entails ensuring that data andanalyses are reliable, valid, and impartial, giving providers some opportunity toconfirm data and methods before information is released to the public, andfinding some means of publishing their perspectives when it is released.key factors in public disclosurepublic disclosure is acceptable only when it (1) involves information andanalytic results that come from studies that have been well conducted, (2) isbased on data that can be shown to be reliable and valid for the purposes athand, and (3) is accompanied by appropriate educational material.several elements are crucial to successful public disclosure of healthrelated information. among the more significant are topics of analysis (e.g.,hospitalspecific death rates) and who is identified in such releases (e.g., healthplans, institutional providers, and individual practitioners). the full reportexplores these matters in some detail.in the committee's view, disclosure of information about larger aggresummary11health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gations of health care providers, such as hospitals, will generally be less proneto cause undeserved losses of reputation, income, or career than disclosure ofinformation on specific individual practitioners. the committee takes theposition that public disclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to the extent that it iscarried out with due attention to accuracy and clarity and does not underminethe quality assurance and quality improvement (qa/qi) programs that healthcare institutions and organizations conduct internally.analyses and disclosure of resultsthe committee recommends that hdos produce and make publiclyavailable appropriate and timely summaries, analyses, and multivariate analysesof all or pertinent parts of their databases. more specifically, the committeerecommends that hdos regularly produce and publish results of providerspecific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care(recommendation 3.1).the subjects of such analyses should include hospitals, health maintenanceorganizations, and other capitated systems; feeforservice group practices of allsorts; physicians, dentists, podiatrists, nursepractitioners, or other independentpractitioners; longtermcare facilities; and other health providers on whom thehdos maintain reliable and valid information.the intended audience for publication or disclosure is the public, notsimply member or sponsoring organizations. some hdos may be based in theprivate sector, operate chiefly for the benefit of forprofit entities, and have noconnection with or mandate from states or the federal government. in thesecases, the imperative to make information and analytic results available to thepublic on a broad scale is less clear. in the committee's view, however, thecharters and bylaws of such hdos ought to include firm commitments toconduct consumeroriented studies, and where state legislation is used toestablish hdos or similar entities (e.g., data commissions), the enablingstatutes themselves should contain such requirements. if public funds are usedto support the development of hdos, public release of analyses should berequired as a condition of funding.describing analytic methodsthe committee recommends that an hdo report the following for anyanalysis it releases publicly: general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of data; a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files andof the variables in each file used in the analyses;summary12health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables used inthe analyses (recommendation 3.2).the committee expects hdos to accompany public disclosure of providerspecific information with clear descriptions of the database (includingdocumentation of its completeness, accuracy, and data sources), of methods ofrisk adjustment, and of appropriate uses by the public, payers, and governmentof the data and analysesšincluding notice of those uses of data and analysesthat are not valid.minimizing potential harmsthe committee has taken a strong prodisclosure stance towardcomparative, evaluative data. disclosure proponents assume that such studieswill be done responsibly, and the public has every right to expect that to be thecase. the committee sees some potential for harm in public release ofcomparative or evaluative studies on costs, quality, or other measures of healthcare delivery, however, and did not wish to rely solely on marketplacecorrectives; it believes that a more protective stance is needed. to enhance thefairness and minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication ofevaluative studies that identify individual providers, the committee recommendsthat each hdo should adhere to two principles as a standard procedure prior topublication: (1) to make available to and upon request supply to institutions,practitioners, or providers identified in an analysis all data required to performan independent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysisprior to public release of the hdo results; and (2) to accompany publication ofits own analyses with notice of the existence and availability of responsiblechallenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanations of the findings(recommendation 3.3). feedback from providers may reveal problems withdata quality and study methods that hdos would want to remedy. this set ofrecommendations reflects what might be regarded as a fairness doctrine.releasing datahdos might well serve as a major repository of data that will beaccessible to other groups. to foster the presumed benefits of widespreadapplications of hdo data, the committee recommends that hdos shouldrelease nonpersonidentifiable data upon request to other entities once thosedata are in analyzable form. this policy should include release to anyorganization that meets the following criteria:summary13health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. it has a public mission statement indicating that promoting publichealth or the release of information to the public is a major goal. it enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentialityand integrity of data. it agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any otherindividual or organization. it agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.the committee also recommends, as a related matter, that hdos makepublic their own policies governing the release of data (recommendation 3.4).strengthening quality assurance and qualityimprovement programs through data feedbackhdos could help to improve the quality of health care through directassistance to health care institutions, facilities, and clinical groups by makingavailable to providers and practitioners the data for or results of evaluativestudies of their services and those of their peers.the committee assumed such an activity would occur chiefly as a part ofor as an adjunct to a formal qa/qi process that providers and plans mightconduct. information on identified providers and individual clinicians would bemade available to organizations' qa/qi programs so that they could takeconstructive action.some readers may think that a tension will exist between public disclosureand such feedback for internal use, but the committee believes that both will beimportant tools available to hdos to improve quality and foster informedchoices in health care. thus, it voices support for both functions, in the beliefthat one activity does notšor at least need notšdiscredit the other and thateffective combination strategies can be designed.confidentiality and privacy of personal datachapter 4 of the iom report examines privacy, confidentiality, andsecurity of information about individuals or patientsšwhat this committeerefers to as personidentified or personidentifiable data.two somewhat distinct trends have led to increased access to the primaryhealth record and subsequent concerns about privacy. one has to do withprimary health records, however they are created and maintained, and the otherinvolves health records stored electronically.the increasing complexity of health care and the involvement of greaternumbers of individuals in health care delivery has resulted in ever more peopleaccessing the health record to deliver and document care. the prisummary14health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mary health record serves many purposes beyond direct health care, and manyparties external to the healing relationship seek personidentified information.of particular concern is the confidentiality of health information that is storedelectronically; the aggregation of information on individuals from diversedatabases will make computerbased health data increasingly valuable and inneed of protection from unauthorized access.existing ethical, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentialityand privacy of personal health data offer some confidentiality safeguards, butmajor gaps and limitations remain. the committee's recommendations areintended to strengthen current protections for confidentiality and privacy ofhealthrelated data, particularly for information acquired by hdos.privacy and privacy rightsthe most general and common view of privacy conveys notions ofwithdrawal, seclusion, secrecy, or of being kept away from public view, butwith no pejorative overtones. in public policy generally, and in health policy inparticular, privacy takes on a special meaning, namely, that of informationalprivacy, ''a state or condition of controlled access to personal information."informational privacy is infringed, by definition, whenever another party hasaccess to one's personal information by reading, listening, or using any of theother senses. such loss of privacy may be entirely acceptable and intended bythe individual, or it may be inadvertent, unacceptable, and even unknown to theindividual.this definition of privacy thus reflects two underlying notions. first,privacy in general and informational privacy in particular are always matters ofdegree. rarely is anyone in a condition of complete physical or informationalinaccessibility to others, nor would they wish to remain so. second, althoughinformational privacy may be valuable and deserving of protection, manythoughtful privacy advocates argue that it does not, in itself, have moralsignificance or inherent value.nonetheless, informational privacy has value for all in our society, and itaccordingly has special claims on our attention. the most salient federalprotections for privacy are the principles of fair information practices embodiedin the privacy act of 1974. the act addresses the right to know about,challenge, control, and correct information about oneself in federal governmentdatabases.privacy rightsno explicit right to privacy is guaranteed by the constitution of the unitedstates. the presumed right as the basis of a civil action is based onsummary15health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.legal opinion written by justice louis d. brandeis in 1890, and itsconstitutional status derives from various amendments to the bill of rights. theconstitution generally has not provided strong protection for the confidentialityof individual health care information; the constitutional protection forinformational privacy is very limited and derived from case law interpreting theconstitution.to assert a right is to make a special kind of claim. rights designate someinterests of the individual that are sufficiently important to hold others under aduty to promote and protect, sometimes even at the expense of maximizing oreven achieving the social good. two interests are widely cited as providing themoral justification for privacy rights: the individual's interest in autonomy andthe instrumental value that privacy may have in promoting other valuablehuman goods.whether hdos can achieve their potential for good in the face of theirpossible impact on privacy will likely turn on the interplay of threeconsiderations. first, to what extent do hdos provide important (and perhapsirreplaceable) health care benefits to the regions in which they operate, andperhaps to the nation? second, how will adequate privacy safeguards beincorporated into the hdos? third, do the societal benefits resulting from theimplementation of hdos outweigh the privacy risks?there cannot be much doubt that hdos will serve legitimate societalinterests. nevertheless, because hdos will represent one of the morecomprehensive and sensitive automated personal record databases yetestablished, the system inevitably implicates interests protected byinformational privacy principles.confidentialityconfidentiality relates to disclosure or nondisclosure of information.historically, a duty to honor confidentiality has arisen with respect toinformation disclosed in the context of a relationship such as that between aphysician and a patient. when one is concerned about data disclosure, whetheror not any relationship exists between a data subject and a data holder, anessential construct is that of data confidentiality. it is the status accorded dataindicating that they are protected and must be treated as such.exceptions to confidentiality requirements are widely acknowledged.situations exist in which sensitive health information about individuals must bedisclosed to third parties. such reporting requirements are justified by society'sneed for information. examples include mandatory reporting of communicablediseases and gunshot wounds. physicians and other health professionals mayalso be required to divulge personal health information under legal "compulsoryprocess," which may take the form of subpoenas or discovery requests enforcedby court order.summary16health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the most important exception to the rule of confidentiality, however, isthat of disclosure authorized by consent of a patient or a patient representativein the course of applying for insurance, employment, or reimbursement formedical claims. such disclosure may or may not be justifiable and acceptable topatients. in such a case, however, consent cannot be truly voluntary orinformed. such authorizations are often not voluntary because the patient feelscompelled to sign the authorization or forego the benefit sought, and they arenot informed because the patient cannot know in advance what information willbe in the record, who will subsequently have access to it, or how it will be used.although such consent procedures are a necessary adjunct to other autonomyprotections, this committee generally does not regard these procedures assufficient in themselves to protect sensitive information from inappropriatedisclosure.legal and ethical confidentiality obligations are the same whether healthrecords are kept on paper or computerbased media. current laws, however,have significant weaknesses. first, and very important, the degree to whichconfidentiality is required under current law varies according to the holder ofthe information and the type of information held.second, legal obligations of confidentiality often vary widely within asingle state and from state to state, making it difficult to ascertain the legalobligations that a given hdo will have, particularly if it operates in a multistatearea. these statebystate and intrastate variations and inconsistencies inprivacy and confidentiality laws are well established among thoseknowledgeable about health care records law; they are worrisome because somehdos will routinely transmit data across state lines.third, current laws offer individuals little real protection againstredisclosure of their confidential health information to unauthorized recipientsfor a number of reasons. once patients have consented to an initial disclosure ofinformation (for example, to obtain insurance reimbursement), they have lostcontrol of further disclosure. information disclosed for one purpose may beused for unrelated purposes without the subject's knowledge or consent. suchredisclosure practices represent a yawning gap in confidentiality protection.as a practical matter, policing redisclosure of one's personal healthinformation is difficult and may be impossible. at a minimum, such policingrequires substantial resources and commitment. with the use of computer andtelecommunications networks, an individual may never discover that aparticular disclosure has occurred, even though he or she suffers significantharmšsuch as inability to obtain employment, credit, housing, or insuranceasa result of such disclosure. pursuing legal remedies may result in additionaldisclosure of the individual's private health information.further, federal law may preempt state confidentiality requirements orprotections without imposing new ones. for example, the employmentsummary17health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.retirement insurance security act (erisa) preempts some state insurancelaws with respect to employers' selfinsured health plans, yet erisa is silent onconfidentiality obligations.last, enforcing rights through litigation is costly, and money damages maynot provide adequate redress for the harm done by the improper disclosure.securityin the context of health record information, confidentiality impliescontrolled access to and protection against unauthorized access to, modificationof, or destruction of health data. in computerbased or computercontrolledsystems, security is implemented when a defined system functions in a definedoperational environment, serves a defined set of users, contains prescribed dataand operational programs, has defined network connections and interactionswith other systems, and incorporates safeguards to protect the system against adefined threat to the system, its resources, and its data.two consequences flow from defining data as sensitive and needingprotection. first, those data must be made secure; second, access must becontrolled. access control can be operationalized by hdo planners andlegislators in a form that this committee would term "informationuse policy." itleads to policymaking about who may be allowed to use healthrelatedinformation and how they may use it. it might also include consideration ofwhether some data should be collected at all.in a study that focuses on the protection of healthrelated data aboutindividuals, defining which items are healthrelated is more difficult than onemight initially think. any data element in medical records, and many data itemsfrom other records, could be considered either healthrelated or sensitive, orboth. in considering the actions of hdos, this committee proceeds from anassumption that all information concerning an individual and any transactionsrelating directly or indirectly to health care that hdos access or maintain asdatabases must be regarded as potentially requiring privacy protections.a national identification system or dossierhdos may be perceived as enabling the development of a nationalidentification system or dossier. privacy advocates can be expected to expressacute concern about the potential for hdos to be linked not only with oneanother, but, more importantly, with government databases and with otherpersonal databases such as the financial, credit, and lifestyle databasesmaintained by consumer reporting agencies. the committee believes that hdoproponents should take every practicable step, includingsummary18health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.those recommended by the committee, to assure that hdos will not contributeto the development of a national identification database.personal identifiers and the social security numberthe personal identifier (id) that is used in an hdo to "label" each of theindividuals on whom it keeps data is a crucial issue. it not only is related to pastpractices, but it will also be strongly influenced, if not mandated, by the healthcare reform actions now under way in the nation.an "ideal" identifierthe choice of a personal id that is satisfactory for the operational needs ofhealth care delivery but at the same time assures the confidentiality of medicaldata and the privacy of individuals is neither easy nor casual. an ideal identifierwould meet the requirements described in detail in the report. superficially, thechoice would be the social security number (ssn), medicare number, orsomething similar simply because people are accustomed to using them,systems are used to handling them, and the government would bear the burdenof administering the enumeration system and the cost of assigning newnumbers. the ssn has many faults, however, that are familiar to researchersand privacy experts. perhaps the most salient of these is that if the ssn were tobecome the id for health care delivery, linkage of medical records to all theother databases would become easy.the most problematic objection to the ssn as a medical id is that it has nolegal protection, and because its use is so widespread, there is no chance ofretroactively giving it such protection. as a data element, it is not characterizedby law as confidential; hence, organizations holding it are under no legalrequirement to protect it or to limit the ways in which it is used. its use is for allpractical purposes unconstrained, and this makes the risk of commingling healthdata with all other forms of personal data and an individual's actions extremelyhigh. major privacy risks arise when medical information is used in decisionsunrelated to health care, such as employment, promotion, and eligibility forinsurance or other benefits. further, access by unauthorized users would be verymuch simpler because the ssn is so readily available.relevance to hdos of existing laws on confidentiality andprivacythe committee examined existing lawšconstitutional, statutory, andcommon lawšfor its relevance to hdos and its adequacy for protectingsummary19health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.patient privacy and confidentiality. the committee also examined the way theselaws might affect the design, establishment, and operation of hdos.it concludes that most of this body of law is unlikely to apply to hdos.with the exception of laws that regulate certain information consideredsensitive, existing laws regulate recordkeepers and their recordkeepingpractices; they do not regulate on the basis of either the content or the subjectmatter of a record.recommendations regarding protection of patient andpersonidentifiable datagiven (1) the unprecedented comprehensiveness and inclusiveness ofinformation expected to be in hdo databases, (2) the generally scanty andinconsistent legal protections across geopolitical jurisdictions, and (3) thecurrent public interest in and concern about privacy protections, the committeebelieves that hdos have both an obligation and an opportunity to fashion welldelineated privacy protection programs that will also foster the realization ofhdo goals. some of these protections, such as the establishment of dataprotection boards and organizational policies regarding security and accesscontrol, can be implemented in the short term. others, such as passage offederal preemptive legislation, will likely require longerterm efforts.preemptive legislationthe committee recommends that the u.s. congress move to enactpreemptive legislation that will: establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for personidentifiable health data andspecify a code of fair health information practices that ensures aproper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patientprivacy; impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate; provide for enforcement by the government and permit privateaggrieved parties to sue; establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be adefense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and exempt health database organizations from public health reporting lawsand compulsory process with respect to personidentifiable health dataexcept for compulsory process initiated by record subjects(recommendation 4.1).summary20health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the last item, the committee believes that both processesšpublic healthreporting and responding to compulsory process such as subpoenasšshouldremain the responsibility of the provider, as is now the case.the committee concludes that federal preemptive legislation is required toestablish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for health data about individuals. it further advisesthat congress enact such legislation, including a code of fair healthinformation practices, as soon as possible. at a minimum, federal legislationshould establish a floor and allow states or hdos to implement more stringentstandards so that stateimposed safeguards are not weakened.although current state protections often apply duties of confidentiality tothe recordkeeper (e.g., the hospital), such protection is no longer in effect oncethe data have left the recordkeeper's control. this means that health data can bedeprived of legal protection unless such protection is specified by another law;furthermore, such protection is likely to be left to the discretion of organizationsor individuals who acquire such information as secondary data. that is littleshelter indeed. therefore, legislation should clearly establish that theconfidentiality of personidentifiable data is a property afforded to the dataelements themselves, regardless of who holds those data. proper preemptivelegislation should also provide for enforcement by government officials andaggrieved private parties. it should also impose penalties for violations of theact. it will be important that the legislation clarify whether individuals havestanding to bring suit.federal legislation can be expected to encourage standard setting in suchareas as connectivity and transmissions standards. standard setting is a majorobstacle to the development of automated medical records and will be no less aproblem for hdos. thus, the committee sees the route of federal legislation asone more mechanism for addressing this problem for all computerbasedsystems that deal with health data.data protection unitshdos will need clear and enforceable, written organizational policies andprocedures in several areas: informing patients of their rights regarding theirown data; protecting medical information and materials; ensuring the accuracyof data; and verifying compliance with their policies. members of the publicshould be able to request and receive clearly written materials describing thesepolicies. although precise policies cannot be written to cover every eventuality,they must be broad enough to address the most common situations, such astypes of data and potential requestors. organizations should also makeconsiderable efforts to educate (and reeducate) staff, the public, and potentialrequestors about these policies. thus, the committee recommends that hdosestablish a responsible administrativesummary21health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.unit or board to promulgate information policies concerning the acquisition anddissemination of information and to establish whatever administrativemechanism is required to implement these policies. such an administrative unitor board specifically should: promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection andanalyses based on such data; develop and implement policies that protect the confidentiality of allpersonidentifiable information, consistent with other policies of theorganization and relevant state and federal law; develop and disseminate educational materials for the general publicthat will describe in understandable terms the analyses and theirinterpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and theprotections accorded their data by the organization; develop and implement security practices in the manual and automateddata processing and storage systems of the organization; and develop and implement a comprehensive employee training programthat includes instruction concerning the protection of personidentifiable data (recommendation 4.2).the commitment to protection of confidentiality of the governing body andexecutives of the hdo will be critical, and these objectives should be writteninto the organization's bylaws. the committee strongly advises that hdo policyboards include in their policies and procedures fair health information practices.any hdo should consider these practices as the foundation of its privacyframework and depart from them only after careful consideration andexplanation.legislation and organizational policies have sometimes distinguishedamong levels of sensitivity of various elements of healthrelated data, based onthe belief that it is possible to identify categories of data that warrant specialprotection. despite precedent for adopting such a stance, this committee hasdecided otherwise. it has concluded that a given data element cannot always bedesignated reliably as inherently sensitive; rather, the sensitivity of datadepends on the kinds of harm to which individuals are or believe themselves tobe vulnerable if the information were known to others. such assessments coulddiffer dramatically from one person to another, one circumstance to another,one place to another, and over time as cultural attitudes change. rather thanrecommending special protections for certain categories of data, the committeeprefers that all data accessed by hdos be afforded stringent, and essentiallyequal, protection.summary22health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.release of personidentified datapolicies relating to access and disclosureclearly, the question of who outside the hdo has access to what data, andunder what circumstances, is supremely important and is the essence of theprivacy issue from the patient's point of view. the committee takes up thesematters in a series of recommendations (presented below) that refer to personidentified or personidentifiable information only. as discussed earlier in thissummary, the committee recommends release and disclosure of nonpersonidentifiable information that protects patient identity but that provides reliable,valid, timely, and useful descriptive and evaluative information on a full rangeof health care providers and clinicians.the committee recognizes that there must be release of patientidentifieddata related to the processing of health insurance claims. the committeerecommends, however, that a health database organization not release personidentifiable information in other circumstances except the following: to other hdos whose missions are compatible with and whoseconfidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as theirown; to individuals for information about themselves; to parents for information about a minor child except when such releaseis prohibited by law; to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information aboutthe patient; to researchers with approval from their institution's properly constitutedinstitutional review board; to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients inlifethreatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care isrendered; and to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (nonlifethreatening) situations, but only with the informed consent of the patient.otherwise, the committee recommends that health database organizationsnot authorize access to, or release of, personidentifiable information with orwithout informed consent (recommendation 4.3).in the last item, the committee has specifically recommended that consentfor access to the database be a necessary and sufficient condition in only onecircumstance: when needed by the treating practitioner in nonlifethreateningsituation. in such a situation it will be important that specific consentmechanisms be in place. otherwise, the committee believes thatsummary23health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.informed consent should not be required for release of personidentifiableinformation in six situations as described below.first, hdos will need to acquire information about outofarea careprovided to persons in their databases and should be able to do so. second,hdos also ought to release personidentifiable data without requiring consentwhen individuals seek information about themselves. the third and fourth casesabove reflect the need to care for minors and persons who are legallyincompetent to give consent for themselves.the fifth case concerns researchers with approval from relevant humansubjects committees or institutional review boards (irbs). in this case, personidentified information is not being sought by a patient or for care of a patient,but to conduct studies that are regarded as being in the public's interest. suchuses of the databases are considered by this committee to be central and vital tothe effective implementation of hdos.the sixth case involves treatment of licensed practitioners with a need toknow in lifethreatening situations, whom the committee believes also ought tobe able to access data about a patient. this requires that the patient be unable toconsent at the time care is rendered.the seventh casešthe release of data to licensed practitioners whentreating patients in all other (nonlifethreatening) situations, but only with theinformed consent of the patientšis the only case in which the committee hasrecommended the use of informed consent to release of personidentifiableinformation. such a circumstance might occur when a treating physician wishesto access the hdo database in addition to the medical records he or she keeps.for example, information on medications prescribed by other practitionersmight be pertinent. in such cases, the treating practitioner should obtain explicitconsent of the patient. as discussed earlier, consent might be givenelectronically and might be time limited.finally, the committee recommends above that hdos not authorize accessto or release of health information on individuals with or without the informedconsent of the individual in any situation or to any requestor other than thosestated above. to ensure that individuals (i.e., patients, parents of minorchildren, or patients' legal representatives) are not placed in an untenablesituation concerning release information, the committee has opted for a positionthat does not rely on consent procedures insofar as most uses or disclosures ofdata are concerned. it prefers to rely on stringent policies against disclosure orrelease of personal information on individuals. the consent proceduresdescribed in this recommendation are for release of information by the hdo.patients will always be able to consent to release of information directly byeach of their care providers.special circumstances exist in the health sector that are of particularconcern to the committee. one involves the current practice of extensiveexchange of medical information between employer and payer with littlesummary24health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.control by providers or patients. this practice has dramatic implications forpatients whose information is accessed by an hdo if the employer and payerare readily able to tap into data in the network. such exchanges of informationcould be especially harmful to patients because the information exchangedcould cover all encounters the patient has with the health care system (not justthose covered by insurance or by the employer's health plan). the committeeacknowledges the danger and inappropriateness of these practices and regardedthem as sufficiently worrisome that it recommends that employers not bepermitted to require receipt of an individual's data from a health databaseorganization as a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits(recommendation 4.4).universal personidentifiersthe committee believes that unique individual personidentifiers areessential to facilitate the efficient operation and data interchange of hdos. thecommittee also recognizes that there are strong arguments against the ssnbeing used as the unique identifier. the great majority of the committee agreedon the need for a new unique identifier on the grounds that the ssn offers toomany opportunities to breach confidentiality. the creation of a new numberwould (1) permit legislative protection of that number, (2) offer the possibilityof providing greater protection for health information than is possible with thessn, and (3) likely occur at the time of implementation of universal health carecoverage, which will, if enacted, require some scheme for unique identification.the futurelittle is yet known about how hdos will function, what their likelybenefits will be, or how they will evolve over time. in emphasizing the use ofaggregated health information, the clinton administration's health reformproposal has put the issue of confidentiality squarely on the agenda. what is notknown is which uses of health care information will be acceptable and willwisely serve the needs of society. moreover, new uses for and users of data willemerge, some raising new threats to privacy. accordingly, the privacydimension of health care information is dynamic and should be revisited fromtime to time.regional hdos hold tremendous promise for evaluating and improvinghealth care and implementing effective new ways to protect health information.although the great public benefit may be easily understood, the potential forharm or lack of fairness may create concern and fear in many. to gain publicsupport for the vision advanced in this reportšand to ensure the best public useof the healthrelated information that will be releasedšsummary25health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hdos, government agencies, and public and privatesector institutions mustimplement carefully planned strategies for fairness and privacy protection andeducate the public, health care providers, policymakers, and patients about theseprotections. this report is intended to be an early step in that educational andpublic policymaking process.summary26health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionthe bradys have recently moved to capital city from a small town inanother state. according to the family practitioner in their former residence,their young daughter needs heart surgery, and they want to identify a surgeonand hospital with considerable experience and good outcomes to do thesurgery. they need to choose a health plan from among those offered by mr.brady's employer that covers services by these providers. which plan shouldthey choose?mike, a shy threeyearold, has been brought to the attention of themontgomery county protective services unit because of concerns about hisfailure to thrive. he has been living on and off with an aunt. she has no recordsof any previous medical care and no special knowledge of any illnesses. howcan the county caseworker acquire healthrelated information as part of herresponsibilities to manage this case and make recommendations forappropriate referrals?alice johns, an elderly woman who rarely visits any physicians, appears indr. mark's office with fever and other flulike symptoms. dr. mark needs toknow what infectious organisms have been appearing in their community latelyas a guide to treating mrs. johns appropriately on this one examination. howcan he quickly get this information?gerry middlemarch, a health services researcher at state university,introduction27health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.leads a team that is studying treatments for low back pain. they want to know:what are the outcomes for patients who have surgery, who attend pain controlclinics, or receive chiropractic services? how well are these patientsfunctioning? how satisfied are they with their treatment? what have been therelative costs of care?a man in jogging clothes arrives unconscious at the emergency departmentof santa teresa memorial hospital, having been found collapsed at anintersection nearby. who is he? what medications is he taking? is he diabetic?does he have a history of heart disease? is he allergic to any medications?officials in the columbia county department of health must begin to planfor longterm development of health facilities in the area, making the best use oflocal resources, tax revenues, and bonds. in particular, they need to decide:whether to renovate the only community hospital to expand traditional inpatientcare services; whether to shift inpatient beds to rehabilitation and skillednursing beds or to authorize construction of a new nursing home; and whetherto establish additional neighborhood clinics for maternal and child care, toupgrade the emergency medical services system for both adults and children, orto add staff for substance abuse facilities. how can they determine thecommunity's greatest needs now and five to ten years from now, and how canthey calculate the most costeffective use of the county's limited health budget?the tectonic plate manufacturing company, a large employer inironweed city, is facing soaring costs for its health benefit plan. the companyis a somewhat paternalistic one, with a generous health plan, and it does notwant simply to direct its employees to the ''cheapest" hospitals in the area. asthe metropolitan area has many hospitals, which range widely in size, servicesoffered, and reputation, how can the company determine which ones will likelyhave good outcomes with only moderate charges?the local chapter of the national paralysis foundation has a young andenergetic executive vice president who wants to move the organization more inthe direction of outreach and case management and away from simple fundraising. she wants to find better ways to identify children and families to whoma greater range of services might be offered. how can she best target theseefforts in this city of 800,000 as well as in the larger suburban countiessurrounding the city?introduction28health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these vignettes are fiction. yet, every day, across the nation, these andsimilar scenarios play out and each describes a valid and legitimate need formedical information. sometimes the questions are answered quickly andcorrectly. sometimes they are not, especially when no central repository ofinformation or network of data sources exists or can be queried easily. inresponse to this situation, many experts in the health care field share an excitingvision: a communityoriented database or group of linked databases that canaddress all kinds of inquiries about health care matters in a timely andsatisfactory manner.this report from an institute of medicine (iom) study committeeexamines the potential that existing and emerging health databases offer forfulfilling this vision. it gives special attention to appropriate uses of data in suchrepositories and to adequate protections for the privacy and confidentiality ofindividually identifiable information. it concludes that "health databaseorganizations" can play a pivotal role in health care delivery and research butthat they, or other interested parties, will have to take significant steps to ensurethat private information remains private. to promote these ends, the committeeadvances recommendations that are detailed in subsequent chapters. takentogether, the committee's findings, conclusions, and recommendationsunderscore the extreme importance of the ways in which health careinformation is to be controlled and used in the future.advancing the prospects for comprehensivehealth databases and networksthe problemthe desire to understand and improve the performance of the health caresystem begets a need for data to answer the questions that opened this report.this, in turn, motivates proposals for the creation and maintenance ofcomprehensive, populationbased health care databases that can provide suchinformation with ease and reliability. the past quartercentury has already seenan exponential rise in the number, complexity, and sophistication of healthdatabases, yet they do not approach in extent, inclusiveness, or quality thevision offered above.what is the state of health databases today? the databases briefly notedhere illustrate the range of existing databases; chapter 2 discusses selecteddatabases in more detail. among the oldest and best known of the socalledadministrative data sets are those associated with the medicare program,particularly the part a and part b files (for, respectively, inpatient andoutpatient services) and more recent compilations such as the national claimshistory system. all states maintain some form of database for their medicaidprograms; more than twothirds maintain databases on hospitalintroduction29health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discharges, such as the statewide planning and research cooperative system(sparcs) database in new york state; a similar proportion collect informationon emergency medical services (chiefly for prehospital emergency vehicleruns); and more and more states are establishing state databases to supportresearch, policy analysis, and performance of the health care delivery system.as something of a counterpoint to existing databases in the united states,canadian provincial databases, such as those in manitoba, contain informationon virtually all health encounters (inpatient and outpatient) for all persons in theprovince, permitting the analyses contemplated for state databases and by thiscommittee.other databases are maintained by insurers in the private sector; they arederived from insurance claim forms and include groups covered by servicebenefit, indemnity, or employerbased health insurance plans. in the past, suchdatabases served chiefly to adjudicate claims for reimbursement; today, theyalso support research applications. some health maintenance organizations(hmos), particularly group and staff model hmos maintain patient healthrecords that can be used both for patient care and research. other majordatabases (and public use files) have been specially constructed for researchstudies, such as the rand health insurance experiment, and for nationalsurveys, such as the national medical expenditures survey and the nationalhealth and nutrition examination survey and its various supplements.despite this activity and progress, many difficulties obstruct the realizationof this committee's vision. some problems relate to the content and structure ofcurrent health databases; others pertain more to the difficulties of creating andmaintaining comprehensive databases. one major drawback is that mostinformation gathered today reflects independent events and a single setting(almost always hospital admissions). in the absence of computerbased patientrecords, even hospital databases are often limited in the quality and quantity ofthe patient data they contain. correspondingly, databases often have little or noinformation about ambulatory and other nonhospital services; thus, they lackfacts about primary care, despite the major impact that primary care has on thepublic's health. another, related challenge is that episodes of carešlongitudinalrecords that tell how patients fare "in the system as a whole"šcannot easily beconstructed. in addition, currently available information is not (or cannot easilybe) adjusted for important characteristics about patients' sociodemographiccircumstances or health status, and this makes it difficult to compare theperformance of providers and practitioners or to set insurance premiums orcapitated payments correctly and without bias.databases created from information generated by the use of health careservices, such as those assembled from insurance claim forms, reflectinformation only on users of the health care system; missing is information onintroduction30health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.those who never seek or obtain care. as a consequence, planners and othersusually cannot use today's databases to learn much about the population as awhole or to assess unmet needs in a community. moreover, many contemporarydatabases are essentially archives of information collected at some time in the(possibly remote) past; this retrospective aspect of the information may givelittle if any support for realtime patient care. furthermore, much moreinformation will be available on what was done to patients (the processes ofcare) than on the end results (the outcomes) of that care, yet those wishing tomake decisions about treatments or providers prefer, indeed require, outcomerelated information. even the clinical information, if gathered through insuranceclaims or encounter forms, may be quite limited and of questionable reliabilityand validity; if obtained from paperbased medical records, then considerablemanual abstraction and computer data entry are required (all tasks thatintroduce their own inaccuracies and biases). the cleanest and mostcomprehensive data on some topics may come from research projects, but suchdatabases have their own limitations in populations covered, timeliness, andaccess by individuals or organizations not involved in research.other issues may be more prosaic, albeit no less difficult. chief amongthese is cost. creating and maintaining databases, whatever the original source(s) of information, can be expensive. when private entities bear the costs, theymay see little reason to share information with others who have not helped toshoulder the monetary burden; when the public sector bears the costs, otherclaims on the public treasury may take precedence.another obstacle is competition in the health field. rival health careproviders or insurers have not been (and are not likely to be) willing to sharewhat they may regard as sensitive, proprietary information. antitrustconsiderations may also play a role in the reluctance of possible or actualcompetitors to share data; health care reform may prompt reinterpretation ofantitrust rules, but this area was well beyond the committee's charge orexpertise. even organizations that do not directly compete may see little or noincentive to make their databases available to others. in any case, such groupsmay not wish to participate in collective actions to set standards forterminology, definitions of data elements, or electronic transmission ofinformation; this has been especially true for organizations whose longestablished internal systems would be expensive to change or upgrade.finally, as reasons accumulate for creating large health databases, so dothe possibilities that such databases (or, more correctly, their users) will doharm to patients, to providers (institutions, physicians, and others), to payers(government, private insurers, and corporations), and to the public at large. thebalance between the advantages of such databases and their potential for harm,or at least unfairness, to some groups is not yet clear, and the question ofwhether and how such entities ought to evolve has beenintroduction31health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incompletely explored. this perception of potential harm from the proliferationof large databases is itself a barrier to their development.the opportunityin the past few years, diverse groups of researchers, business leaders, andpolicymakers at state and regional levels have begun to design and develop anarray of databases, networks, repositories, and the like. these are intended toovercome some of the above problems and to permit far more sophisticatedanalyses of community health needs, practice patterns, and costs and quality ofcare than has been possible to date. the interests that have prompted suchaction cover a broad range: controlling business costs attributable to healthbenefits; applying computer technologies to decrease costs of processinginsurance claims; evaluating and improving health care; conducting technologyassessments; planning the expansion and contraction of health care facilities andservices across the nation; and transmitting medical history information for anincreasingly mobile population. the success of health care reformšas well asthe ability to assess the effect of a reformed system on the health of the publicšdepends on access to the kinds of data that too often are unavailable.coincident with this conjunction of needs, interests, and enthusiasm aregreatly enhanced electronic capabilities for data management in many aspectsof daily life. comprehensive, computerbased health data files can easily belinked, and information from those files can be moved essentiallyinstantaneously. thus, an unparalleled opportunity exists to apply computertechnologies creatively to address many of the informational needs and dataproblems noted above. this report focuses on the actions that might be taken tofoster such action and progress by what the iom committee terms healthdatabase organizations.health database organizationsmany kinds of health databases, networks, and repositories exist today,although they differ in many characteristics. they may be created by businesscoalitions, built by entities supported with private funds, mandated by statehealth legislation, or established by federal action. for purposes of this report,these entities are collectively termed health database organizations (hdos).as ideally conceptualized by the committee, and discussed more fully inchapter 2, hdos have several important characteristics in common. they:introduction32health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. operate under a single, common authority; acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sources andput their databases to multiple uses; have files containing personidentified and personidentifiable data;1 serve a specific, defined geographic area; have inclusive population files; have comprehensive data with elements that include administrative,clinical, health status, and satisfaction information; manipulate data electronically; and support electronic access for realtime use.the prospect of creating these entities has raised numerous issues. amongthe more conspicuous are: (1) worries on the part of health care providers andclinicians about use or misuse of the information that hdos will compile andrelease and (2) alarm on the part of consumers, patients, and their physiciansabout how well the privacy and confidentiality of personal health informationwill be guarded. addressing these two concerns was the chief focus of the iomcommittee appointed to conduct this study. a third issuešthe technical andpolitical feasibility of building such repositories of health information andassuring that the expected benefits are achievedšis often voiced, butaddressing it was beyond the scope of the study.the institute of medicine studythe direct impetus for this study came from discussions between staff ofthe john a. hartford foundation and the iom in the early 1990s. the hartfordfoundation has a longstanding interest in issues relating to the generation andapplication of information to improve health care delivery and to increase thevalue of health care spending. its interests have intensified in the presentcontext of vastly greater computer capabilities in the health care sector,increasing attention to health matters in the business community, rising interestamong health professionals in understanding the effectiveness andappropriateness of the health care services they deliver, and growingsophistication among consumers about health care matters. in1 personidentified means that the record contains an obvious individualrelatedidentifier such as name or social security number. personidentifiable means that therecord contains a variety of facts that collectively can be used to infer the identity of theindividual. that is, personidentified is a subset of personidentifiable data. these tworelated terms are discussed more fully in chapter 2.introduction33health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this framework, the foundation had supported earlier iom studies on computerbased patient records (iom, 1991a) and clinical practice guidelines (iom,1992a). it now had specific questions concerning potential obstacles to thesuccessful implementation of regional health data networks or repositoriesšknown as community health management information systems (chmiss)šwhose creation it was supporting in several areas of the country.2the study committee and its chargein early 1992 the iom appointed a study committee that conducted themajor part of its work between march 1992 and december 1993.3 the studycommittee, chaired by roger bulger, m.d., consisted of 16 individuals (seeroster) with expertise in the administration of medical centers and academichealth centers, the practice of medicine, health insurance, utilizationmanagement, use of large administrative and research databases for researchpurposes, administration of large (nonhealth) corporations, consumer services,health and privacy law, ethics, data security, informatics, and state health dataorganizations.during meetings and other study activities, the committee addressed thecharge given below, which incorporated both the concerns of the hartfordfoundation (about what was then termed regional health data networks) and asomewhat wider set of issues and concepts that committee members themselvesbelieved significant:the study committee will examine regional health data networks and possibleimpediments to their effective implementation. the focus will be on ways tofacilitate cooperative regional efforts among payers, employers, insurers,health care providers, and other parties that will be practical, useful, andacceptable to a wide array of community interests and mem2 apart from the major support for this project from the hartford foundation,additional funding was made available by the american health information managementassociation, electronic data systems corporation (eds), and science applicationsinternational corporation. the interests of these groups varied widely and are reflectedin the committee charge; the particular concern with ethical problems of privacy andconfidentiality expressed by eds were addressed not only by committee discussions butalso by reliance on iom reports being prepared at the same time that dealt directly orindirectly with these matters (iom, 1993b; iom, 1993e).3 the iom committee conducted this project chiefly during the 18 months before theclinton administration introduced its health security act in the fall of 1993. therefore,the study was neither designed nor intended to reflect specifics of that or any of the otherhealth care reform proposals that were being debated as this report was being released.although the committee takes no stance on the desirability or feasibility of elements ofthe various contending proposals, it does note throughout its report the features of theadministration's proposals most germane to its formal charge.introduction34health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bers. the study will address privacy, confidentiality, security, and otherconcerns about healthrelated information in several kinds of regional datarepositories and files in the broad context of the uses to which these databasesmight be put. specifically, the committee will seek to understand more aboutdatabases now in existence and those now under development and willconsider how current impediments to their successful implementation might beaddressed in the context of public and private decision making about the costs,quality, appropriateness, effectiveness, and costeffectiveness of health careservices and care providers. the committee will seek information from manysources (e.g., site visits, expert panels or workshops, focus groups,commissioned papers) and will produce an nrcreviewed report.4questions confronting the study committeethe iom committee took as a given that, even as it conducted itsinvestigations, a variety of hdos were being created and moving intooperational phases. it thus initially addressed itself to two critical "downstream"questions: (1) what current dangers arising from electronic data interchangeand the widespread sharing of personal health data might continue, beexacerbated, be ameliorated, or be prevented by such entities? (2) what newharms might be anticipated and minimized or avoided by design? within thebroad sweep of these questions, several more specific issues surfaced during thestudy.first, how will hdos be governed? developers, providers, consumerrepresentatives, and others ask who will and should own these organizations,what sorts of organizations they will be, and how they should be governed. thedifferent legal mandates that might give rise to such entities and contribute totheir effectiveness also come into play. for instance, hdos might emerge in theprivate sector as the result of the interests of a business coalition or providerassociation. conversely, state legislation might prompt and direct theirdevelopment. yet other data repositories might come about through acombination of public and privatesector interests, data sources, and governingstructures.54 procedures of the national research council (nrc)šthe administrative arm of thenational academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the instituteof medicineestablish rigorous requirements for expert peer review of all committeereports resulting from the activities of those organizations. reports such as this one arenot released to the public or the sponsoring agencies or institutions until that review issuccessfully completed.5 the logistics and costs of hdo implementation and operation arise naturally in thiscontext. the committee did not explore these matters directly, however, because little ifany empirical information was available to the study and because the committee felt thatthese issues would be highly idiosyncratic to locales.introduction35health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.second, what is the scope of an hdo? one factor is whether suchdatabases can be designed and implemented to ensure that they encompass agiven region's population, not just the users of health care in the area. the moreinclusive and comprehensive the database, the more likely it is to have value fora broad range of users and uses, such as research into the epidemiology ofdisease or the effectiveness of medical treatments, health care planning, andquality assurance and improvement. clearly, however, the more expansive thedatabase, the more difficult and more expensive it is to create and to maintain.the arguments concerning the breadth of the population covered relate equallyto health care providers; that is, databases that include all independentpractitioners and types of facilities are certain to be more useful than those that,for example, cover only physicians with hospital admitting privileges.third, how good will the data be? many of the experts contributing to theiom committee's factfinding efforts raised questions about data accuracy,quality, comprehensiveness, reliability, and validity. this led many committeemembers to wonder how the public, policymakers, providers, and others candetermine whether data are factual, sufficiently complete, and appropriate forthe analyses in which they are used. even when data for a given purpose appearto be adequate in these respects, many observers worry about using data foraims other than those originally intended; a case in point is the use ofinformation originally intended for administrative functions to support patientcare or quality assessment applications.fourth, what about the "safety" of personal health data? many individualsquestion whether private information about an individual (however "private" isconstrued by the individual in question) can be kept private and confidential inthese databases, especially when such information is accessible over electronicnetworks. aggregation of personal health data in data repositories greatlyincreases the possible benefits as well as the potential for harm. thus, manywonder whether it will be possible to assure the public that very sensitivepersonal health data will be protected, and they ponder the circumstances underwhich various users should gain access to personidentifiable data.fifth, how "secure" will these hdos be? apart from protecting privacyand confidentiality through rules about access to data files that contain personidentified information or about release of personidentified information toothers, what security measures for the system as a whole can and should be putin place? many experts state that the threats of breaches of security are myriadand sometimes difficult to detect; although less technologically oriented, laypersons worry as well about unauthorized access to their personal information.all consider that finding ways to prevent, or alternatively to detect and mitigate,such security problems is a significant challenge.introduction36health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sixth, who will see and use whose data? the rules that now govern accessto patient, provider, employer, and payerspecific data, and should continueto do so in the future, all occasion concern. the reasons for and levels ofapprehension differ widely depending on the potential usersšpatients(including their families and proxies); health care providers (and theiremployees); insurers and thirdparty administrators; employers (including thosewho selfinsure medical care for employees); researchers; local health careplanners; clinical and health services researchers; community and consumerinterest groups; attorneys (including patients' attorneys); law enforcementofficials; and other interested parties. for health care providers, employers, andinsurers, data on competitors may be of intense interest; similarly, plaintiffs'lawyers in malpractice suits will seek to acquire information from hdosconcerning other patients cared for by the defendants. many observers questionwhether access to such information should be permitted.as another case in point: even if access to or use of personidentifiedinformation is severely restricted, one can still inquire about the proper uses ofdata on defined populations. for instance, should analyses be done and madepublic (even if individuals are never identified) on groups characterized byhaving certain diseases or belonging to a given socioeconomic or ethnic group?one significant issue relating to health care providers is whether differentrules should govern access to and public disclosure of data on specificinstitutions versus named practitioners. one can also ask about the propriety ofreleasing information on groups or categories of providers and practitioners. aprinciple of fairness in the use of data lay behind much of the committee'sthinking on these matters.seventh, how should information be made public? given that hdos meetconditions for adequate data as well as those relating to security and to privacyand confidentiality of person or patientspecific information, a further questionis how to ensure that they release and disseminate useful knowledge andinformation in ways that can be understood by the public at large.eighth, where do current laws and statutes fit in? presentday laws andregulations at both the national and state levels may pose constraints forregional hdos, or they may not affect them at all. the impact of currentstatutes will depend on the issue at hand, the jurisdiction under consideration,and the reach of existing laws to secondary records. among the issues arebarriers to accessing certain categories of data, such as information on mentalhealth or substance abuse treatment, and statutes establishing time limitationson keeping (or destroying) data.introduction37health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.study activitiesthe committee met five times between march 1992 and august 1993 todebate these matters. several outside experts (see appendix a to this volume)were invited to three of these meetings. they described analogs of regionalhdos and other databases and discussed several specific problems with thecommittee, such as the range of organizations, agencies, and individuals whonow seek access to patient health records and possible approaches foraddressing misuse of patient data.to avail itself of expert and detailed legal analysis of issues beyond thetime resources of its members, the committee commissioned a paper from anexpert in privacy and confidentiality matters (belair, 1993). the paperidentified privacy interests relevant to hdos (chiefly of the chmis variety);examined the impact of existing law on these organizations; advanced someshort and longterm options and strategies for privacy protection of patientidentified information; and gave particular consideration to the status andprotection of clinical and other patientidentified data once they move beyondlegal or other protections afforded to primary medical records.when iom studies with national significance involve activities initiated atthe grassroots, state, and local levels, the iom often makes a concerted effort toreach out to a wide range of people in those locales. the aims are to learn aboutthe activities and to understand the views of interested parties about issuespertinent to the local efforts, and then to apply those lessons, as appropriate, tobroad national, professional, and policyrelated issues. the iom takes care, inthese circumstances, not to evaluate or draw public judgments about local efforts.during the summer and fall of 1992, the committee conducted five majorsite visits to the following cities (and nearby locales): memphis, tennessee;cleveland, ohio; des moines, iowa; seattle, washington; and albany androchester, new york. during these site visits two or three committee membersand iom staff met with groups developing hdos in business coalitions andother organizations, practicing physicians and representatives of local medicalsocieties, insurers and thirdparty claims administrators, health maintenanceorganizations, consumers, hospital administrators and hospital associations,researchers, state and county health officials, employers, and computer systemdevelopers. (sites and organizations visited are listed in appendix a.)organization of the reportthe committee considered all the questions raised earlier but focused ontwo primary issues. the first is the public release of descriptive and evaluativedata on the costs, quality, and other attributes of health careintroduction38health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutions, practitioners, and other providers, which the committee assumedwould be a major function if not a hallmark of hdos. the second involves theopportunities, risks, and remedies for protecting the privacy and confidentialityof data that do (or may) identify individuals in their role as patients orconsumers, not as clinicians or providers. these topics are taken up,respectively, in chapters 3 and 4. before that, chapter 2 describes healthdatabases and hdos in more detail, discusses their ostensible benefits ingeneral and with respect to a wide range of potential users, and introduces somecaveats about how their intrinsic limitations (e.g., poor or incomplete data) mustbe recognized and overcome.commentthis report reviews the tremendous promise of regional health datanetworks for evaluating and improving health care and controlling itsadministrative costs. while the potential for great benefit to the public may beunderstood by those in the relevant fields, the potential for harm or lack offairness in their use may create doubt and fear in many.powerful technologies (and electronic technologies are increasinglypowerful) can be deliberately or inadvertently misused and cause great harm, inthis case primarily in the loss of privacy and confidentiality and the resultantharms this may engender. to gain public support for the vision in this report,and for the public to make best use of the healthrelated information that will bereleased, carefully planned strategies must be developed for education about thedata networks, about how the data can be used to help the public access andobtain better care, and about what each individual needs to know about the rightto privacy and confidentiality and the steps being taken to protect their rights.the responsibility for providing usable public information should be assumedby those who undertake to make the vision of regional data networks becomereality.introduction39health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2health databases and health databaseorganizations: uses, benefits, and concernsno one engaged in any part of health care delivery or planning today canfail to sense the immense changes on the horizon, even if the silhouettes ofthose changes, let alone the details, are in dispute. 1 beyond debate,1 the clinton administration's proposed health security act (hsa, 1993) givesappreciable attention to information systems and related matters. it calls for theestablishment of a national health board to oversee the creation of an electronic datanetwork consisting of regional centers that collect, compile, and transmit information(sec. 5103). the board will, among other duties, provide technical assistance on (1) thepromotion of communitybased health information systems and (2) the promotion ofpatient care information systems that collect data at the point of care or as a byproductof the delivery of care (sec. 5106).the types of information collected would include: enrollment and disenrollment inhealth plans; clinical encounters and other items and services provided by health careproviders; administrative and financial transactions and activities of participating states,regional alliances, corporate alliances, health plans, health care providers, employers,and individuals; number and demographic characteristics of eligible individuals residingin each alliance area; payment of benefits; utilization management; quality management;grievances, and fraud or misrepresentation in claims or benefits (sec. 5101).the hsa further specifies the use of (1) uniform paper forms containing standard dataelements, definitions, and instructions for completion; (2) requirements for use ofuniform health data sets with common definitions to standardize the collection andtransmission of data in electronic form; (3) uniform presentation requirements for data inelectronic form; and (4) electronic data interchange requirements for the exchange ofdata among automated health information systems (sec. 5002). it also calls for a nationalhealth security card that will permit access to information about health coveragealthough it will contain only a minimum amount of information (sec. 5105) (healthsecurity act. title v. quality and consumer protection. part 1. health informationsystems).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns40health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, is the need for much more and much better information on use ofhealth care services and on the outcomes of that care. the needs are quitebroad: health care reform; evaluation of clinical care and health care delivery;administration of health plans, groups, and facilities; and public health planning.policymakers, researchers, health professionals, purchasers, patients, andothers continue to be frustrated in their attempts to acquire health information.they may not be able to determine with confidence the outcomes, quality,effectiveness, appropriateness, and costs of care for different segments of thepopulation, for different settings, services, and providers, and for differentmechanisms of health care delivery and reimbursement. when this is so, theycan say little, with confidence, about the value of the investment in health carefor population subgroups, regions, or the nation as a whole.in principle, this information can be acquired through numerous avenues,such as surveys, electronic financial transactions for health insurance claims,computerbased patient records (cprs), and disease registries. in practice, noone system will suit every need or produce information appropriate for everyquestion. as introduced in chapter 1, however, health database organizations(hdos) hold considerable promise as a reasonably comprehensive source of theinformation needed to: assess the health of the public and patterns of illness and injury; identify unmet regional health needs; document patterns of health care expenditures on inappropriate,wasteful, or potentially harmful services; find costeffective care providers; and improve the quality of care in hospitals, practitioners' offices, clinics,and various other health care settings.the latter half of this chapter outlines these and other benefits of hdos,the databases they access or control, and the analytic and informationdissemination activities they undertake. it also discusses the applications thatuser groups might have for different types of databases. the committeeadvances some views on how major concerns about these databases, chieflyrelating to the quality of their data, might be addressed, and it makes tworecommendations. in preparation for those sections, the chapter next offerssome definitions of key concepts and terms, explores the basic construct ofhdos (which the committee sees as the administrative and operational structurefor regional health databases), and provides some examples of the variety ofentities that now exist, are being implemented as this report was written, or areenvisioned for the future.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns41health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.definitionseven among experts, terms such as database and network are not used inthe same manner. for this report, the committee advances the followingworking definitions for certain major concepts, building to its view of an hdo.databasethe term database embraces many different concepts: from paper recordsmaintained by a single practitioner to the vast computerized collections ofinsurance claims for medicare beneficiaries; from files of computerized patientencounter forms maintained by health plans to discharge abstract databases ofall hospitals in a given state; from cancer and trauma registries maintained byhealth institutions and researchers to major national health survey data offederal agencies. as commonly used and meant in this report, a database (or,sometimes, data bank, data set, or data file) is ''a large collection of data in acomputer, organized so that it can be expanded, updated, and retrieved rapidlyfor various uses" (webster's new world dictionary, 2nd ed.).although databases may eventually be linked (or linkable) to primarymedical records held by health care practitioners, this report addressesdatabases composed of secondary records.2 secondary files are generated fromprimary records or are separate from any patient encounter (as in the case ofeligibility or enrollment files for health plans and public programs). they arenot under the control of a practitioner or anyone designated by the practitioner,nor are they under the management of any health institution (e.g., the medicalrecords department of a hospital). furthermore, they are not intended to be themajor source of information about specific patients for the treating physician.secondary databases facilitate reuse of data that have been gathered for anotherpurpose (e.g., patient care, billing, or research) but that, in new applications,may generate new knowledge.2 according to the iom (1991a, p. 11): "a primary patient record is used by healthcare professionals while providing patient care services to review patient data ordocument their own observations, actions, or instructions. a secondary patient record isderived from the primary record and contains selected data elements to aid nonclinicalusers (i.e., persons not involved in direct patient care) in supporting, evaluation, oradvancing patient care." at present, most medical records are maintained on paper, notin computers, and the u.s. general accounting office provides the following startlingfigures on the equivalent volume of paper: "we estimate that the 34 million annual u.s.hospital admissions and 1.2 billion physician visits could generate the equivalent of 10billion pages of medical records" (gao, 1993a, p. 2).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns42health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee distinguishes between databases composed of secondaryrecords and cprs or cpr systems (iom, 1991a; ball and collen, 1992), but itsbroader vision of computerbased health information systems includes directties to cpr systems. many experts argue that until cpr systems are linked insome fashion to such data repositories or networks, neither will be complete orreach their full health care, research, or policymaking potential.3this chapter cites several examples of health databases used today formany purposes, but the ones noted are highly selective and intended to illustrateparticular applications or kinds of data maintained. to understand the range ofdatabases that hdos might access and why there might be concern aboutprotection of personal data, readers are referred to the many inventories ofhealth databases. publications from the national association of health dataorganizations (nahdo) describe state and insurance databases (nahdo,1988, 1993). for databases related to federal programs supported by thedepartment of health and human services (dhhs), readers can consultpublications and manuals from the health care financing administration(hcfa, for medicare and medicaid), the public health service (phs, forsurveys conducted by the national center for health statistics; see also gable,1990; iom/cbasse, 1992; nchs, 1993; smith, 1993), and the agency forhealth care policy and research (ahcpr, for the national medicalexpenditure surveys and patient outcome research teams [ports]; ahcpr,1990a). major research databases include those developed for the randcorporation's health insurance experiment (a largescale social experimentconducted in the late 1970s and early 1980s on the utilization, expenditures, andoutcomes effects of different levels of cost sharing [newhouse and insuranceexperiment group, 1993]), which were turned into a large number of carefullydocumented publicuse tapes.key attributes of databasesin reviewing the considerable variation in databases that might beaccessed, controlled, or acquired by hdos, the committee sought a simple wayto characterize them by key attributes. it decided on two critical3 one major hurdle to the development of cprs involves standards for vocabulary,structure and content, messaging, and security, according to gao reports (1991, 1993a);without standards for uniform electronic recording and transmission of medical data,effective automated medical record systems will be delayed. this committee did notexamine these technical issues, although they pertain as well to largescale regionalhdos; arguably, the government and the private sector will need to move moreforcefully on development of such standardsšperhaps moving beyond neartotalreliance on voluntary effortsšif cprs, cpr systems, and regional health databases andnetworks are to succeed.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns43health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dimensions of databases: comprehensiveness and inclusiveness. (because theseterms are used with distinct meanings in this report, they are italicizedwhenever used.)comprehensiveness. comprehensiveness describes the completeness ofrecords of patient care events and information relevant to an individual patient(table 21).4 it refers to the amount of information one has on an individualboth for each patient encounter with the health care system and for all of apatient's encounters over time (usdhhs, 1991, refers to this as completeness).a record that is comprehensive contains: demographic data, administrative data,health risks and health status, patient medical history, current management ofhealth conditions, and outcomes data. each category is described briefly below. demographic data consist of facts such as age (or date of birth),gender, race and ethnic origin, marital status, address of residence,names of and other information about immediate family members, andemergency information. information about employment status (andemployer), schooling and education, and some indicator ofsocioeconomic class might also appear. administrative data include facts about health insurance such aseligibility and membership, dual coverage (when relevant), andrequired copayments and deductibles for a given benefit package. withrespect to services provided (e.g., diagnostic tests or outpatientprocedures), such data also typically include charges and perhapsamounts paid. administrative data commonly identify providers with aunique identifier and possibly give additional providerspecific facts;the latter might include kind of practitioner (physician, podiatrist,psychologist), physician specialty, and nature of institution (general orspecialty hospital, physician office or clinic, home care agency,nursing home, and so forth). health risks and health status health risk information reflects behaviorand lifestyle (e.g., whether an individual uses tobacco products orengages regularly in strenuous exercise) and facts about family historyand genetic factors (e.g., whether an individual has firstdegree familymembers with a specific type of cancer or a propensity formusculoskeletal disease).4 the discussion of comprehensiveness and inclusiveness of databases is couched interms of what might be regarded as the traditional domain of medical care, includingmental health care. clearly, more advanced databases could include information ondental care and care provided by health professionals that practice independently, such asnursepractitioners and nursemidwives, acupuncturists, or alternative healers of varioussorts. even more farreaching databases might contain information on sociomedicalservices provided through, for instance, day care and home care for adults or children.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns44health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns45health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health status (or healthrelated quality of life), generally reported byindividuals themselves, reflects domains of health such as physical functioning,mental and emotional wellbeing, cognitive functioning, social and rolefunctioning, and perceptions of one's health in the past, present, and future andcompared with that of one's peers. health status and qualityoflife measures arecommonly considered outcomes of health care, but evaluators and researchersalso need such information to take account in their analyses of the mix ofpatients and the range of severity of health conditions. patient medical history involves data on previous medical encounterssuch as hospital admissions, surgical procedures, pregnancies and livebirths, and the like; it also includes information on past medicalproblems and possibly family history or events (e.g., alcoholism orparental divorce). again, although such facts are significant for goodpatient care, they may also be important for casemix and severityadjustment. current medical management includes the content of encounter formsor parts of the patient record. such information might reflect healthscreening, current health problems and diagnoses, allergies (especiallythose to medications), diagnostic or therapeutic procedures performed,laboratory tests carried out, medications prescribed, and counselingprovided. outcomes data encompass a wide choice of measures of the effects ofhealth care and the aftermath of various health problems across aspectrum from death to high levels of functioning and wellbeing; theycan also reflect health care events such as readmission to hospital orunexpected complications or side effects of care. finally, they ofteninclude measures of satisfaction with care. outcomes assessed weeksor months after health care events, and by means of reports directlyfrom individuals (or family members), are desirable, although these arelikely to be the least commonly found in the secondary databases underconsideration here.the more comprehensive the database is, the more current and possiblymore sensitive information about individuals is likely to be. this suggests thatcomprehensiveness as envisioned here will have a direct correlation withconcerns about privacy and confidentiality. by analogy, the department ofdefense treats information with increasingly higher levels of security as itbecomes more comprehensive, even when the aggregated information is notconsidered sensitive (ware, 1993).some patient events are unlikely to appear in databases (depending on howthey originate); missing from the databases considered here are services thatmay have been advised but neither sought nor renderedšscreeningexaminations not given, physician followup visits not advised or kept, andprescriptions given but not filled. other reasons for missing data involve outofarea care for an individual who is otherwise in the database; an example ismedical services provided in florida to new york residentshealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns46health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.when they are on vacation or living part of the year out of state. yet another iswhen patients do not make claims against health insurance policies (regardlessof where they are rendered); this transaction may not be recorded through anyof the usual claims processing mechanisms used to generate the database.furthermore, databases may never be sufficiently comprehensive forresearch or outcomes analysis, especially if the choice of core data elements isparsimonious. thus, when the question at hand is health status and outcomeslong after health care has been rendered, hdo staff or outside researchers mayneed the capability and authority to contact individuals (providers and possiblypatients) for information about outcomes and satisfaction with care. suchoutreach activities would require some adequate funding mechanism.inclusiveness. inclusiveness refers to which populations in a geographicarea are included in a database. the more inclusive a database, the more itapproaches coverage of 100 percent of the population that its developers intendto include. databases that aim to provide information on the health of thecommunity ought to include an enumeration of all residents of the community(e.g., metropolitan area, state) so that the information accurately reflects theentire population of the region, regardless of insurance category. conversely,inclusiveness is reduced when membership is restricted to certain subgroups orwhen individuals expected to be in the database are missing (table 22). forinstance, a database that is intended to include all residents in a local area mayinclude only those who are insured and file claims for services; it misses thosenot insured and those who, although insured, do not use health services. aninsurance claims database that does not include members of a healthmaintenance organization (hmo) because no claims are filed will also not beinclusive for the geographic area.databases may be (and often are) designed to include only subsets of theentire population of a geographic area: those eligible for certain kinds ofinsurance, such as enrollees (subscribers, their spouses and dependents) incommercial insurance plans; persons receiving care from specific kinds of.providers or in certain settings (e.g., prehospital emergency care fromemergency medical services and hospital emergency departments); persons witha given set of conditions (e.g., a cancer or trauma registry); an age group suchas those age 65 and older (e.g., medicare beneficiary files);5 residents of adefined geographic area or political jurisdiction or scientifically selectedsamples of individuals, as in major health surveys. clearly these categories arenot mutually exclusivešindividuals (as well as providers)5 this is illustrative only because medicare files also include younger but disabledbeneficiaries and persons with endstage renal disease.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns47health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can and do appear in more than one such database. the potential benefits of thedatabase, however, will increase as the database moves toward being inclusiveof the entire population of a defined geographic area.table 22 inclusiveness: populations covered as a critical dimension of healthcare databasesdefined populationsexamplesnationalall persons physically resident in the 50states, district of columbia, puerto rico,and the trust territoriesgeographic areaall persons resident in a definedgeopolitical or other describable area,such as an msainsurance typehmo, indemnity, medicaid, nonesite and care settinghospital, nursing home, clinicdisease, injury typecancer, trauma registryage or other demographic characteristicage 65 or older, belonging to a definedethnic or racial groupnote: msa = metropolitan statistical area.hdos will have to be clear about what groups are missing whendescribing their databases and the results of their analyses. perhaps moreimportant, hdos should seek ways to ensure that all relevant populations areincluded, so that their analyses accurately reflect the population of the regionand, thereby, yield estimates of the levels of underuse of health care in theirrespective regions.table 23 summarizes these two attributes.6 the dummy matrix, al6 the congressional physician payment review commission (pprc) has been in theforefront of advocates for a national data system (pprc, 1992, 1993). in its 1992 annualreport, pprc described an "allpatient database" [emphasis in the original],conceptualized as a "network of local or regional data processing centers ... to streamlinethe transfer of administrative information for payment and serviceuse trackingpurposes" (p. 269). the report goes on to posit "parallel organizing entities ... tocoordinate the use of these data [and] the data processing centers and the organizingentities would make up an allpatient data network" (p. 269). the commissioners alsoenvisioned the network evolving into a "means to link and assimilate more detailedclinical information." although the general thrust of the pprc idea is consonant with thelongrange views of this iom committee, the specific understanding of what a databaseor network is differs. in defining an allpatient database, the commissioners appear tohave in mind what this committee terms inclusiveness; what the pprc report lays out as"core data elements'' in that database approaches what the iom report callscomprehensiveness.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns48health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.though empty, illustrates how databases can be described, evaluated, anddifferentiated from each other. cell a represents patient populations and dataelements that are included in a database. cell b depicts the individuals who aremissing from a database that is otherwise fairly comprehensive. cell crepresents patient nonevents and missing data in a database that is otherwisereasonably inclusive. cell d represents missing individuals and missing data.to the extent cells b, c, and especially d are large, the database in question willbe less able to provide extensive, or unbiased, information; the sizes of cells b,c, and d are, therefore, three determinants of database quality.table 23 characteristics of databases according to two critical dimensionscomprehensiveness (data elements)inclusiveness (population)highlowhighablowcdother characteristics of databasesthe more comprehensive and inclusive databases are, the more theyfacilitate detailed and sophisticated uses and, in turn, entail both greateranticipated benefits and possible harms. the magnitude of either benefits orharms can depend on several other important properties of databases, however,as noted below.linkage over time. the ability to analyze patterns, quality, and costs ofcare over a period of time may be very important to users. they may want toconstruct episodes of care or develop other longitudinal profiles; cases in point(respectively) involve all the care provided to a specific patient for a discretecourse of illness or injury, regardless of site or setting, and compilations ofinformation on services provided by a local hmos over rolling fiveyearperiods. such studies require not only unique identifiers for patients andproviders (see below) but also a record structure that permits analysts to linkdates and times with patient care events, problems, and diagnoses.timeliness. facts based on patientprovider interactions and other relevantinformation (e.g., employment, health plan, health status, or outcomes)health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns49health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should be entered or updated frequently enough to permit their timely use andanalysis. if databases are to be of assistance with direct patient care, theninformation must be sufficiently up to date that caregivers can rely on it in allclinical decisionmaking situations.accuracy and completeness.  data used for clinical carešdecision makingabout a given individualšmust be of far greater accuracy and completenessthan those required for administrative uses. databases used for clinical decisionmaking must, in describing an individual, describe only that individual and doso accurately. for instance, missing or outofdate data or files that commingledata for more than one individual under a single identifier have grave potentialfor harm. in addition, correcting errors found at a later time must be possible;ideally, alerting past users of the database to those errors and corrections oughtto be possible as well.control, ownership, and governance. whether a given database has beenestablished by the public or the private sector (or is some hybrid) will haveimportant implications for inclusiveness and access. for instance, databasesaddressed in this report may be publicly supportedšespecially at the state levelšand may be operated and administered by a private entity. some statehospital discharge databasesšsuch as the health care policy corporation iniowa and the massachusetts health data consortiumšare of this kind.alternatively, they may be developed, maintained, and financed wholly in theprivate sector, such as those developed by professional or health careorganizations, insurers, or business coalitions. a database created by state orfederal law can require participation; that is, it can demand that healthprofessionals, institutions, and patients participate in providing data. forexample, washington state has passed legislation that mandates development ofa statewide data system by a health services commission that will identify a setof health care data elements to be submitted by all providers (e.g., hospitals andphysicians) (engrossed second substitute senate bill 5304, 1993). to theextent databases are developed and maintained in the public sector or arenetworked with publicsector databases (especially at the federal level), theywill be subject to regulations that differ from those affecting databases operatedpurely within the private sector for the benefit of private sponsors. given theevolving nature of state and national health care reform plans and programs,movement toward electronic data interchange (edi), progress toward cprs,and emergence of various hybrid arrangements for financing and deliveringhealth care, the development of hdos is taking place in very different (andperhaps unpredictable) environments that will likely have disparate effects overtime.origin of data. databases can vary widely in the source(s) of theirhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns50health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information. for example, data may come from hospital discharge abstracts,selfcompleted questionnaires from patients or survey respondents, insuranceclaims submissions, employer files, computerbased pharmacy files, cprs, andother sources.hospital discharge abstracts are common sources of publicly held data: 36states have mandates for the collection, analysis, and dissemination of hospitallevel information for prudent purchasing, decision making, education of thepublic, and rate regulation. such databases may be maintained by a variety ofentities, including: the department of insurance (north carolina), afreestanding health data commission (iowa and pennsylvania), a ratesettingcommission (massachusetts), or the department of health (minnesota, newjersey) (nahdo, 1993). one wellknown model is that of the new yorkstatewide planning and research cooperative system, called sparcs, whichhas been an influential source of information for research on hospitalspecificmortality (hannan et al., 1989b).an example of a survey database is the medicare current beneficiarysurvey, a longitudinal panel survey that the hcfa office of the actuarylaunched in september 1991. individuals sampled from the medicare enrolledpopulation are interviewed three times a year. the survey includes demographicand behavioral data, health status and functioning, insurance coverage, financialresources, family support, source of payment, use of medicare and nonmedicare services, and access and satisfaction. information from the survey canbe linked to medicare claims and other administrative data.personidentified and personidentifiable data. for purposes of this report,personidentified data contain pieces of information or facts that singly orcollectively refer to one person and permit positive (or probable) identificationof that individual. an obvious piece of identifying information is an individual'sname. other identifiers may be biometric, such as a fingerprint, a retinal print,or a dna pattern.the committee uses the term personidentifiable to characterizeinformation that definitely or probably can be said to refer to a specific person.it includes items of information (e.g., the fact of a physician visit on a givenday) that will allow identification of an individual when combined with otherfacts (e.g., zip code of residence, age, or gender). to render data nonpersonidentifiable, some data managers convert facts to a more general form beforereleasing those data to others. for instance, date of birth may be converted toage, date of admission to month of admission, or date of physician visit tointervals between visits.concerns about misuse or improper disclosure of personidentifiable dataare likely to escalate as more health information is stored in computer files.ultimately, protecting patient identity in the commonly understoodhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns51health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sense may become very difficult given increasing computer capabilities,creative crosslinkages among data sets, and the usual curiosity of human beings.unique, universal personidentifiers. a unique identifier (1) applies to oneand only one person and (2) does not change over time. it includes thebiometric identifiers noted above as well as numeric or alphanumeric codes.health insurers, plans, and entitlement programs assign identifiers; among themare the social security number (the basis of the health insurance claim numbersused by medicare) and other alphanumeric codes typically used by medicaidprograms and commercial insurers. such identifiers may be neither reliablyunique nor universal in the sense of linking health databases. providers alsoassign identifiers to patientsšusually a medical record or account numberšbutthey are not universal, as they are not used beyond that specific provider, andgenerally they cannot be matched to identifiers assigned by other providers,plans, or programs. the term universal as used here does not apply to identifiersthat could link health and nonhealth (e.g., financial) databases.the extent to which unique and universal identifiers are available forindividuals in the databasešfor instance, all persons in a geographic area, or allusers of the health systemšmay prove to be a critical factor in the utility of thatdatabase. they are a prerequisite for the construction of longitudinal records onindividual patients that can reflect their health care events and outcomes acrosssites and time. ideally, inclusive populationbased databases will have uniqueuniversal identifiers for all members of the relevant population group, so thatnonusers of the health care system can be taken into account in various analyticapplications. the need for a universal identifier and the debate about the use ofthe social security number (or its derivatives) for this purpose are discussed indetail in chapter 4.nonvolitional identifying informationšfor example, fingerprints or retinalprintsšmay also be important, particularly for hdos that intend to contributeto direct patient care. these markers allow positive identification of individuals,such as trauma victims, who cannot identify themselves, presuming of coursethat the data about individuals are in the database. they may also help to ensurethat a patient record corresponds to the presenting patient both in deliveringpatient care and in verifying eligibility for benefits.unique identifiers for health care providers and practitioners. thischaracteristic pertains to individual practitioners, particularly physicians;hospitals and other inpatient or residential facilities or institutions; hmos aswell as independent practice associations (ipas), preferred provider orhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns52health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ganizations (ppos) and similar organized, integrated health systems; andvarious other providers such as pharmacies (and pharmacy chains) and homehealth agencies. hcfa assigns a universal physician identification number, orupin, for records of care to medicare patients. because not all providers seemedicare patients (e.g., pediatricians do not), however, upins are not a meansof identifying all practicing physicians in the country.as with patient identifiers, unique identifiers for providers will ideally beconsistent over time and used for one and only one individual institution orclinician. failing that, hdos will need to find ways to link multiple identifiers(e.g., when a physician belongs to more than one health plan or bills fromdifferent addresses with different tax numbers) and to assign individualidentifiers to a group using a single number (e.g., when all physicians in anhmo use the hmo's identification number).data networka data network can be thought of as a set of databases that: (1) are hostedon several computer systems interconnected with one another and to terminalsand (2) serve some community of users. such a network will typically have anumber of attributes. first, the databases are dispersed over several machines;each database or group of databases resides on one or more computer systems.second, the computer systems are often, but not necessarily, physically distantfrom one another. third, all the machines in the network are linked so thatinformation can be transmitted from one machine to another. finally, eachmachine has software to permit exchange of information among individualsystems in the network and, in turn, to allow individual users of the network toquery the many databases and to receive, analyze, and aggregate these data.this report focuses on networks in which one or more common data elements(e.g., patient name, provider identity, facility name) is a link parameter thatrelates records in one database to those in others.databases in data networks may be linked by various physical or otherarrangements. these include telecommunications (e.g., microwave channels,localarea networks, the publicswitched network, satellite circuits), physicaltransfer of magnetic tapes or disks, and dialup connections. this report isintended to apply to any or all of these mechanisms for linking databases; thatis, the term network does not imply here that an electrical connection betweencomputers must be in place (in contrast to the common terminology ofcomputer professionals, for whom network usually does include electricallinkage).hospitals, pharmacies, physicians' offices, insurance companies, publicprogram offices, and employers all generate inputs to databases that areinterconnected in such networks. this committee, however, is particularlyhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns53health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interested in data networks with linked databases that have, at a minimum, twospecific characteristics: (1) their linking implies or involves movement of healthdata outside the care setting in which they have been generated and (2) theyinclude personidentified or personidentifiable data.health database organizationthe concept of hdosthe committee chose the phrase health database organization (hdo) torefer to entities that have access to (and possibly control of) databases and thathave as their chief mission the public release of data and of results of analysesdone on the databases under their control. for purposes of this report,prototypical hdos have the characteristics outlined in chapter 1; theseproperties may not, however, be present to the same degree in existing oremerging hdos today. as conceptualized by the committee, hdos have anumber of crucial characteristics. they operate under a single, common authority. they acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sourcesin the health sectoršfor example, institutions and facilities, agenciesand clinics, providers such as pharmacies, and physicians in privatepractice. they might also obtain information from other sources notdirectly connected with personal health care, such as the administrativefiles or databases on persons covered by a specific insurance plan oremployed by a given company. in all these cases, hdos might add andupdate information periodically (from hourly to annually) or on a casespecific basis (e.g., on all patients with a certain diagnosis or on allproviders of a certain type). they put these databases to multiple uses(some of which may not yet be imagined), in contrast to administrativeor research databases created to perform specific tasks or to answeronly specific questions. files accessible to hdos will include personidentified or personidentifiable data. hdos will serve a specific geographic area that is defined chiefly bygeographic or political boundaries (e.g., metropolitan area, county,state) and will include those who reside in or receive services in thatarea, or both. hdo population files will be inclusive, meaning that they include allmembers of a defined populationšfor instance, in a regionšso thatdenominators are known and populationbased rates of serviceutilization and health outcomes can be calculated. the data will be comprehensive in the kinds of data included aboutindividuals and will include not only administrative and clinicalinformation, but also information about health status and satisfactionwith care.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns54health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. hdos will process, store, analyze, and otherwise manipulate dataelectronically. files held by hdos can be designed for interactive access in realtimefor assistance with patient care when primary records are unavailableto a treating physician. they are not, however, typically viewed asprimary patient records (e.g., a computerbased patient record), andthey are not meant to be simply passive archives or warehouses forhealth information.for maximum accountability, security, protection, and control over accessto data, hdos should have an organizational structure, a corporate or legalexistence, and a physical location; for example, they would have a governingboard, a staff, a building, and a mailing address. they would conduct business,articulate a mission statement, promulgate policies, implement procedures, andcarry out manipulations and analyses of data, and they could be heldaccountable for their actions. assuming these characteristics exist, thecommittee targets most of its recommendations at such hdos. someorganizations may develop the functions described above, but not as theirprimary mission. the committee intends its recommendations to apply to thosehdolike units as well. one might also imagine proprietary programs, systems,or entities with units that function as hdos and that would be controlled by thesame general principles.although the committee adopted the simplified construct offered above forits study, it was aware that more complex entities may arise. the variations thatmay emergešfor instance, bifurcated legal structures that include a networkoperator and a user organizationšmay result in consortia of legal entities. tothe extent that this trend decentralizes authority and undermines commonoperating rules, the issues addressed in this report will become far more seriousand possibly unresolvable.the committee examined the repository function of an hdo. in this role,information collected at the level of the patient or about patients, providers,plans, and clinical encounters is accessed, stored, and made available for others,such as providers, researchers, insurers, and planners, to analyze. in some caseshdos may have additional functions, such as claims transfer and adjudication,but these were not the subject of the committee's work or recommendations.throughout its discussions, the committee focused on regional databasesand hdos. in this context, the term regional is meant to suggest that hdos andtheir constituent networks and databases pertain to a defined population ofindividuals living in, or receiving health care in, some specifiable geographicarea. these may be city centered, such as the established metropolitanstatistical areas that comprise cities and their surrounding counties or suburbs;they may be statewide (and not cross state borders). in some uses, regionalconveys the idea of a multistate territory (e.g., the mountainhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns55health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.states or the midatlantic region), but most of this committee's work has beendirected at smaller regions. farthinking experts envision a time when regionalentities will be linked across the nation, even if their governance and operationsremain close to home. this creates the very longrange view of a national healthdata repository operated by a single organization or a federation of regional orstate entities. especially in the short term, however, hdos may haveoverlapping geographic and population boundaries; that is, there might beseveral in a metropolitan area or within a state's boundaries that includedifferent subpopulations.the committee elucidated these concepts precisely because regional hdosare only now emerging in the united states. some have been legislated or areunder consideration by several cities and states for legislative mandate, but noneis in full operation. it believes, however, that such entities will becomerepositories of an immense array of health informationšfar more extensive intheir holdings than any of today's data systems. thus, the issues raised inchapters 3 and 4 of this report are explored with an eye to the policies andprocedures these emerging hdos might establish today to realize their manypotential benefits while protecting against or minimizing possible harms toindividuals (whether patients or practitioners), institutions, or society in general.hdos under developmentdescribed below are several hdos currently under development thatrepresent the kinds of entities the committee considered during this study. onlyselected characteristics of these programs are given, as a means of illustratingspecific points that reflect the attributes of prototypical hdos as defined earlierin this chapter.hospital consortium of greater rochester. in existence since the late1970s, the rochester area hospital corporation (rahc) was originallyestablished to enhance cooperative links among the community hospitals and toput community resources to their best use. a recent initiative has led to itsreorganization as the hospital consortium of greater rochester (hcgr) and tothe continuing development of a communitywide health information networkthat has hdo characteristics. recent community discussions have focused onthe creation of a health care commission that will include representatives of thearea's eight hospitals, physicians, employers, the two major thirdparty payers,and residents (gates, 1993a; personal communication, beverly voos, presidentand ceo, rhi group, november 1993). while the function of this commissionis still being discussed, the initiative could include the use of a databasemaintained by the rochester healthcare information group (rhi group), awholly owned, forprofit subsidiary.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns56health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from 1980 to 1987, rahc administered an experimental paymentprogram with both state and federal funding. under this program, it establisheda communitywide hospital data system and administered an annual globalbudget using a community database. that database contains demographic,clinical, and financial data on all acutecare discharges from rahc hospitalsfrom 1980 onward. it has approximately 100 data elements per patient record inthe following categories: social security number, demographics, clinicalinformation, patient classifications, provider identification, payer data, andresource use data. reports are provided to hcgr and to member hospitals onan ad hoc basis. regional and national comparisons can be made usingstatewide data and the national hospital discharge survey.beginning with 1980, more than a million patient discharge records arerecorded in this database. reports can provide casemix analyses (whichcompare lengths of stay by diagnosis, payer, age, and hospital); trend reports onmortality statistics and readmission statistics by year and by diagnosis; payeranalysis (which uses cases by insurers by years to analyze age and length ofstay); resource utilization analysis comparing routine daily care and ancillarycare; severityofillness analysis; market share analysis using zip codes; andphysician caseload and hospital case mix.the rhi group database now includes ambulatory surgery and will sooninclude outpatient clinic visits as well. other database components includepatients awaiting discharge from a hospital to a nursing home and a perinataldatabase that is under development. eventually, it is expected that the databasewill include information from every clinical setting. rhi group is able to trackpatient care over time because it has social security numbers in the database.henry ford health system. the center for clinical effectiveness at thehenry ford health system in detroit is developing systems to track patients'longterm functional status six months or more after treatment as well as costsof their care (gates, 1993b). this focus has provided the impetus for thedevelopment of a uniform electronic data collection system. the developersplan to integrate the collection of data from many operational units of thehospitals and sites of care (e.g., ambulatory care physician visits, tumorregistries, patient satisfaction surveys) to make data available for a variety ofuses within henry ford's large integrated health care system, ranging frompatient reminders and managed care activities to outcomes research that wouldbe supported by a central data repository. from the standpoint of inclusiveness,such a system would include only patients at henry ford sites. that systemincludes over 400,000 hmo members of the health alliance plan and 920physicians. it owns four hospitals, operates two nursing homes, and has jointventures to manage four other hospihealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns57health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tals. the henry ford health system is an independent, notforprofit providernetwork (anderson, 1993).the new york singlepayer demonstration program. new york state isimplementing a threeyear program to improve administrative efficiency ofhospitals and other providers (some freestanding clinics and physicians) bycoordinating, automating, and standardizing claims processing, billing, andpayment systems. the initiative is not literally a singlepayer effort but rather asingleclaim demonstration to translate insurance claims and billing forms inwhatever format they are submitted and forward them to payers. in terms ofinclusiveness, the databases will be statewide and will include patientshospitalized in new york state; with respect to comprehensiveness, they willcontain primarily hospital data with the addition of physician and clinic datafrom billing forms. the state does not plan to maintain a data repository, but thepotential exists for it to direct data to such a repository in the future.the vermont health care authority. the vermont health care authority(vhca) is the creation of 1992 state legislation (vermont health reform act).it draws on earlier state efforts to share health care information, particularly thevermont program for quality in health care, a project that has been under waysince the late 1980s (keller, 1993). the vhca program will be inclusive(covering all vermont residents) and comprehensive (all health care servicesthat vermont residents receive from providers both in state and out of state).the initiative will include a lifetime patient recordšessentially a unified healthcare databasešlinked to an information repository.the unified database is to be developed by a subsidiary group, vermonthealth care information consortium, using files of all providers, a uniforminsurance claims form, and electronic claims submission. the claimsdrivenhealth care database is intended to provide policyrelated information such asaggregate levels of expenditures and utilization by sectors; it will includemedicare, medicaid, blue cross and blue shield, and other provider or insurergroups (e.g., hmos).the information repository, when linked to the lifetime health record, ismeant to be an integrated system that improves access, controls costs, givesconsumers health care information, and improves quality of care. theseoutcomes are to be achieved through two proposed mechanisms that are similarto those examined in chapter 3 of this report: (1) feedback programs to sharedata on quality and practice patterns with onethird of vermont's practicingphysicians and (2) public disclosure of information about providers.as of late 1993, the role of state agencies was not yet clear, but goverhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns58health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nance of the notforprofit consortium will include a publicprivate partnership,with representation of state government (the department of health and thegovernor's office), vermont employers, the vermont business roundtable, bluecross and blue shield, health care providers (hospitals, physicians, the state'smedical school), and consumer and patient advocates. it will have an advisorycommittee and several subcommittees for activities focused on patient advocacyand confidentiality, a business plan, financial issues, technical concerns, anddata elements.community health management information system. in the early 1990sthe john a. hartford foundation launched a program of support for innovative,communitybased development efforts to meet the shared information needs ofall health system stakeholders at the local level: purchasers, consumers,providers, payers, and regulators. the hartford initiative has focused on severalregions of the country; grantees are located now in the states (or cities) of iowa,minnesota, new york, ohio, tennessee (memphis), vermont, and washington.the program conceptšgenerally known as the community healthmanagement information system (chmis)šhas been described by bentoninternational (bi, 1991a, 1991b, 1992), which developed the chmis designand functional specifications that were being adapted by the local sites.7the chmis is based on two components. the first is a transaction system.to facilitate pointofservice transactions for the patient and to speed claimsprocessing, computer terminals at each provider site will be used to accesspatient information based on a personal identification code (pic) and amagnetized card similar to those used by automatic teller machines. at the timeof service, patients or clerks will key in a pic to allow access to eligibility,coverage, and billing information. this approach is comparable to thosefollowed by prescription medication plans that use terminals in pharmacies toconfirm that a customer is eligible for plan coverage and to determine whatcharges should be paid. electronic switches or clearinghouses process bills andinsurance forms from hospitals, physicians, laboratories, pharmacies, and othersites by electronically forwarding claims and encounter information to theinsurance carrier, health plan, or thirdparty administrator.the second component is a data repository, the main focus of thiscommittee's interest. certain information about patients, providers, plans,7 benton international is a consulting firm for the financial services industry, withexpertise in credit card and atm (automatic teller machine) transaction processing. allinformation about chmis in the bi specifications is in the public domain, and neitherthe john a. hartford foundation nor bi retains proprietary claims on this information.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns59health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and clinical encounters will be routed to and stored in a data repository (ormade available through distributed databases); these data will then be availablefor use and analyses by providers, payers, purchasers, consumers, regulators,and researchers (see william m. mercer, inc., 1993). the repositories areintended to be inclusivešall individuals receiving care in a defined region orstate. they are also designed to be comprehensivešincluding demographic,eligibility, clinical, health risk, and health status information.as envisioned in the bi specifications for chmiss, data sources are varied: transactionbased information in feeforservice systems, encounterdata typically associated with insurance claims, such as procedure anddiagnostic codes, constitute much of the general data set and will beacquired directly from the provider as part of the claims transaction. inprepaid capitated systems (group and staff model hmos) that do notnormally produce insurance claims forms, special arrangements will bedesigned to obtain needed data. the system is intended to incorporatemedicare and medicaid claims data at some point. patient satisfaction surveys and health status questionnaires thisinformation will be obtained from the patient (or possibly a familymember in the case of, e.g., minor children), on either a routine or asample basis. survey instruments and questionnaires might alsocontain inquiries about lifestyle and health habits. special studies the general data set will be augmented by specifiedclinical data acquired from providers to permit researchers and othersto conduct special studies of specific health conditions or other topics.the subjects of special studies would likely change over time, butclearly could include matters related to quality of, satisfaction with,access to, and costs of health care in the relevant community or state.although not fully operational as this report was being prepared in1993,the hartford chmiss were moving forcefully toward implementation. twodifferent operating models seem to predominate. one model is based on a statelegislative requirement for all providers to send data to a public agency thatcontracts with the chmis operating entity; washington state and vermont fallinto this group. a second model is voluntary, relying on recognition byproviders and payers of the system's benefit to them. in such cases localbusiness or health care purchasing coalitions may require that all providers withwhom they contract submit data through the chmis; the memphis businessgroup on health exemplifies this approach.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns60health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of health databasesthe gains expected from imaginative but responsible uses of theinformation held by hdos accrue not only to various interest groups but also topopulations generally, whether in a metropolitan or substate region, a givenstate, or the nation as a whole. the size of the potential benefits, whether to thecommunity at large or to specific users, is likely to be a function of thecomprehensiveness and inclusiveness of the databasesšthe morecomprehensive or inclusive (or both) the more powerful the information will beat every level and for every potential user and use.broadbased benefitsthe intent of many database and hdo efforts today is to give regions away to monitor and improve the value of their health care services and the wellbeing of their residents. hdos might achieve this by making availableinformation on access to care, costs, appropriateness, effectiveness, and qualityof health care services and providers. hdos can also contribute toimprovements in quality of care by making information available to institutionsand groups of practitioners for their use in quality assurance and qualityimprovement (qa/qi) programs and for regional health planning.many hdos (especially those developed with public funds and bylegislative mandate) can be expected to be useful in addressing a wide range ofpolicy questions and in this way they will contribute to the national debaterelated to health care reform.8 regardless of the path of reform efforts, thequestions noted below are of special importance, as implied by the briefscenarios that opened chapter 1. for example: access are people in a given region receiving appropriate care in atimely manner? are services equitably available and affordable by allgroups in that population? do access barriers relating to social andcultural factors appear to persist? does the use of particular types ofproviders or facilities differ by patient or consumer characteristics? costs can the rate of increase in aggregate health expenditures be8 in a recent report, the institute of medicine (iom, 1993c) outlined the criticalelements of health care reform that it believed sound reform proposals ought to address.the five main topics were access, containing costs, ensuring quality, financing care, andenhancing the infrastructure of health care. individual iom reports have dealt withspecific topics related to certain aspects of health reform, such as access (iom, 1993a),employmentbased insurance (iom, 1993e), quality of care (iom, 1990), clinicalpractice guidelines (iom, 1992a), and the information infrastructure (iom, 1991a).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns61health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moderated? can accurate estimates be made of the costs of care ingiven geographic areas? can health care delivery and administration bemade more efficient? can administrative costs be reduced? can costshifting within the public sector (e.g., between states and the federalgovernment, or from the private to the public sector) be minimized? quality of care can the provision of health services be organized so asto increase the likelihood of health outcomes that are desired byindividual patients? can information from these databases addressthree main quality problems: use of inappropriate and unnecessaryservices, underuse of appropriate and needed services, and poortechnical and interpersonal performance? can clinical and otherinformation in hdo files contribute to more, and better, practiceguidelines? can credible information about more effective andappropriate health care services be made available to clinicians andinstitutions in a more timely, and less threatening, fashion? can usefulinformation about the quality and outcomes of care of different kindsof providers be assembled and made available in convenient andprompt ways to consumers and organizers of provider networks andplans (e.g., insurance companies)?9 delivery of health services what services are appropriate and effectivefor what health care problems? how does the provision of thoseservices vary across geographic areas, population groups, types ofproviders, settings of care, and time? can innovative approaches tohealth care delivery be designed so as to promote the goals of healthreform? disease incidence and public health what are the major causes ofdeath, illness, and disability for different groups in the population?how are these patterns changing over time? health planning how might the acquisition, location, operation, andfinancing of facilities, capital equipment, health personnel, and otherresources be made more rational, more affordable, and moreresponsive to clear community and regional needs?9 at the time this study was conducted, the hartford foundation sponsored a separatestudy from researchers at the harvard school of public health to examine questionsrelated to the establishment of an ''institute for health care assessment," which wouldhave as a major goal the advancement of quality measurement and improvement.services that such an institute might provide to hdos might include project formulation,technical assistance (in quality measurement, data collection and management, andanalysis), report design and profiling (e.g., of morbidity, patient satisfaction, provideradherence to guidelines, and variation in use of costly technologies), and projectevaluation. a clearinghouse effort and dissemination might also be contemplated. forfurther information, see mcneil et al. (1992).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns62health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.differential benefits as a function of users and usesanswers to the questions above benefit almost all members of a givenpopulation; in that sense, the gains are broadbased. other benefits of hdosand their activities will depend on a specific user and use, which are exploredmore fully in the next section. one aspect of differential benefits should beunderscored, however. in today's complicated u.s. health sector, what mayprofit one party may well work to the detriment of other parties. for example,information that encourages insurers or others to contract only with certainproviders in a community, on grounds of either quality or cost, is doubtless ofbenefit to those insurers and providers, and it does give insurers the opportunityto direct patients toward highquality providers. such practices may, however,threaten the financial stability, livelihood, or professional standing of other,noncontracted providersšthis is certainly not a benefit for them and mayundermine the systems for the delivery of care to other, lessfavored patientgroups.the next section briefly identifies usersšgroups that have a stake in theuse of healthrelated datašand is followed by a discussion of potential uses ofhdo databases. some potential applications of data raise concerns that thereport returns to in chapters 3 and 4. in developing positions andrecommendations about the actions that hdos should take with respect to data(this chapter), public disclosure of healthrelated information on providers(chapter 3), and with respect to privacy and confidentiality of personidentifieddata (chapter 4), the committee tried to balance the broadbased benefits (andthe narrower benefits sought by certain groups) against the possible harms thatmight be done to individuals or to broader health and social policy goals.users of information in hdosas noted, many stakeholders in the health care system will share thegeneral uses and the derivative benefits described above for hdos. the majorusers include: health care provider organizations and practitioners providerorganizations include physicians in solo practice and largemultispecialty groups; managed care groups such as hmos, ipas, andppos; freestanding surgery centers and other ambulatory carefacilities; institutions such as hospitals and nursing homes; andenterprises such as pharmacies, clinical laboratories, and home healthagencies. patients, families, and community residents in general the informationin hdo databases may also be valuable for active patients and theirhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns63health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.families; more generally, it will be useful for residents who, althoughnot patients at a given time, seek information about health care. academic and research organizations academic and researchorganizations take many forms: academic health or medical centersaffiliated with the nation's public and private universities; schools ofmedicine, dentistry, nursing, and allied health professions; and schoolsof public health. private research institutes also fall into this group.most of the entities in this category have major patient care andeducational responsibilities, but they also carry out much of the healthresearch in this country on issues involving access, effectiveness,utilization, costs, quality, and acceptability of care. payers and purchasers this category of users includes healthinsurance firms and companies with selfinsured health plans that payfor some or all of the health care of their beneficiaries or employees. italso includes managed care companies, thirdparty payers (tpps), andthirdparty administrators (tpas), who will look to hdos forassistance in managing standard insurance tasks. insurers and selfinsured employers also administer a variety of retrospective andprospective utilization management and case management programs. employers and business or purchaser coalitions typically, businesscoalitions comprise major employers in a given area, many of whomhave selfinsured health plans; some coalitions may have providermembers, but many do not. these groups have been a driving force indeveloping data networks in several regions of the country. (forexample, as the chmis models were evolving during the period ofthis study, they were motivated in large measure by the concerns andinterests of business or purchaser coalitions.) health agencies at the federal level, at least three phs agencies mightfind hdo databases of considerable value in their daily operations(beyond the clear contributions that such databases would make tooutcomes and effectiveness research): the food and drugadministration, for postmarketing surveillance and monitoringresponsibilities (usdhhs, 1991); the centers for disease control andprevention, for public health and prevention activities; and the healthservices and resources administration, for its maternal and childhealth block grants and health work force training programs. otherdhhs agenciesšsuch as hcfa, the administration on children andfamilies, and the administration on agingšmight be added to this listof potential users for similar federal oversight tasks. at the state,county, and municipal level, analogous health departments are likely tobe users of hdo information for corresponding purposes; they are alsolikely to be central to hdo development and operations. other potential database users other users may well view hdoinformation as valuable. these include community and consumerorganizahealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns64health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tions; charitable groups and volunteer groups concerned with variousdiseases; social service agencies; law enforcement agencies at thefederal, state, and local level; attorneys; and commercial entities suchas direct marketing firms, financial and credit institutions, and billcollection agencies, to list only a few. to the extent that these usersseek personidentifiable information, however, the committee takes anextremely negative view toward providing access to hdo files.uses of databaseswithout a clear understanding of potential users and their reasons forwanting access to data, hdos cannot frame or implement sensible policiesabout a range of operational activities. to provide a background for reachingconclusions about hdos and for developing recommendations to address themajor issues implied by the vignettes that opened chapter 1, the committeeexplored the uses of hdo information. those described below are seen as themost likely in the short term, but as the direction of health reform becomesclearer, new uses and users may arise (e.g., related to health purchasingalliances), and some described below (e.g., insurer roles) may become obsolete.in some cases, uses of hdo data are illustrated by reference to databases heldby organizations or public agencies that approach the hdo concept (seetable 24).assessing access to care and use of servicesassessing access or lack of access to care is critical in evaluating theperformance of systems of health care delivery and the rational planning ofthose systems. understanding the economic, geographic, and transportationbarriers to health services, variations in, and access to health services isessential in the evaluation of the effects of ongoing or changing health caredelivery systems. several recent studies have examined the relationshipbetween insurance, socioeconomic status, and race, on the one hand, and accessto and use of health services, on the other (bravemen et al., 1989; burstin et al.,1992; patrick et al., 1992; adler et al., 1993); racial and gender differences indisease incidence and survival have also been examined (ayanian and epstein,1991; hannan et al., 1991b; ayanian, 1993; becker et al., 1993; whittle et al.,1993). at the level of regions of the country, unmet health needs may beespecially significant for minorities or other groups such as pregnant women orpoor children; users of hdo information may need to pay special attention tosuch groups.among the betterknown work on patterns of utilization is that related tothe phenomenon of geographic or smallarea variations in the use ofhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns65health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns66health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns67health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns68health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns69health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical services, particularly invasive procedures.10 much of the landmarkresearch in this area has relied on the administrative and other databases thathcfa maintains for the medicare program (table 24); these files have beenextremely useful for research purposes for more than a decade. other studieshave employed data from state data organizations (e.g., wennberg andgittelsohn, 1982). for purposes of tracking use of services, conducting manydifferent kinds of health services and health policy research, and otherwiseadministering a complex populationbased health system, many experts regardthe databases maintained by the individual provinces of canada as models foruses of hdo information (see table 24 for a description of the manitoba files).some uses of hdo data to explore patterns of utilization could raiseconcerns, however. for example, information that permits thirdparty payers todevise insurance packages attractive to (or affordable by) only certain groups inthe population is clearly of competitive benefit to the companies and thepopulations they target, but such practices may operate to the disadvantage ofthe excluded groups. to the extent the latter overlap with the vulnerablepopulations noted above, many would regard this use of hdo data asundesirable.assessing costs and identifying opportunities for savingscurbing health care expenditures includes placing global limits onspending and linking fees to changes in the volume of services. for such effortsto be effective and equitable, however, those directing them will have tounderstand better the geographic variations in services and the reasons for thesevariations (welch et al., 1993). equally significant will be documenting the trueeconomic costs of delivering health care as a means of understanding patternsof health expenditures and, secondarily, the efficiency of different plans andsystems of care. to the extent that hdos acquire reliable and valid informationon services rendered and on charges and payments for those services (howeverquestionable the actual relationship between billed charges and true costs), theywill be in a position to clarify cost and expenditure issues.10 the literature in this area is extensive. wellknown articlesšbeginning about adecade ago on smallareavariations analysisšinclude mcpherson et al., 1981; roos androos, 1981; roos et al., 1982; wennberg and gittelsohn, 1982; wennberg et al., 1982,1984; eddy, 1984; roos, 1984; wennberg, 1984; health affairs, 1984; chassin et al.,1986a, 1987; merrick et al., 1986; winslow et al., 1988a, 1988b; wennberg, 1990; paulet al., 1993. for a recent review of this literature and a new interpretation of this body ofempirical work that suggests that physician enthusiasm for particular services explainsmuch of the geographic variation in utilization, see chassin, 1993a.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns70health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evaluating quality and outcomes of careinformation about quality of care is important to everyonešfor choosing asource of care, designing a health plan, building a malpractice case, or trying toimprove carešand this committee gave quality assurance and improvementissues special attention in its deliberations. physicians, institutions, and otherswho deliver direct patient care and insurers who establish their own providernetworks will need to carry out qa/qi activities. it can be argued that thequality issues will have even greater visibility if certain approaches to healthcare reform gain prominence (those premised on managed competition) becauseof the heavy reliance that will be placed on the availability of credible qualityofcare information to consumers, purchasers, and regulators. as noted abovewith respect to access, the work that hdos might do or support on quality ofcare must take disadvantaged, at risk, vulnerable populations more directly intoaccount (lohr et al., 1993).if information available from hdos is reliable and amenable to diagnosisspecific analyses and if it can be aggregated by physician, institution, and thelike, then it may prove more useful for these purposes than current regulatoryapproaches to quality assurance. of special interest to insurers (andpolicymakers in implementing health reform) is the potential for hdos to useaggregate data to provide clinical practice benchmarks or norms. such normsallow insurers (or others) to compare the practices and outcomes of a givenprovider with those of similar providers.hospitalspecific mortality rate studieshospitalspecific mortality rate studies have been an early focus of qualityof care studies using large databases. much of this work began with hcfa'srelease of such information in the mid1980s, and a steady stream of reports(produced annually until 1993 by hcfa) from numerous teams of investigatorshas appeared since that time. 11 statewide databases have also been used forresearch projects on mortality rates following open heart surgery. one examplecomes from the new york state cardiac surgery reporting system (hannan etal., 1989b, 1990, 1991a; zinman, 1991; see also chapter 3 of this report) andanother from the pennsylvania health11 the first major release of hospitalspecific mortality rates dates to publications fromhcfa (e.g., hcfa, 1991). other illustrative research efforts include those reported bychassin et al. (1989) on all medicare hospitalizations, by dubois et al. (1987a, 1987b) onadmissions to institutions belonging to a single hospital chain, and by luft and romano(1993) on riskadjusted death rates from coronary artery bypass and graft operations forhospitals in california.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns71health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.care cost containment council, whose report listed hospital charges and riskadjusted mortality rates for coronary artery bypass graft (cabg) surgery for 35pennsylvania hospitals and 170 cardiac surgeons (phcccc, 1992).a painstaking evaluation of the impact of the diagnosisrelated groupprospective payment system (drgbased pps) in medicare also relied onmedicare files for critical data on patient outcomes (kahn et al., 1992; keeler etal., 1992a). because the thrust of this work relates to quality of care, this reportreturns to such studies in chapter 3.effectiveness and outcomes researchyet another critical research area involves the effectiveness and outcomesof health carešthe clinical evaluative sciences as some call it. understandingeffectiveness involves evaluation of the utility and appropriateness of healthcare in everyday settings with socalled average patients and usual providers(brook and lohr, 1985). william roper, m.d., the former hcfa administrator,coined the phrase ''what works in the practice of medicine" to characterize thequestions that researchers in medical effectiveness might address (roper et al.,1988). at about the same time, the national center for health servicesresearch (now ahcpr) began an ambitious research program whose granteesare known as patient outcomes research teams (ports) (ahcpr, 1990a,1990b; raskin and maklan, 1991). a dozen or more ports are under way atany one time in this country, and all of those concerned with health problems ofthe elderly rely heavily on medicare files.although these studies often involve rigorous design and statisticalmethods, by intent they are usually not randomized trials that require massiveprimary data collectionšhence the attractiveness of information on health carethat already has been collected and stored in data files. information in thesedatabases can, nonetheless, contribute to classic randomized, controlled trialsšfor example, by providing indications of the epidemiology of disease ortreatment patterns or, in some circumstances, serving as a means of designing asampling frame for the study.12 as a case in point: two articles that appeared asthis report was being prepared examined the utility of12 technology assessment overlaps with these research efforts in so far as it extendsbeyond reviews of the published literature or operations of expert panels to actualcollection and analysis of data. often, however, technology assessment is directed moreat emerging technologiesšfor example, new drugs, devices, or (less often) proceduresšthan at established ones. to the extent this is true, databases of the sort described in thisreport, particularly those derived from financial transactions in health care, will notcontain much relevant or useable data on those newer technologies. they will, however,contain valuable information for the comparison of these new technologies with existingapproaches (which always include watchful waiting). when the focus of technologyassessment is on established technologies, databases are useful not only for suchevaluation activities, but also for setting priorities for assessment (iom, 1992b).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns72health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.surgery for prostatic cancer (fleming et al., 1993; luyao et al., 1993). onepaper relied on medicare's claims system to estimate the risk of radicalprostatectomy; the other examined time trends and geographic variations inprostate cancer diagnosis. both can be traced to earlier analyses on variations inthe use of transurethral prostatectomy for benign prostatic hypertrophy, whichhad been based on data contained in largescale databases (see the citations infootnote 10). the committee thus placed great emphasis on the need to expandsuch uses of health databasesšincluding those expected to be assembled byhdosšto address the myriad health services research questions that nowconfront this nation. a recent report from ahcpr provides a usefulcompilation of automated data sources and a literature review for ambulatorycare effectiveness research as well as a description of automated ambulatoryrecord systems (usdhhs, 1993a).quality assurance and quality improvement programsproviders will find information in hdo databases of particular value forqa/qi programs. in a health care environment emphasizing competitionšonethat may heavily regulate prices and other economic factors and disallowpreexisting condition clauses, biased risk selection by insurers, and similar costshifting tacticsšcompetition on the basis of quality of care may become farmore prominent (ampra, 1993; iom, 1993c; palmer and adams, 1993;tillmann and sullivan, 1993). provider groups have a clear incentive toimplement meaningful qa/qi efforts as a means of doing as well as possible incomparative analyses. some internal efforts may involve recruiting highqualitystaff or dismissing poorly performing staff; other elements involve improvingperformance across the board. thus, these databases may offer provider groupshelp for strategic planning, marketing, and competing in local health markets;these benefits presuppose that providers choose to act on the information thatthey can glean directly from the database or that they are furnished as part of anexternal qualityreview program.in california, for example, all nonfederal acutecare hospitals submitdischarge abstracts to the state's office of statewide health planning anddevelopment. among the data elements available for analysis are age, sex,presence of chronic conditions, dates of admission, surgery, and procedureshealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns73health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition to a primary operation; information dates back to at least 1983.using data from this file, luft and romano (1993) reported on two sets ofcabgrelated analyses: (1) describing general patterns of cabg use and riskadjusted outcomes over a sevenyear period and (2) identifying hospitals withsignificantly or consistently higher or lower death rates after cabg than wouldbe expected. these kinds of analyses are commonly done with hospitaldischarge abstract databases; often, however, they are subject to considerablecriticism, especially because of the inadequacy of information to permitadjustment for patient risk factors, such as ejection fraction or previous cabg.given the constraints of the database that luft and romano used, their studywas considered exemplary because of their sophisticated approach to measuringoutcome and performing statistical analyses (chassin, 1993b).another example of qualityofcare applications of databases is thequantitative and qualitative work done for the iom report on the endstage renaldisease (esrd) program (iom, 1991b). these analyses drew on information inone or more of three major esrd data systems: the esrd programmanagement and medical information system, administered by hcfa; theunited states renal data system, administered by the national institute ofdiabetes and digestive and kidney diseases; and the united network fororgan sharing data system, a part of the southeast organ procurementfoundation.in short, for well more than a decade researchers have employed largedatabases, particularly those of the medicare program, for studies that todayhave significant bearing on our understanding of the quality of health servicesin terms of both processes and outcomes of care. apart from their intrinsicworth and findings, such studies have generated important hypotheses, theexploration of which promises to yield further, and considerable, social benefit.planning and monitoring patient carehealth care practitioners will be able to use the information in hdodatabases in many patient care responsibilities. examples of such applicationsinclude: checking patients' allergies to medication, obtaining patient histories atthe time of patientpractitioner encounters, planning the management ofcomplex cases, and fostering better communication among all providersrendering care to an individual patient and between clinicians and ancillarypersonnel.descriptive information derived from such databases may enable primarycare physicians (and their support staffs) to conduct outreach and healthpromotion activities; such tasks might involve identifying individuals whoshould receive periodic screening tests and providing uptodate immunizationrecords for school enrollment. chronically ill patients and theirhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns74health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.families could use hdo data files to help maintain family health records (e.g.,logs of visits to a specialist or admissions to a hospital) or to create a runningsum of outofpocket expenses for officebased care, medications, orhospitalizations.hdos with prescription databases might enable physicians, pharmacists,and others to track prescribed medications and to report adverse drug reactionsmore readily. their databases might also be used to identify medication abuseby patients who obtain a pharmaceutical agent from multiple providers or todetect medications prescribed by different providers whose interactions couldcause adverse reactions or reduce their effectiveness.even for those who are not patients or relatives of patients at any giventime, hdo databases may be of value. descriptive information on primary carephysicians, specialists, other caregivers, and health plans (e.g., location, specialaspects of a practice or facility, or usual charges) may be of great help whenindividuals plan to seek care for new problems or in new locales. healtheducation materials that could be developed as an adjunct to hdo activity, suchas guidelines for preventive care, nutrition, or available community resources,can be a valuable resource for residents as well.many large employers have become deeply involved in managed care,case management of highrisk or highcost patients, and in workplace healthpromotion efforts. they are likely to use hdo information in all these kinds ofprograms for their employees, employees' dependents, and (possibly) retirees.government is a significant employer at the federal, state, and local levels, andit has as much interest in good health and good decision making among civilservants, as does the private sector for its work force. thus, the uses thatcorporate (or small) employers might have for hdo information apply equallyto the public sector.less obvious reasons for seeking access to health databases can beimagined. for example, adopted children may wish to obtain information oncertain health or genetic characteristics of their birth (natural) parents, as ameans of making healthrelated decisions of their own; such requests might bebrought through third parties as a way of protecting the privacy of the parents orthe adopted child, or both. although this example may seem remote today,uncommon uses of these databasesšand the considerable ethical,psychological, political, and practical ramifications they may havešought to becontemplated in advance as policies about access, privacy, and disclosure areset in motion.enhancing administrative efficiencyone major goal of health care reform is to make health insurance claimsprocessing and financial transactions more efficient. all health insurers havedatabases derived from several sources. these databases have tradihealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns75health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tionally served as mechanisms for eligibility verification, provider reporting (fortax purposes), and claims adjudication. when their data flow in an electronictransaction (i.e., edi) system, the efficiency related to billing, reimbursement,claims tracking, remittance reconciliation, and similar business matters can bevery high; the workgroup for electronic data interchange, in its report to thesecretary of dhhs (wedi, 1992), estimated benefits, savings, and strategiesfor implementing edi in the coming years.analogously, when hdos build their repositories through such electronicsystems, they may be able to support nearly instantaneous verification ofinsurance plan eligibility and covered benefits,13 facilitate claims submission,and eliminate timeconsuming, costly paperwork. the closer that thesedatabases approximate the medical record, the more exact reimbursementstrategies will become and the less time can be spent on record requests andappeals.operating managed care programsproviders or others may find hdo databases helpful in identifying likelyhighcost patients who would benefit from case management and instreamlining precertification tasks. case management and precertificationcustomarily call for casebycase decision makingšwhether an individual'scare for severe mental illness will be reimbursed if given in the inpatient settingor whether services for a highrisk pregnancy will be organized through a casemanager.tpps and tpas have begun to apply medical logic programs to augmenttheir precertification programs with what might be called intelligent adjudicationšthat is, decision making that takes into account historical medicalinformation. given appropriate and consistent use of standardized coding rules,electronic (as opposed to telephone or paperbased) precertification systemscan simplify and speed decision making for patients, physicians, tpps, andtpas. hdo data may be useful for profiling services received13 the term "benefits," as used in this report, has two distinct meanings, depending onthe context. one reflects the general notion of positive advantages, gains, and useful aidsin the conduct of some activity. the other is the narrower insurancerelated concept of abenefit package or contract, in which a set of services (typically characterized as"medically necessary") is specified as covered (and in which other services may bespecifically identified as not covered). this committee assumes that major health carereform will likely bring about a standardized class of covered benefits, at least in a"basic" package mandated nationally; this would reduce the need for verification ofcovered benefits by providers and insurers. to the extent that reform initiatives permitdifferential types of supplemental insurance plans to be offered, however, suchverification may still be needed and the desirability of doing that instantaneously remainshigh.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns76health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.by patients who are subject to precertification programs and for portrayingprevailing practices in a locale, thereby contributing to the construction of suchlogic programs.in these ways, hdo data could be brought to bear to improve patient careand to minimize the frustrating, inequitable, or idiosyncratic features of presentday utilization review and case management. looking well into the future, someexperts hypothesize that information in largescale databases will significantlychange utilization management processes and, indeed, even obviate the need forutilization management as it is conducted today. this might happen as betterepidemiologic data and the methods of artificial intelligence make it possible tocreate casemanagement protocols based on complex logic trees that takeaccount of far more patient, clinical, and other variables than is possible today.strategic planning and selective contractinghdo data can facilitate a range of longterm planning, business, andfinancial management tasks that insurers, employers, and providers face. suchinformation can also be applied in the selective contracting activities that arebecoming increasingly common.strategic planningwith respect to longrange strategies, tpps and tpas might be able toimprove their underwriting and benefits design through analysis of hdo data;for instance, such analyses might enable them to set premiums more accuratelyor to establish benefit packages. however, the committee hopes that tpps andtpas would not use hdo databases for selective underwriting that furtherfragments the risk pool. more broadly, payers and purchasers might be able todetermine the risks they face with respect to future demand for health care moreaccurately from such databases than they could in the past. if hdo databasesare reasonably inclusive, tpps and tpas might then be able to understandbetter how such demand might vary by geographic area or population group andhow it might change over time.payers are likely to use hdo information in strategic planning for morethan just the health insurance portion of their business. for instance, somehealth insurers may be part of conglomerates that offer life, disability, workers'compensation, and other forms of insurance. in theory, hdos might provideinformation on individuals, or groups in a geographic area, that would be ofconsiderable interest to those managing other activities of an insurancecompany. such data might be helpful in devising nonhealth insurance packagesthat are attractive (or not attractive, as the case may be) to certain individuals orpopulations in those locales.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns77health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.providers may seek to use hdo databases for many reasons: to projectmarket share when considering mergers with other facilities, to select sites forsatellite clinics, to establish ambulatory surgery centers, to acquire grouppractices, and in other ways to plan future activities with financial implications.some groups may wish to acquire competitive intelligence in order to setcharges for their services, so that they can consider whether to lower or raisetheir charges for some or all purchasers or patients. although such activitiesmight well raise antitrust issues, addressing such questions was beyond theexpertise of the committee or the scope of the study.selective contractingto develop provider networksšsystems of practitioners (includingphysicians, dentists, optometrists, and psychologists), ancillary facilities (e.g.,clinical laboratories or shortterm substance abuse programs), hospitals andnursing homes, and agencies that deliver home health or homebased hospicecarešthat can compete effectively in the health sector today, insurers needmore specific, accurate, and detailed data that will permit them to contractselectively with such providers. selective contracting in this context means notonly identifying practitioners and providers that can deliver highquality carewithin some acceptable cost norms, but also recognizing those that cannot; ineither case, it implies that providers will perform in accordance with responsiblepractice guidelines and protocols. in addition, providers might use measures ofnormative behavior to determine the standards of quality each provider or planmight expect of its practitioners.thus, hdo information might be applied in retrospective profiling ofproviderrelated information as a means of identifying providers that might bebrought into (or kept out of) selective contracting arrangements; it can also beemployed to monitor performance over time. one of the chief aims of hdosemerging today is, in fact, to aid payer or other groups in this process byenabling them to develop (or acquire) analyses of practice patterns, outcomes,costs, and similar variables that will permit them to make decisions about theproviders their systems will include or exclude.other businessrelated usesnearly threequarters of employers with 1,000 or more employees manageselfinsured health plans (foster higgins, 1991, in iom, 1993e). these firmscan, for all practical purposes, be regarded as conducting (or being responsiblefor) the same tasks as insurers, as discussed above.14 health14 the technicalitiesšnot trivial mattersšrelating to employment retirement incomesecurity act (erisa) preemptions with respect to selfinsured employer plans were notdirectlyhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns78health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.databases or hdos based chiefly on the sponsorship of employers will thus, intheory, offer considerable advantages in benefits planning, selectivecontracting, monitoring provider network performance, and similar activitiesrelating to management of employmentbased health insurance coverage. forexample, employers may want to create casemanagement plans that areincreasingly directive and oriented toward exclusive provider organization(epo) arrangements, like those that are common today for hightechnologytherapies such as transplantation and cardiac surgery.employers might also wish to use the information in some databases forpersonnel actionsšpromotions, relocations, dismissals, and the like.15 as willbe noted later in this report, serious concerns must be addressed about misuse ofdata in general and with respect to possible violation of the americans withdisabilities act (ada), for instance. nevertheless, the connections betweenworkplace wellness and personnel actions are clear.tracking injury and illness, preventive care, and healthbehaviorsthose studying and having responsibility for public health efforts can beexpected to use hdo databases for a broad set of applications. these includeanalyses of the incidence of injury and disease and studies of the prevalence oftraumarelated health problems and chronic illness. today, disease and injuryregistries provide information on traumatic events, episodes of illness, and theprocesses and outcomes of care that exemplify what might be done with hdodata in the future. for instance, cancer registry data from two states, illinois andwashington, have been used to address a range of questions (hand et al., 1991;lasovich et al., 1991) including underuse of services in the hospitals studied.one study focused analyses on the percentage of earlystage breast cancerpatients who do notaddressed by this iom committee. many observers believe, however, that meaningfulhealth care reform will require modification, if not outright repeal, of erisa insofar ashealth insurance is concerned (iom, 1993e, 1993c). federal preemptive legislationwould override existing state statutes and regulations and effectively take some aspectsof insurance regulation out of the hands of state insurance commissioners; if that occurs,distinctions between selfinsured corporations and insurers subject to state insuranceregulation will decrease if not disappear altogether. the ramifications of erisa extendbeyond insurance regulation to rules for protecting the privacy and confidentiality ofpersonal health data, including those held by hdos; informational privacy issues areaddressed in chapter 4.15 for purposes of making hiring decisions about individuals, potential employers maywish to obtain information on such persons. this committee will (in chapter 4) take avery strong position against personidentifiable information being made available for thispurpose and thus does not examine that possible use of health databases further.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns79health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.receive indicated auxillary lymph node dissection or assays for hormonereceptors; in another, the study question was the percentage of women receivingbreastconserving surgery who did not receive indicated radiation therapy. incommenting on these studies, chassin (1991) notes that they suggest problems"in the extent to which physicians fail to communicate options and outcomesdata objectively" (p. 3473) and advocates routine feedback of these kinds ofdata to hospitals. with respect to injury, the american college of surgeonsnational trauma registry is another example of a database that providesinformation on patterns of injury and their outcomes (see table 24); for thoseconcerned with emergency medical services, such sources of epidemiologic andclinical information are critical (iom, 1993d).other public health applications of hdo databases relate to preventivecare and health behaviors. for some industries, for instance, epidemiologicinformation from large databases may enable analysts to identify potentialsafety or healthrelated problems in workplace environments and to suggestcorrective steps. immunization tracking systems, currently under developmentregionally and nationally, might be incorporated into hdo databases tosimplify monitoring and recording of children's immunization status both inaggregate and individually. hdos might also maintain information about bloodtype, organ donors, and tissue matching in their databases, as a means offostering improved blood banking and organ procurement and transplantservices.promoting regional and community health planning,education, and outreachhealth planning and educationwhen hdo databases are statewide, or sponsored by state healthdepartments, the potential uses by states and all subordinate levels ofgovernment for health planning, health care delivery, public health, andadministrative responsibilities become quite extensive; they can involve thehealth departments and social services agencies of states, counties, andmunicipalities in many overlapping efforts. planning and educational activitiesthat could employ hdo data might be focused on improving access to,reducing costs of, and enhancing quality of care; on organizing providersystems of care; or on investigating epidemiologic patterns of injury or illness.for example, communityspecific studies conducted using hdo data mightexamine the kinds of cases treated by local hospital emergency departments,whether use differs by hospital or patient characteristics, and whether patientoutcomes differ accordingly. such information might enhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns80health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.able public agencies to target public funds or other resources in new ways tomeet previously undetected problems or needs.integrating data on vital statistics, epidemiologic surveillance, and localand regional public health programs with those in the personalhealthcare filesof hdos raises the possibility of more effective public health activities formonitoring health, attaining public health objectives at a population level, andtargeting efforts for hardtoreach individuals. for example, researchers inboston have developed and operationalized a distributed health record systemfor a homeless population seen at many sites by many different providers(chueh and barnett, 1994).community outreachin addition to whatever publicsector agencies might do to monitor thepublic health of communities, community and consumer organizations maywish also to carry out populationbased studies as a means of learning wheresignificant health problems exist and of making elected officials and othersmore accountable for solving those problems. another significant way thatinformation held by hdos may contribute to the work of community,voluntary, and consumer groups is in their public education and outreachprograms. here the data may suggest emerging problems that warrant increasedattention (or waning problems that need reduced effort); data may also indicatewhere (in geographic areas or population subgroups) education initiatives mightbest be targeted. for example, recognition that bicycle accidents are a majorsource of children's head injuries could lead to community education programsin schools and neighborhood associations. publicsector agencies, academiccenters, or consumer groups might pursue such public health efforts byanalyzing hdo data and developing communityspecific informationalmaterials (e.g., public information brochures on sources of care for specialproblems).charitable groups and voluntary organizations concerned with particulardiseases and conditions have many roles: providing information to and supportfor patients with particular illnesses and for their families; sponsoring research;and lobbying for more policy attention, social acceptance, and research supportfor the problem. because they are likely to be private organizations that securetheir funds through donations from individuals and corporations, most mustengage in aggressive fundraising campaigns. information from health databanks might enable them to increase their efficiency in amassing epidemiologicinformation and perhaps in targeting fundraising efforts.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns81health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other uses for hdo databasesthe iom committee identified a great many other potential users and usesof hdo databases, including agencies engaged in law enforcement at thefederal, state, and local levels; law firms and attorneys; and various commercialentities. the more plausible are briefly described here.law enforcement officials can be expected to find many uses for theinformation held in hdo files. they may wish to trace individuals (forinstance, to locate parents not paying child support). they may also need toinvestigate alleged illegal acts; in the health context, this might extend to abuseof illegal substances or cases of possible child abuse. conceivably, lawenforcement agencies might want genetic information to assist them inidentification of a suspect. finally, such agencies may be expected to monitorproviders and patients for possible fraud.arguably attorneys and law firms might identify many uses for hdo data,including malpractice litigation. plaintiffs' lawyers, for instance, might try toaccess information from hdos concerning previous qualityofcare deficienciesof a physician or hospital; defendants' counsel might seek to demonstrate,through analysis of hdo data, that the provider acted well within communitystandards. one important application occurs in cases where the past or currenthealth condition of the patient is relevant to the case or is at issue in the case.product safety litigation may also call forth requests for data from the network,especially when a medical device is in question. finally, attorneys representinghealth plans, insurers, medical groups, hospitals, and other providers in theirbusiness (e.g., financial) concerns may find information contained in thedatabases of use in advising their clients about risk management, taxes,financing, and similar matters.a wide array of other kinds of companies, organizations, and servicesmight well have an interest in the information available through hdos. amongthem are direct marketing firms, financial and credit institutions, and billcollection agencies. such entities (especially the last named) might wish to havepersonidentified information, but in general many applications of theinformation might not be directed at patients but rather at providers or atgroupings such as zip codes. financial and credit institutions might beinterested in health plan and hospital data to determine market share or estimatesolvency for a given group practice or facility. in general, this committee takesan extremely negative view toward giving these groups access to hdo files,particularly any data that might conceivably identify individual persons, andthus these uses are not explored further here.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns82health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commentthe committee emphasizes that its roster of users includes examples ofcurrent as well as potential hdo database users;16 it does not believe thathdos necessarily ought to satisfy all such claimants. it does acknowledge,however, that the mere existence of a database creates new demands for accessand new users and uses. consequently, those who establish health databases andhdos may be creating something for which the end uses cannot always beanticipated.because this study took place at a time of change in both health careinfrastructure and information systems, the committee tried to anticipate theprobable sources of the tension that will exist between those who createdatabases and wish to protect the information and those who might argue foraccess to those databases on grounds of anticipated benefits. historically, thecreation of large databases, such as those to administer the social securityprogram and the national crime information network, has been followed bymodifications in the databases themselves and in the policies and legislationthat regulate access to themšwhich results more often than not in relaxingprohibitions or barriers to access. realism dictates that large databases such asthose maintained by hdos will be dynamic. in the committee's view, policiesregarding access to these databases should, therefore, be based on firmprinciples but flexible enough to accommodate unavoidable changes andunanticipated uses.the benefits of electronic patient records should not be overlooked,however. these benefits include the availability of much more powerfuldatabases, elimination of the need for repeated requests to record subjects forthe same information, and assurance that information is available when needed.despite the privacy concerns described, it should be possible to improveprivacy protection and safeguard the confidentiality of health information inhdos through a variety of methods described in later chapters.moreover, information must be acted on by individuals in a position to16 in the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care,the iom examined in some depth the array of users of computerbased patient records(cprs) and cpr systems, indicating that an ''exhaustive list ... would essentially parallela list of the individuals and organizations associated directly or indirectly with theprovision of health care. patient record users provide, manage, review, or reimbursepatient care services; conduct clinical or health services research; educate health careprofessionals or patients; develop or regulate health care technologies; accredit healthcare professionals or provider institutions; and make health care policy decisions" (iom,1991a, p. 31). it is difficult to improve on that enumeration in the present context, eventhough the nature of the databases themselves (cprs versus networks based on, e.g.,insurance billing transactions or surveys) is quite different and the emphasis (e.g., patientcare delivery versus health plan management) differently placed.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns83health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.change their own, and others', behaviors and performance. most experts agreethat getting information to people and organizations is just the first, and perhapsnot the most important, step in the change process. although this committee (inchapter 3) places great store on information dissemination efforts by hdos,hdos will not be well placed to follow up the actions taken (or not taken) byrecipients of that information.many of the challenges faced by the health care sector are essentiallyexogenousšfor instance, the changing demographics of the u.s. population,problems of international competition in the manufacturing and informationservices sectors, and increasing disintegration of social and familial structures.no amount of radical change in health care, let alone tinkering, willdemonstrably affect those problems, and hdos similarly cannot influence them.further, despite the promise that hdos hold for addressing certain healthpolicy issues, this committee emphasizes that information derived from the filesof hdos and similar entities will not be the solution to all the ills of the healthcare system. information may be incomplete or untimely, lack critical variablessuch as health status, or otherwise be imperfect. in addition, such data may beobservational, meaning that they lend themselves more to description than tocausal or inferential analysis, and more to retrospective commentary than toprediction. in the terminology used earlier, hdos and their constituentdatabases may be neither acceptably comprehensive nor inclusive.commentary on a related information activity is instructive. in 1992 theiom, in conjunction with the commission on behavioral and social sciencesand education (cbasse) reviewed the plans of the national center for healthstatistics for a new national health care survey. the survey is described ashaving the following objective: "to produce annual data on the use of healthcare and the outcomes of care for the major sectors of the health care deliverysystem. these data will describe the patient populations, medical care provided,financing, and provider characteristics" (iom/cbasse, 1992, p. 6). the iom/cbasse report commented at some length on the ability of existing datasources (e.g., current nchs surveys) to provide these kinds of information andnoted (p. 38):[they] are rapidly becoming outdated and less comprehensive than isdesirable. often they do not cover the universe of providers and sites of healthcare [or] patients or potential users of health care. they lack sufficientinformation on exactly what services are provided and what the outcomes ofthose services are . . . are inexact with respect to financial data ... are nottimely; and ... are inaccurate, incomplete and unreliable.these faults may well affect the data repositories and networks consideredby this iom committee; they are discussed in greater detail below.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns84health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ensuring the quality of datathe above discussion has outlined the many potential users, uses, andbenefits of hdos. ultimately, however, the real rewards of developing andoperating hdos will depend heavily on the quality of the data that they acquireand maintain. the committee considers this subject of sufficient importance thatit elected to comment on it directly.the absolute prerequisites to successful implementation of any type ofdatabase or hdo with the expansive goals implied by the foregoing discussionare reliable and valid data. developers must ensure that the data in their systemsare of high enough quality that the descriptive compilations, the effectivenessresearch, and the comparative analyses envisioned can be done in a credible,defensible manner. (mcneil et al., 1992, describe limitations of current datasystems for profiling quality of care, especially at the individual provider level.)mistakes, qualifications and caveats, retractions, and similar problems must beminimized, and precision about what data are actually being sought must bemaximized. all this must be done from the outset so that the longterm integrityand believability of the database and work based on its information will not beundermined irretrievably.the committee did not wish to prescribe methods that hdos mightemploy for ensuring data quality, judging that approaches might differ by typeof database and hdo. it did, however, consider that success in meeting thisresponsibility will call for attention on several fronts.first, the committee held the view that information becomes more usefulwhen it is used. although the characteristic of comprehensiveness is clearly ofprimary importance in considering the value of a database, hdos need to avoidthe trap of collecting everything that it is possible to collect, regardless of itsreliability and completeness, and thereby end up with data elements that will beused only rarely and, worse, be of questionable value when they are used.part of the problem is that analysts will have little experience with suchdata elements and may make incorrect assumptions about their reliability orabout how to interpret values correctly. another part of the problem is thatsome data, although currently collected routinely because an entry must bemade in a box on a form, are not used for anything by anyone. such data willlikely have a very low level of accuracy. a commonly cited example relates toinformation on hospital diagnoses in the medicare program; diagnoses wereoften doubtful before the advent of the drgbased pps (see gardner, 1990).when diagnostic data began to figure in decisions about reimbursement, studiesof quality of care, choices in clinical care, or analyses about productivity, thesituation changed. after 1983 hospitals came to be paid on the basis of drgs(which obviously are diagnosis based), andhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns85health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.diagnostic information improved markedly, although some problems persist.similar problems of suspicious (missing, wrong, or even fraudulent)information on insurance claims forms for outpatient care exist to this day; theunderlying problem is that payment mechanisms do not depend so heavily onoutpatient diagnostic datašthat is, the information is not used in the same wayas inpatient datašso little incentive exists to record diagnoses accurately.17 theleast that can happen in these instances is that those data elements consumecomputer memory; the worst is that the data will be used in ways thatcontaminate an entire study or cause unwarranted harm to individuals, groups,or practitioners.second, data must be accurate and analyzable. sometimes these points arecouched in terms of reliability and validity of data.18 more generally, theaccuracy and completeness of data elements that will be used extensively mustbe guaranteed if they are to be useful. among the problems one must guardagainst are the following: missing data; outofrange values for quantitative data(e.g., age of patient; charges; even laboratory values in the most advanceddatabases of the future); unrealistic changes in parameters over time (e.g., thedoubling of a patient's weight between office visits); clearly erroneousinformation (e.g., wrong sex); and miscoded information on diagnostic tests,actual diagnoses, surgical procedures, medications, and the like. analysts mustalso be cautious about their interpretation of patient care eventsšfor example,not misconstruing the reasons for or timing of a particular diagnostic procedurewhen interpreting events in the course of treatment of a lifethreateningemergency.third, the committee also believes that structural aspects of health data17 one example of the problem of diagnostic coding for insurance claim purposes wasprovided during a study site visit. a member of an internal medicine group noted that heused essentially six outpatient (office visit) diagnoses because "they work" and becausehe would otherwise be questioned or secondguessed too much by insurers if he recordedmore, or more detailed, diagnostic codes. because reimbursement is keyed to length andcomplexity of a visit, rather than to diagnosis, he had a clear conscience about thispractice.18 reliability in this context relates to the need for data to be reasonably accurate andcompletešthat is, essentially free of missing values, systematic bias in what data arecaptured or recorded and how those data are coded, and random errors. validity concernsrelate to the issue of whether analyses done on a given database are appropriate for thequestions being asked and whether those analyses will provide defensible answers thatare internally consistent and externally generalizable. according to palmer and adams(1993), measures of quality can be reliable if the rate of random error is low, althoughthey may still contain systematic error (meaning that some attribute is being captured butthat it may not be the one intended); for quality measures to be valid, both random andsystematic error must be low. these considerations of random and systematic error meanthat the level of reliability of a measure (or the underlying data) place a ceiling on thelevel of validity that can be attained; unreliable measures or information can never bevalid.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns86health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bases should be emphasized as conducive to highquality data and information.databases should be built around a core of uniformly reported (or translatable)data that is relevant and can be shown to be accurate and valid for the hdo'sintended analyses (in keeping with the comments just above). in addition, hdoshould have an easily implemented capacity to supplement core data elements.the committee and other experts agree on the significant tension that existsbetween the desire for comprehensive databases and the consequently broaduses to which hdo data might be put and the wisdom of a certain parsimony inthe actual gathering of personidentifiable information.although the committee realizes that the federal government may have totake the lead in standards development and improved coding systems, thecommittee urges hdos to foster, encourage, and work toward nationalstandards for coding and definitions for (at least) core data elements. 19government leadership is indispensable in matters of coding and datauniformity, but widespread input from the private sector is desirable. thereason is that the costs of momentous or frequent changes (in terms of money,loss of comparability of data, potential incompatibility of clinical and paymentcoding, and incentives for fragmentation and upcoding of services) can besignificant; consultation between the public and private sectors can help avertexcessive or unnecessary costs of these types.fourth, the committee takes the position that the basic structure andcontent of these databases ought to be carefully designed from the beginning,but they must have sufficient capacity for expansion and change as health carereform, effectiveness and outcomes research, and other dynamic aspects of thehealth care sector evolve in coming years. this requirement implies that dueattention will be paid to the quality of new categories of data that may becomeavailable for hdos in the future.recommendation 2.1 accuracy and completenessto address these issues, the committee recommends that healthdatabase organizations take responsibility for assuring data quality on anongoing basis and, in particular, take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) thecompleteness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which they areresponsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for which theyare used.part 2 of this recommendation applies to analyses that hdos con19 ahcpr has explored the feasibility of linking administrative databases foreffectiveness research and urged the development of uniform messages and vocabularystandards (usdhhs, 1991). see also aronow and coltin (1993).health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns87health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.duct. they cannot, of course, police the validity of data when used byothers for purposes over which the hdos have no a priori control.until hdos can demonstrate the quality of their data, the committeecautions that their proponents must guard against promising too much in theearly years, particularly in the area of improving quality of care and conductingresearch on the appropriateness and effectiveness of health services. thecommittee returns to this point in chapter 4 in a discussion of data protectionand data integrity.as many investigators have pointed out, the absence of sufficient clinicalinformation in most databases today (and likely for tomorrow) is a criticallimitation (roos et al., 1989; hannan et al., 1992; chassin, 1993b; krakauerand jacoby, 1993). efforts to acquire such information through manualabstraction of relevant information in hospital records, which is the basis ofvarious patient classification programs (e.g., medis groups or hcfa's proposeduniform clinical data set), are costly and timeconsuming. some means ofobtaining such information more directly from patient records will be needed.clinical data should be obtained, whenever practical, to validate analyses.the committee does not regard the clinical data found in medical records,whether computerized or not, as always sufficiently comprehensive, accurate, orlegible to characterize them as a "gold standard," but they are a valuable, andsometimes indispensable, touchstone against which to judge the less richadministrative data on which many types of health policy and health servicesresearch are and must be based.the validity of elements in a database must be matched with the kinds ofinferences that can be drawn. the committee believes that the best method ofenhancing the comprehensiveness of hdo databases and the accuracy andcompleteness of data elements is to move toward cprs in which the desiredvariables themselves, rather than highlevel abstraction and proxy codingsystems, could be accessed. this committee does not wish to convey theimpression that the transition to cpr systems is anything but an extraordinarilydifficult task. although the progress made in establishing a cpr institute islaudable, much remains to be done for that organization to realize even the mainobjectives set forth for it in the iom report on cprs and cpr systems. inaddition, planning efforts by the computer science and telecommunicationsboard (a unit of the commission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplications of the national research council) on the national informationinfrastructure and its role in health care (and health care reform) make clear thatboth the health care and the computer and information sciences communitieshave a considerable way to go even in agreeing on details about the directionsthat policies andhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns88health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical advances should take in addressing major issues in this critical area.in its april (1993) report to the secretary of dhhs, the work group oncomputerization of patient records supported the development of nationalstandards for documenting and sharing patient information. it also called on theamerican national standards institute healthcare information standardsplanning panel to coordinate the development, adoption, and use of nationalinformation standards for patient data definitions, codes and terminology,intersystem communication, and uniform patient, provider, and payer identifiers.recommendation 2.2 computerbased patientrecordaccordingly, the committee recommends that health databaseorganizations support and contribute to regional and national efforts tocreate computerbased patient records.the committee acknowledges the importance of computerbased patientrecords with uniform standards for connectivity, terminology, and data sharingif the creation and maintenance of pooled health databases is to be efficient andtheir information accurate and complete. the committee urges hdos toanticipate the development of cprs and to contribute to the development andadoption of these standards. hdos should take a proactive stance, by joiningefforts by the cpr institute and other organizations working to facilitateimplementation of cprs, helping in standardssetting efforts, and otherwisebecoming full participants in the multidisciplinary effort that is now under way.summarymuch of the thrust of this report concerns how to maximize the benefitsthat this committee believes can be realized from the construction and operationof inclusive and comprehensive health databases. in examining these questions,the committee has focused on what it calls health database organizations.hdos are emerging entities of many different characteristics in states and othergeographic regions of the country; the committee made two key assumptionsabout them: (1) hdos have access to and possibly control considerableamounts of personidentifiable health data outside the care settings in whichthose data were originally generated and (2) the chief mission of hdos ispublic release of data and results of studies about health care providers or otherhealthrelated topics.the broadbased value of hdos and their databases might be said to bethe provision of reliable and valid information in a reasonably timely manhealth databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns89health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ner to address all the major questions in health care deliveryšaccess, costs,quality, financing and organization, health resources and personnel, and researchšfacing the nation today and in the coming years. the chapter also details thenarrower benefits that might accrue to a variety of potential users, includingpatients and their families, health care providers, purchasers and payers,employers, and many other possible clients in the public and private sectors.in assembling the data that will go into products for all such users anduses, the committee had sobering concerns about the quality of those data.thus, it recommends that hdos take responsibility for assuring data quality onan ongoing basis, and in particular take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) thecompleteness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which they areresponsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for which they areused [by hoos] (recommendation 2.1). the committee also recommends thathdos support and contribute to the regional and national efforts to create cprsand cpr systems (recommendation 2.2).initially, hdos will attempt to provide data for particular users and uses toanswer particular kinds of questions. nevertheless, advances in the creation andoperation of computerbased databases, whether centralized or farflung, can beexpected in the coming years. the committee believes that thoughtfulappreciation of their potential and anticipation of their potential limitations willhasten that progress. the development of hdosštheir structure, governance,and policies on disclosure as well as on protection of datašmust be designedfor the achievement of these longterm goals.the next chapter takes up the major responsibilities of hdos in carryingout a critical mission: furnishing information to the public on costs, quality, andother features of health care providers in a given region or community. thecommittee adopted two strong assumptions as it began to consider this topic.the first is that considerable benefits will accrue to interested consumers and tothe public at large from having access to accurate and timely information onthese aspects of the health care delivery system with which they deal; this hasbeen the thrust of the present chapter. the other assumption is that hdossupported by public funds ought to have a stated mission of making suchinformation available, and this will be a core element of several committeerecommendations. the committee also assumes, however, that harms can arisefrom some uses of the information in such databases. for this reason, in the nextchapter the committee considers administrative and other protections that itbelieves hdos should put in place.health databases and health database organizations: uses,benefits, and concerns90health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3public disclosure of data on health careproviders and practitionersprevious chapters have discussed a wide array of users, uses, and expectedbenefits of information held by health database organizations (hdos). suchorganizations are presumed to have two major capabilities. one is the ability toamass credible descriptive information and evaluative data on costs, quality,and costeffectiveness for hospitals, physicians, and other health care facilities,agencies, and providers. the other is the capacity to analyze data to generateknowledge and then to make that knowledge available for purposes ofcontrolling the costs and improving the quality of health carešthat is, ofobtaining value for health care dollars spent. another benefit derived fromhdos is the generation of new knowledge by others.in principle, the goals implied by these capabilities are universallyaccepted and applauded. in practice, hdos will face a considerable number ofphilosophical issues and practical challenges in attempting to realize such goals.the iom committee characterizes the activities that hdos might pursue toaccomplish these goals as public disclosure.by public disclosure, this committee means the timely communication, orpublication and dissemination, of certain kinds of information to the public atlarge. such communication may be through traditional print and broadcastmedia, or it may be through more specialized outlets such as newsletters orcomputer bulletin boards. the information to be communicated is of twovarieties: (1) descriptive facts and (2) results of evaluative studies on topicssuch as charges or costs and patient outcomes or otherpublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners91health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.qualityofcare measures. the fundamental aims of such public disclosure, inthe context of this study, are to improve the public's understanding about healthcare issues generally and to help consumers select providers of health care.1these elements imply that hdos should be required to gather, analyze,generate, and publicly release such data and information: in forms and with explanations that can be understood by the public; in such a manner that the public can distinguish actual events (i.e.,primary data) from derived, computed, or interpretive information; in ways that reveal the magnitude of any differences among providersas well as the likelihood that differences could be the result of chancealone; in sufficient detail that all providers can be easily described andcompared, not just those at the extremes; with descriptions and illustrations of the steps necessary to predictoutcomes in the present or future from information relating only to pastexperience; and with statements and illustrations about the need to particularizeinformation for an individual in the final stages of decision making.acceptance of hdo activities and products relating to public disclosurewill depend in part on the balance struck for fairness to patients, the public ingeneral, payers, and health care providers. fairness to patients involvesprotecting their privacy and the confidentiality of information about them, asexamined in chapter 4. fairness to the public involves distributing accurate,reliable information that is needed to make informed decisions about providersand health care interventions; the broader aims are to promote universal accessto affordable and competent health care, enhance consumer choice, improvevalue for health care dollars expended, and increase the accountability to thepublic of health care institutions. fairness to payers may be a subset of thiscategory. they should receive the information that is available to the public atlarge, but perhaps in more detail or in a more timely manner. finally, fairness toproviders entails ensuring that1 sec. 5003 of the hsa (1993) calls for a national quality management council todevelop a set of national measures of quality performance to assess the provision ofhealth care services and access to such services.sec. 5005 (1) requires health alliances annually to publish and make available to thepublic a performance report outlining in a standard format the performance of eachhealth plan offered in the alliance and the results of consumer surveys conducted in thealliancepublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners92health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data and analyses are reliable, valid, and impartial; it also means that providersare given some opportunity to confirm data and methods before information isreleased to the public, and offered some means of publishing their perspectiveswhen the information is released.this chapter deals chiefly with issues relating to tradeoffs betweenfairness to providers and fairness to the public at large (including patients)insofar as public disclosure of information is concerned. the considerations justnoted appear simple and noncontroversial on the surface; in the context of realpatients, providers, and data, they become technical, complex, and occasionallyin conflict. the appendix to this chapter offers a brief illustration of thedifficulties that hdos might face in discharging their duties of fairness to allgroups.previous studiesthis report is not the first treatment of issues related to providing healthrelated information to the public. marquis et al. (1985) reviewed what wasknown about informing consumers about health care costsšconsidered thenand now a less difficult challenge than informing them about quality of carešas a means of encouraging them to make more costconscious choices. in anextensive literature review, the authors documented the wide gaps in cost (orprice) information available to consumers, especially for hospital care.2 theyreported evidence that some programs to help certain consumer groups, such asassisting the elderly in purchasing supplemental medicare coverage, have hadsalutary effects on the choices people make. despite new efforts at that time byemployers, insurers, business coalitions, and states to collect and disseminatesuch information, the authors concluded that, ''it remains uncertain whetherdisclosure of information about health care costs will do much to modifyconsumers' choices of health plans,2 in all likelihood, people will have more, and be more attentive to, information abouttheir own health insurance plans than about cost or quality information on health careproviders. marquis (1981) studied consumers' knowledge about their health insurancecoverage as part of the rand corporation health insurance experiment. shedetermined that, although most families understand some aspects of their insurancepolicies, many lack detailed knowledge of benefits, especially about coverage ofoutpatient medical services. greater exposure to information about an insurance plan,measured by the length of time the family was insured and whether the family had achoice of plans, increased the family's knowledge, which suggests that more experiencewith information or formal efforts to educate will improve the general level ofknowledge. left unanswered, however, is the question of the extent to which people willact on that knowledge, especially to change insurance plans. these findings raisecautions, therefore, about what actions people might take in response to receipt of qualityand cost information.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners93health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hospitals, or other health care providers" (p. xii). the authors emphasized thatunderstanding how consumers use information in making health care choices iscritical to the design of effective data collection and disclosure interventions butthat such basic knowledge was lacking. it is not clear that the knowledge gaphas been closed.more recently, the congressional office of technology assessment (ota,1988) produced a signal report on disseminating qualityofcare information toconsumers. it examined the rationales that lie behind the call for more publicinformation; evaluated the reliability, validity, and feasibility of several types ofquality indicators; 3 and advanced some policy options that congress could useto overcome problems with the indicators. also presented was a strategy fordisseminating information on the quality of physicians and hospitals using thefollowing components: stimulate consumer awareness of quality of care;provide easily understood information on the quality of providers' care; presentinformation via many media repeatedly and over long periods of time; presentmessages to attract attention; present information in more than one format; usereputable organizations to interpret qualityofcare information; considerproviding price information along with information on the quality of care; makeinformation accessible; and provide consumers the skills to use and physiciansthe skills to provide information on quality of care (ota, 1988, pp. 4047).the ota study did not wholly endorse any one quality measure orapproach, and specifically noted that "existing data sets do not allow routineevaluation of physicians' performance outside hospitals" (p. 30). the report alsoconcluded that "informing consumers and relying on their subsequent actionsshould not be viewed as the only method to encourage hospitals and physiciansto maintain and improve the quality of their care. even wellinformed laypeople ... must continue to rely on experts to ensure the quality of providers.some experts come from within the medical community and engage in selfregulation, while others operate as external reviewers through private andgovernmental regulatory bodies" (p. 30). it may be said that many, if not most,of the issues raised by the ota report are germane to today's quite differenthealth care environment, including the development of regional hdos.3 quality indicators in the ota (1988) report included: hospital mortality rates;adverse events; disciplinary actions, sanctions, and malpractice compensation; evaluationof physicians' performance (care for hypertension); volume of services in hospitals orperformed by physicians; scope of hospital services (external standards and guidelines);physician specialization; and patients' assessments of their care.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners94health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important principles of public disclosurea significant committee stance should be made plain at the outset: thepublic interest is materially served when society is given as much informationon costs, quality, and value for health care dollar expended as can be givenaccurately and provided with educational materials that aid interpretation of thatinformation. indeed, public disclosure and public education go hand in hand.much of the later part of this chapter, therefore, advances a series ofrecommendations intended to foster active, but responsible, public disclosure ofinformation by hdos.one critical element in this position must be underscored, however,because it is a major caveat: public disclosure is acceptable only when it: (1)involves information and analytic results that come from studies that have beenwell conducted, (2) is based on data that can be shown to be reliable and validfor the purposes intended, and (3) is accompanied by appropriate educationalmaterial. as discussed in chapter 2, data cannot be assumed to be reliable andvalid; hence, study results and interpretations, and resulting inferences, cannotbe assumed always to be sound and credible. thus, a position supporting publicdisclosure of cost, quality, or other information about health care providersmust be tempered by an appreciation of the limitations and problems of suchactivities. in chapter 2 the committee advanced a recommendation about hdosensuring the quality of their data so as to minimize the difficulties that mightarise from incomplete or inaccurate data.apart from these caveats, the committee's posture in this area leads to threecritical propositions. first, it will be crucial for hdos or those who use theirdata to avoid the harms that might come from inadequate, incorrect, orinappropriately "conclusive" analyses and communications. that is, hdos havea minimum obligation of ensuring that the analyses they publish are statisticallyrigorous and clearly described.second, hdos will need to establish clear policies and guidelines on theirstandards for data, analyses, and disclosure, and this is an especially significantresponsibility when the uses in question are related to quality assurance andquality improvement (qa/qi). the committee believes that hdos can producesignificant and reliable information and that the presumption should be in favorof data release. such guidelines can help make this case to those who wouldotherwise oppose public disclosure efforts with the argument that reasonableand credible studies cannot be conducted.third, in line with these principles, the committee advises that hdosestablish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate, oversee, andenforce information policies. the specifics of this recommendation arediscussed in chapter 4, chiefly in relationship to privacy protections. thecommittee wishes here simply to underscore its view that hdos cannotpublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners95health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.responsibly or practically carry out the activities discussed in the remainder ofthis chapter without formulating and overseeing such policies at the highestlevels.important elements of public disclosureseveral elements are important to the successful public disclosure ofhealthrelated information. among them are the topics and types of informationinvolved, who is identified in such releases, differing levels of vulnerability toharm, and how information might be disclosed. how these factors might behandled by hdos is briefly discussed below.topics for hdo analysis and disclosurein theory, virtually any topic may be subject to the hdo analyses andpublic disclosure activities under consideration in this chapter. in practice, thetopics that figure most prominently in public disclosure of provideridentifiedhealth care data thus far have been extremely limited. perhaps the bestknowninstance of release of providerspecific information is the health carefinancing administration's (hcfa) annual publication (since 1986) of hospitalspecific death rates; these have been based on medicare part a files for theentire nation (see, e.g., hcfa, 1987; ota, 1988, chapter 4; hcfa, 1991; andthe discussion in chapter 2 of this report).4this activity has had three spinoffs (not necessarily pertaining just tohospital death rates). the first is repackaging and publishing the hcfa data inlocal newspapers, consumer guides, and other media. the second is similaranalyses, perhaps more detailed, more timely, or more locally pertinent, carriedout by statebased data commissions. examples of statewide work include thepublished data on cardiac surgery outcomes in new york (cited in chapter 2),the work of the pennsylvania health care cost containment council onhospital efficiency (phcccc, 1989) and on coronary artery bypass graft(phcccc, 1992), and the publication of a wide array of information onhospitals, longterm care facilities, home health agencies,4 as this report was being prepared, the hcfa administrator announced a moratoriumof indeterminate length on publication of hospitalspecific mortality data (darby, 1993).the main issues appear to be the adequacy of risk adjustors in the statistical model andthe concern that mortalityrelated data do not provide meaningful information about thetrue levels of quality of care in the nation's hospitals (or at least in certain types, such asinnercity institutions). some attention may thus be turned to other indicators, such aslength of stay or hospitalacquired complications. even more ambitious goals mayinvolve reporting on volume of services and patient satisfaction. the ultimate desirabilityof making reliable and valid information available to consumers is not in question.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners96health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and licensed clinics by the california health policy and data advisorycommission (california office of statewide health planning and development,1991). the files of the massachusetts health data consortium have been a richsource of information for various health services research projects (densen etal., 1980; gallagher et al., 1984; barnes et al., 1985; wenneker and epstein,1989; wenneker et al., 1990; ayanian and epstein, 1991; weissman et al.,1992). the third spinoff is exemplified by the special issues of u.s. news &world report (1991, 1992, 1993) that have reported on top hospitals around thecountry by condition or speciality. the underpinnings of these rankings,however, are not hcfa mortality data but, rather, personal ratings byphysicians and nurses.longo et al. (1990) provide an inventory of data demands directed athospitals, some of which originate with entities like the regional hdosenvisioned in this study (e.g., tumor and trauma registries and state datacommissions). those requesting data would like, for example, to comparehospitals or hospital subgroups during a specific calendar period, to control orregulate new technologies or facilities, and to help providers identify and usescarce resources such as human organs.local activities, such as those for metropolitan areas or counties, areexemplified by the release of the clevelandarea hospital quality outcomemeasurements and patient satisfaction report (chqc, 1993), as described inchapter 2. (nearly a decade ago, the orange county, california, healthplanning council developed a set of quality indicators for local hospitals, whichwas considered at the time to be a pioneering effort; see lohr, 198586.) in 1992(volume 8, number 3), washington checkbook presented information onpharmacy prices for prescription drugs and for national and storebrand healthand beauty care products; it also reported on hospital inpatient care quality(judged in terms of death rates) and pleasantness (evaluated in terms of stafffriendliness, respect, and concern) (hospital inpatient care, 1992). in october1993 the washingtonian offered a review of top hospitals and physiciansserving the washington d.c. metropolitan area (stevens, 1993). another localpublication, health pages (1993, 1994), covers selected cities or areas of thecountry. it tries to help readers choose doctors, pick hospitals, and decide onother services such as home nursing care. its spring 1993 issue provides aconsumer's guide to several metropolitan areas of wisconsin; included arepractitioners; hospital services, procedure rates, and prices; and an array ofother kinds of health care.5 a similar issue released in winter 1994 focused onmetropolitan st.5 quality of care becomes problematic for these types of publications. health pages(1993), for instance, states explicitly: "there is little objective information availableenabling us to judge the quality of care provided [about physicians]" (p. 3).public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners97health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.louis. sources of the information in these publications include surveys, pricechecks, and hcfa mortality rate studies; only the last approximates the usesthat might be made of the data held by regional hdos today, but clearly morecomprehensive hdos in the future may have price information, survey data,and the like.the brief examples above illustrate areas in which analyses that identifyproviders have been publicly released. other calls for public disclosure,however, may actually be intended for more private use by consulting firms;health care plans such as health maintenance organizations (hmos),independent practice associations (ipas), and preferred provider organizations(ppos); and other health care delivery institutions such as academic medicalcenters or specialized treatment centers. requests may include analyses of thefees charged by physicians for office visits, consultations, surgical procedures,and the like, and the requests may be for very specific icd9cm (internationalclassification of diseases, ninth revision, clinical modification) and cpt4(current procedural terminology, fourth revision) codes. yet other inquiriescome from clients concerned with the market share of given institutions orhealth plans in a region as part of a more detailed market assessment. questionsmay also be focused on patterns of resource utilization by certain kinds ofpatients, for instance, those with advanced or rare neoplastic disease. in general,because these applications are unlikely to lead to studies with published results,they are not discussed here in any detail.some internal studies are intended for public release, however, for use byregulators, consumers, employers, and other purchasers. these include the socalled quality report cards being developed by the national committee onquality assurance, by kaiser permanente, the state of missouri, and others. thenorthern california region of kaiser permanente, for instance, has released a"benchmarked" report on more than 100 quality indicators such as membersatisfaction, childhood health, maternal care, cardiovascular diseases, cancer,common surgical procedures, mental health, and substance abuse (kaiserpermanente, 1993a, 1993b).who is identifiedthe main objects of such requests and the ensuing analyses tend to belarge health plans to hospitals, physician groups, individual physicians, andnursing homes. most of the debate in the past few years has centered onhospitals, especially in the context of the validity and meaningfulness ofhospitalspecific death rates (baker, 1992). generally, arguments in favor of theprinciple of release of such information on hospitals have carried the day;controversy persists about the reliability, validity, and utility of suchinformation when the underlying data or the sophistication of the analyses canbe called into question.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners98health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more recently, the debate has turned to release of information on thehospitalbased activities of particular physiciansšfor example, death ratesassociated with specific surgical procedures. here the principle of publicdisclosure also seems to have gained acceptance, again with caveats about thesoundness of the analyses and results. nevertheless, because of the muchgreater difficulty of ensuring the reliability and validity of such analyses,especially on the level of individual physicians, many observers remainconcerned about the possible downside of releasing information on specificclinicians. this criticism is especially pertinent to the extent that thisinformation is a relatively crude indicator of the quality of care in hospitals orof that rendered by individual physicians, especially surgeons.in the future, attention can be expected to shift to outpatient care andinvolve the ambulatory, officebased services of health plans and physiciangroups in primary or specialty care and of individual physicians. in these casesthe stance in favor of public disclosure may become more difficult to adoptfully, for three reasons: the problems alluded to above for hospitalbasedphysicians become exponential for officebased physicians; the clear, easytocount outcomes, such as deaths, tend to be inappropriate for officebased carebecause they are so rare; and qualityoflife measures, such as those relating tofunctional outcomes and physical, social, and emotional wellbeing, are moresignificant but also more difficult to assess, aggregate, and report.other types of providers and clinicians also must be considered in thisframework. these include pharmacies and individual pharmacists; home healthagencies and the registered nurses and therapists they employ; and durablemedical device companies, such as those that supply oxygen to oxygendependent patients and the respiratory therapists they employ. stretching thepublicdisclosure debate to these and other parts of the health care deliveryenvironment may seem farfetched; to the extent that their data will appeareventually in databases maintained by hdos, however, the prospect thatsomeone will want to obtain, analyze, and publicize such data is real. this mayillustrate the point raised in chapter 2 that simple creation of databases maylead to applications quite unanticipated by the original creators.finally, some experts foresee the day when hdos might do analyses byemployer or by commercial industry or sector with the aim of clarifying thecauses and epidemiology of healthrelated problems. cases in point might bethe incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome in banks, accidents in the meatpackingor lumber industry, or various types of disorders in the chemical industry. herethe issue is one of informing the public or specific employers in an economicsector about possible threats to the health and wellbeing of residents of an areaor employees in a particular commercial enterprise.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners99health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vulnerability to harmthe examples above can be characterized by level of aggregation: largeaggregations of health care personnel in, for instance, hospitals or hmos, ascontrasted with individual clinicians. the committee believes that, in general,public disclosure can be defended more easily when data involve aggregationsor institutions than when they involve individuals. vulnerability to harm is thecomplicating factor in this controversy, and some committee members affirmthat it should be carefully and thoughtfully taken into account before data onindividuals are published.to an individual, the direct harms are those of loss of reputation, patients,income, employment, and possibly even career.6 hospitals and other largefacilities, health plans, and even large groups are less vulnerable to such lossesthan are individuals. higherthanexpected death rates for acute myocardialinfarction or higherthanexpected caesarean section rates are not likely to drivea hospital out of business unless the public becomes convinced that these ratesare representative of care generally and are not being addressed. by contrast,reports of higherthanexpected death rates for pneumonia or higherthanexpected complication rates for cataract replacement surgery could disqualifyan individual from participating in managed care contracts and eventually spellruin for the particular physician.how one regards harms and gains may depend in part on whether oneviews public disclosure of evaluative information about costs or quality as azerosum game. in a highly competitive market, which may have thecharacteristics of a zerosum game, clear winners and losers may emerge in theprovider and practitioner communities. furthermore, in theory this is what onewould both expect and desire. nevertheless, when markets are not highlycompetitivešfor instance, when all hospital occupancy rates are high or whenthe number of physicians in a locality is smallšthe information may lessdirectly affect consumer choice, although it may well influence providerbehavior by changing consumer perceptions. in this situation, clear winners andlosers are neither expected nor likely, but establishing benchmarks that all canstrive to attain should, in principle, contribute to better performance across allinstitutions and practitioners.6 the prospect that particular institutions, health plans, or individual practitionersmight rate less well than others, but not necessarily poorly, and thereby lose patients toothers is possible (and perhaps probable), but in the committee's view it did not warrantspecial attention. similarly, the possibility of gain, when publicly disclosed data or otherratings are superior and thereby enhance reputation or bring additional patients, seemslikely but not of sufficient weight to merit further discussion.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners100health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.methodological and technical issuesseveral factors influence the degree of confidence one can have in theprecision of publicly disclosed analyses, and this dictates how securely one caninterpret and rely on published levels of statistical significance and confidenceintervals and generalize from published information. two factors involve thequality of the underlying data and the analytic effort, as introduced inchapter 2. others, discussed below, involve the level of aggregation inpublished analyses, the appropriateness of generalizing from published resultsto aspects of care not directly studied, and the difficulty of creating globalindexes of quality of care.in the committee's view, proponents of public disclosure have anobligation to insist that the information to be published meet all customaryrequirements of reliability, validity, and understandability for the intended use.such requirements vary, to some degree, according to the numbers of cases orindividuals included in the reportthat is, according to the level of aggregation,from a single case or physician to dozens or hundreds of cases from multiplehospitals. when hdos cannot satisfy these technical requirements, they shouldnot publish data in either scientific journals or the public media. the committeewas not comfortable with the idea that publication might go forward withexplanatory footnotes or caveats, on the grounds that most consumers or usersof such information are unlikely to accord the cautions as much importance asthey give to the data themselves and may thus be unwittingly led to makeerroneous or perhaps even harmful decisions.this position may not be sustainable in all cases, however. the new yorksupreme court rejected the argument "that the state must protect its citizensfrom their intellectual shortcomings by keeping from them information beyondtheir ability to comprehend" (newsday, inc. and david zinman v. new yorkstate department of health, et al.) and ruled that physicianspecific mortalityrate information be made public pursuant to a freedom of information lawrequest. in this particular case it could be argued that the data and analyses metall reasonable expectations of scientific rigor. in the future, however, onecannot assume this will be the case. one solution in problematic circumstancesmay be for hdos to disclose information only at a much higher level ofaggregation than that at which the original analyses may have been done.77 to overcome some of these objections to public disclosure of information with weakreliability and validity, especially stemming from small sample sizes, various statisticaldisclosure limitation procedures might be considered (nrc, 1993). for example, if dataor results are in tabular form and if the data are themselves questionable, theninformation on individual practitioners, or indeed even specific plans, hospitals, and soforth, might be suppressed according to a "concentration rule" (an n, k rule); in this, if"n" number of providers (e.g., a small number, such as two) dominate a given cell (e.g.,account for "k" percentage of a given cell, where "k" is a large figure such as 80 percent),then information on those particular providers would not be made public. this is a formof protection against the "statistical identification problem'' as well.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners101health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.generalizability is a related methodologic matter with ramifications for theharms and gains noted above. it refers here to the proposition that informationon one dimension of health care delivery and performance will in some fashionpredict or otherwise relate to other dimensions of performance. for hospitals,for instance, the thought might be that information on adult intensive care canbe generalized to adult cardiac care, pediatric intensive care, neonatal intensivecare, or even to orthopedics, obstetrics, or ophthalmology. a similar propositionmight hold that information on the management of patients with acute upperrespiratory infections in the office setting can in some manner predict care ofpatients with longstanding conditions such as chronic obstructive lung disease,congestive heart failure, or even diabetes mellitus.those involved in public disclosure of evaluative information must takecare to reflect expert opinion on this matterinferences about one aspect of carecannot always successfully be drawn from information, whether positive ornegative, about another aspect of care. the point is complex because someextrapolation or generalization may be supportable. for example, good or badratings for a hospital on death rates for congestive heart failure or acutemyocardial infarction might well be generalizable to that hospital's performanceon pneumonia or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (keeler et al., 1992b),but they might well be completely irrelevant to ratings for asthma in children,hip replacement, or management of highrisk pregnancies. the committee thusbelieves that hdos will have a duty to make clear the limits of one's ability todraw conclusions about quality of care beyond the precise conditions andcircumstances reported for analyses.a related problem involves the understandable desire to reduce severalseparate measures of quality of care into a single, global index intended torepresent the performance of an entire hospital, plan, or individual provider.the presumption is that an index measure will be easier for hdos to report andfor the public to understand. developing index measures is extremely difficultfor conceptual reasons, which mainly relate to the difficulty of aggregatingmeasures that come from a variety of sources or represent disparate variables(essentially an "apples and oranges" or even "apples and giraffes" problem);quantitative and statistical problems are also significant. in practice, developingindex measures for qualityofcare analyses rarely ifpublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners102health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ever has been successful,8 although at least one committee member believes thatthe general level of intrahospital correlation is probably underestimated.how information is publicly disclosedassuming that some of the above issues have been adequately addressed,one arrives at the question of the content and appearance of publicly disclosedinformation. the structure, level of detail, and other properties of suchinformation will differ by the disclosure media used, by the nature of theinformation, by the type of provider or practitioner under consideration, and bythe level of confidence that can be placed in the numbers, statistics, andinferences to be presented. some of the more problematic factors in presentingdata are noted here. the committee does not take a formal stand on how thesematters might be resolved, however, because it believes that those decisionsneed to be governed by local considerations.one difficulty in presenting data involves how and in what order hdoselect to identify or list institutions, clinicians, or other providers. the mostobvious choice is to do so alphabetically. this option has the advantage ofmaking it easy to find a given provider and would probably be the likelyapproach when publicly disclosed information is purely descriptive. it has therelated disadvantage, however, of complicating the task of comparison when theissues of interest involve evaluative information.other approaches are nonalphabetic. hdos might, for instance, orderproviders of interest on a noncontroversial or descriptive variable; for a givenregion, these might be the number of beds for institutions, the number of freestanding clinics for hmos, or the number of primary care physicians for ppos.this method, however, does not have the advantages of alphabetic ordering andstill has the disadvantages noted above. a variant is to sort providers on thebasis of an essentially descriptive variable, such8 as evidence of the difficulty of developing index measures in quality analyses,cleveland health quality choice (chqc, 1993) has attempted to avoid themethodological pitfalls of trying to combine independent measures of quality. in itsrecent report, the cleveland group provides data separately for various quality measures,which include intensive care mortality and length of stay (los), medical mortality (foracute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, stroke, pneumonia, and chronicobstructive pulmonary disease) and los, and surgical mortality and los. the group didreport global patient satisfaction measures, in addition to separate indicators ofsatisfaction with such elements of care as admissions, ancillary services, billing, food,and nursing care, but in this case the entire approach to assessing patient satisfaction(including the estimation of a global measure) is based on known instruments withproven reliability and validity.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners103health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as charges for a particular service, that has the potential of some evaluativecontent.yet another option is to list providers in order from high to low (or viceversa) on a particularly sensitive evaluative variable, such as death orcomplication rates. this option may be the least desirable or the most open tomisinterpretation, as exemplified by primetime live's referral to such anarrangement as a "surgical scorecard" (primetime live, abc, june 4, 1992).some choices in the category of otherthanalphabetic ordering presentspecial problems or considerations. for one, the distinction implied abovebetween descriptive and evaluative information may be incorrect or not alwaysapplicable. what for some consumers may be purely informational,noncontroversial, or irrelevantšfor instance, numbers of specialists or feescharged for a procedurešmay for others be a significant or decisive matter inchoosing or leaving providers. opting to list providers or practitioners by thesevariables may thus reflect the biases or predispositions of those publicizing thedata and may not serve all consumers equally well.rankingsšfor instance, from highest to lowest on some variablešmayimply greater differences than are truly warranted, and indeed may be positivelymisleading. this is especially the case when adjacent ranks differ numericallybut the differences have no clinical meaning or statistical significance (stateddegree of certainty). the committee believes that those disclosing suchinformation must indicate where no statistical differences exist between ranks.mixed approachesšfor instance, grouping into thirds, quartiles, quintiles,or essentially equivalent ranks and then ordering alphabetically within thegroupsšare of course possible. scores, indexes, or other combinationalcalculations may be appealing for publication purposes, but they often havetechnical or methodologic weaknesses that will be difficult to convey to thepublic.other aspects of public disclosure involve whether information isrepresentational or symbolic. data can be presented quantitatively as numbers,rates, dollars, and so forth. alternatively, data can be rendered qualitativelyšfor example, as one to five stars or dollar signs; open, halfopen, or closedcircles; or other symbolic figures. combinations of such approaches arepossible. exactly which approaches convey what kinds of information best,with the least implicit bias, is open to question and deserves empirical study.another aspect of disclosure involves how analyses are released. up to thepresent time, most observers would expect hdos to release analyses in printedform; in the future, however, electronic outlets, such as cdrom diskettes orcomputer bulletin boards, may come into play. a computerbased approach mayspeed information to some audiences, which would be a positive outcome.depending on the extent to which the underlying datapublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners104health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accompany analytic results in computerbased media, however, someopportunity may arise for unauthorized analysis of data that could distort theoriginal information. from the viewpoint of hdos, this would be anundesirable outcome.a final set of factors concerns the extent of explanatory information andtechnical footnotes. when public disclosure relies on judgmental or symbolicapproaches, more explanatory and definitional material is probably needed thanwhen information is given in straightforward, nonqualitative ways. some of thisinformation might best be left to a technical report for researchers and othervery knowledgeable readers. in any case, the committee agrees that hdosinvolved in public disclosure must make available, in clear language, the keyelements of their methods, including discussion of possible threats to theinternal validity and generalizability of the work that analysts believe they havedealt with adequately.committee findings and conclusionsto this point the committee has considered issues of public disclosure ofinformation, particularly descriptive or evaluative data on costs or quality, by orunder the auspices of hdos. its views do not extend to certain other kinds ofdata banks or repositories, such as computerbased patient record systems ofindividual hospitals and health plans or internal data files of commercialinsurance carriers. furthermore, the positions advanced here logically dependon the databases in hdos being regional in nature (i.e., serving entire states orlarge metropolitan areas) and both inclusive and comprehensive within thatregion as those terms were used in chapter 2.the committee further believes that public disclosure of such information,particularly evaluative or comparative data, must give due regard to the possibleharms that may unfairly be suffered by institutions and individuals. in thecommittee's view, disclosure of information about larger aggregations of healthcaregivers, such as hospitals, will generally be less prone to causing undeservedlosses of reputation, income, or career than disclosure of information onindividual practitioners. the committee thus takes the position that publicdisclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to the extent that it is carried out withdue attention to accuracy and clarity and does not undermine the qa/qiprograms that health care institutions and organizations conduct internally.99 according to a reviewer of this report, the laws establishing the phcccc providethat a violation of the law would occur if cost data were provided without associatedquality data, or vice versa. the committee did not consider this specific requirement inits deliberations about disclosure policies for hdos, but arguably the pennsylvaniaprovision could be seen as an effort to strengthen the "fairness" principle.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners105health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendationsthe stance favoring public disclosure presented so far includes tworequirements. one is that the hdos themselves ought to carry out someminimum number of consumeroriented studies and analyses and publish themroutinely. that view proceeds directly from the definition of hdo developedfor this studyšthat hdos are entities that have as one of their missions makinghealthrelated information publicly available. in elaborating this position, thecommittee offers a series of recommendations under the general rubric ofadvocacy of analyses and public disclosure of results. the second requirementis that hdos make appropriate data available for others to use in such studiesand analyses, with the expectation that the results of the work will be publiclydisclosed; that is the thrust of a recommendation on advocacy of data release.finally, to promote these aims, the committee has urged that hdos keep pricesfor providing data and related materials as low as possible, as noted in thesection on related issuesadvocacy of analyses and public disclosure of resultsrecommendation 3.1 conducting providerspecificevaluationsthe committee recommends that health database organizationsproduce and make publicly available appropriate and timely summaries,analyses, and multivariate analyses of all or pertinent parts of theirdatabases. more specifically, the committee recommends that healthdatabase organizations regularly produce and publish results of providerspecific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care.the subjects of such analyses should include hospitals, hmos and othercapitated systems, feeforservice group practices, physicians, dentists,podiatrists, nursepractitioners or other independent practitioners, longtermcare facilities, and other health providers on whom the hdos maintain reliableand valid information. in all cases the identification of providers andpractitioners in publicly released reports should be only at a level ofdisaggregation that will support statistically valid analyses and inferences.in this context, publish or disclose is intended to mean to the public, notsimply to member or sponsoring organizations. this may be easier to state as aprinciple than to effect in practice. for hdos with clear publicagencymandates, such as those created by state legislation or governmental fiat orcharter and supported with public funds, the requirement to provide informationto the public would seem clear, but the use of public funds to support privatehdos could be made contingent on the dissemination of such analyses. somehdos may be based in the private sector, operatepublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners106health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chiefly for the benefit of forprofit entities, and have no connection with ormandate from states or the federal government. in these cases, the imperative tomake information and analytic results available to the public on a broad scale ismuch less clear. this committee hopes that such groups would act in the publicinterest and not just in support of parochial or member interests.this committee assumes that policy and economic forces already exist toencourage hdos to conduct such studies and to release information to thepublic. as implied above, however, this presupposition may be in error,particularly if hdos are supported largely by private interests or professionalgroups that may have reasons not to want such information publicly disclosedor that may believe that proprietary advantage may be lost by disclosure.professional groups may have different, but equally selfinterested, reasons forwanting information on their members to remain private.in the committee's view, therefore, the charters of such hdos ought toinclude firm commitments to conduct consumeroriented studies. furthermore,no public monies or data from publicly supported health programs (for example,medicare and medicaid at the federal level, or medicaid or various healthreform efforts at the state level) ought to be available to hdos that do notsubscribe to such principles (except when such data are otherwise publiclyavailable). where state legislation is used to establish hdos or similar entities(e.g., data commissions), the enabling statutes themselves should contain suchrequirements.recommendation 3.2 describing analytic methodsthe committee recommends that a health database organizationreport the following for any analysis it releases publicly: general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of their data; a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files andof the variables in each file used in the analyses; information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables usedin the analyses.the committee expects hdos to accompany public disclosure of providerspecific information with the following kinds of information: (1) cleardescriptions of the database, including documentation of its completeness andaccuracy; (2) material sufficient to characterize the original sources of the data;(3) complete descriptions of all equations or other rules used in riskadjustments, including validations and limitations of the methods; (4)explanations of all terms used in the presentations; and (5) description ofpublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners107health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appropriate uses by the public, payers, and government of the data and analyses,including notice of uses for which the data and analyses are not valid. whencertain disclosures are relatively routine (e.g., appearing quarterly or annually),such information might be made available in some detail only once andmodified or updated as appropriate in later publications.with respect to the quality and accuracy of data, hdos that do not coverthe majority of patients, providers, and health care system encountersšsuch asthose operated mainly for the interests of selfselected employersšwill haveless to say about cost, quality, and other evaluative matters for the full range ofproviders in the community. public disclosure of the results of evaluativeinvestigations in these circumstances may be less important; indeed, it mayeven be undesirable if the information is open to oversimplification,misinterpretation, or misuse. as noted previously, therefore, it will be crucial toprovide explanatory material and clear caveats about how the data might beappropriately applied or understood. publicizing descriptive facts on providerswho do render health care services to the populations covered by these smallerhdos will, however, likely be a useful step.minimizing potential harmsup to this point, the committee has taken an extremely strong prodisclosure stance toward comparative, evaluative data, but it sees some potentialfor harm in instantaneous public release of comparative or evaluative studies oncosts, quality, or other measures of health care delivery. this might be the case,for example, if those doing such work fail to provide information to hospitals,physician groups, or other study targets in advance of release, even to permitthem to check the data or develop responses. disclosure proponents assume thatsuch studies will be done responsibly, and the public has every right to expectthat to be the case. to the extent that is true, the generators of the work will bebelieved and the public interest will have been served.what is not clear is how well such initiatives will be carried out and whatbrake or check will exist to ensure highquality studies. one option is to requirehdos to exercise formal oversight over their work and, insofar as possible,over work done with data they provide. for instance, hdos might be expectedto impose an expert review mechanism on their own analyses before publicrelease, or to require that such peer review be done for analyses performed byothers on hdo data, or both.alternatively, reliance might be placed on an essentially marketdriven setof checks and balances. this approach holds that poor, biased, or otherwisequestionable work will eventually be discovered and those carrying it outdiscredited, because the "marketplace of ideas" has its own discipline to preventreckless analysis. studies cost money and are likely to be donepublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners108health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.only by organizations large enough to have a reputation to protect; poorly doneanalyses will be criticized and discounted in the press; analysts will feardiminishment of their professional reputations; and fear of lawsuits fordefamation can be a powerful dissuader.the committee did not, in the end, wish to rely solely on marketplacecorrectives; it believed that a more protective stance was needed.recommendation 3.3 minimizing potential harmthe committee recommends that, to enhance the fairness andminimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of evaluativestudies that identify individual providers, each hdo should adhere to twoprinciples as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) to makeavailable to and upon request supply to institutions, practitioners, orproviders identified in an analysis all data required to perform anindependent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysisprior to public release of the hdo results; and (2) to accompanypublication of its own analyses with notice of the existence and availabilityof responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanations of thefindings.this set of recommendations reflects what might be regarded as a fairnessdoctrine. it holds that an important safeguard for providers, especiallyindividual practitioners, dictates that they be allowed to check their own dataand comment thereon.meeting a fairness principle could take the form simply of giving thesubjects of analyses prerelease copies of the publication or at least of theinformation about them. such subjects would not be given a veto over whethertheir data are used, nor would they necessarily be afforded an opportunity tohave their data amended in public studies, but their comments would bemaintained by the hdo so that interested parties could review them. thecommittee assumed that hdos might well choose to append such comments totheir own reports and publications. hcfa adopted this approach for itsmortality rate releases, for instance, as did cleveland health quality choice forits first data release.the committee actually has gone further, however, to advise that hdosgive providers and practitioners (or their representatives) the relevant data andsufficient time to analyze them, should such requests be made. because suchsituations will differ among hdos in the future, the committee did not developspecific guidance on these points. for example, it cautions that hdos will haveto devise ways, in conveying such data to one requestor, to conceal theidentities of other providers or practitioners in the data files to be transferred,but the committee believes that hdos can accomplish this.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners109health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition, the committee did not reach any consensus on what constitutessufficient time, believing that this would vary by the nature, size, and scope ofthe analysis in question, but common sense about the difficulties of dataanalysis and fairness to all parties might dictate the length of waiting time; aweek's, or a year's, delay would doubtless fail both tests, two months might not.the committee also thought that the time permitted for reanalysis might belonger in the earlier years of hdo operations, when all parties are developingprocedures and skills in this area, and for approximately the first year of anynew or especially complicated analyses.this discussion began with the premise that potential harms to institutionsand individual practitioners need to be prevented or minimized, and the stepsrecommended above have that intent. the committee believes, however, that abenefit for hdos of requiring them to make such data available for review andpossible reanalysis is that feedback from providers may reveal problems withdata quality and study methods that hdos would want to remedy.advocacy of data releasepromoting wide applications of healthrelated datato this point, the chapter has focused on what hdos might do internally toanalyze and publish information on providers and practitioners in their regions.consistent with the discussion in chapter 2, however, hdos might well beexpected to do more in the public interest to promote responsible use of healthrelated data. specifically, they can serve as a key repository of data to whichmany other groups should have access.recommendation 3.4 advocacy of data release:promoting wide applications of healthrelated datato foster the presumed benefits of widespread applications of hdodata, the committee recommends that health database organizations shouldrelease nonpersonidentifiable data upon request to other entities oncethey are in analyzable form. this policy should include release to anyorganization that meets the following criteria: it has a public mission statement indicating that promoting publichealth or the release of information to the public is a major goal. it enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentialityand integrity of data. it agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any otherindividual or organization. it agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners110health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee also recommends, as a related matter, that healthdatabase organizations make public their own policies governing therelease of data.in referring to "nonpersonidentifiable data," this recommendation isintended to protect the confidentiality of personidentifiable information inhdo databases. the latter pertains to specific patients or other individuals andmight include persons residing in the community who appear in populationbased data files but have not received health care services. the distinction ismade because individual practitioners or clinicians, who might well appear inthe databases as patients or residents of the area, could be identified oridentifiable by their professional roles (in line with earlier recommendations inthis chapter). chapter 4 of this report explores issues of privacy and ofconfidentiality of personidentifiable data in more detail.the committee debated at length the desirability and propriety ofadvocating that hdos make data available to all requestors, rather thanconstraining the transfer of data as in the above recommendation. it wasuncomfortable with flat prohibitions on all transfers of data, but it was equallyuncomfortable with the possibility of openended or blanket transfers of data toa wide variety of groups who would not be expected to place publicdissemination of information high on a list of organizational objectives. tothread a path through this dilemma, therefore, the committee advocated thathdos make data available to those entities that can demonstrate their clear goalof public disclosure of descriptive or evaluative information and their ability torealize this goal. hdos should not place prior restraints on which entities mightreceive such data simply on the grounds that others may conduct analyses orrelease findings that dispute those of the hdos themselves.10to characterize such entities, therefore, the committee devised the criteriain the above recommendation for two purposes. the first is to underscore itsview that databases held by hdos (or at least those mandated by law orsupported by public funds) should be available for science and the public good.the second is to constrain the use of such data purely for10 one of the reviewers of this report noted that the ability of individuals andinstitutions to obtain information from public hdos under state or federal freedom ofinformation act (foia) legislation is going to become more problematic andtroublesome as hdo releases become more widespread, especially if courts uphold theview that (1) anything known to the requestor is available through foia procedures, (2)any analyses can be requested as long as they do not require excessive time to perform,and (3) data can be obtained at any stage (before analysis, before cleaning or editing,even before the end of data collection). the reviewer suggested that consideration offederal preemptive foia legislation that is cognizant of new challenges posed by publicdata disclosures by the hdos might be wise.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners111health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.private gain, particularly in anticompetitive actions. examples of this secondconcern might be employers, insurers, ppos, hospitals, or other health caredelivery organizations in a given region using data for price collusion. thus, itis expected that those requesting data tapes from an hdo will perform andpublish analyses that can be said to serve science and/or the public interest.the committee recognized that a tension may develop between theunderstandable desire on the part of hdos to hold data until they havecompleted studies they wish to conduct and the need to be responsive torequests from eligible organizations for reliable, valid, and uptodate data.responding to such requests might even delay or prevent studies andpublications by the hdos themselves. the committee believes, therefore, thathdos might consider developing independent units; one group could beresponsible for data management and release of data to authorized recipients,and the other could take the lead for the hdos' own internal analyses andpublic disclosure activities.requiring recipients to protect data privacy and confidentialitythe committee debated at some length the advisability and feasibility ofrecommending that hdos require recipients of their data to protect theconfidentiality of the information. ultimately, the committee elected simply toobserve that such behavior on the part of hdos might be desirable; it iscertainly desirable on the part of data recipients. it concluded, however, that thepractical aspects of insisting that hdos police the actions of their datarecipients were too difficult to make this step an integral part of hdo operations.certain kinds of database organizations, already in existence for someyears, have long experience in designing descriptive, publicuse data tapes thatare consistent with all the principles of privacy and confidentiality advanced inchapter 4. thus, to the extent that any affirmative action is required of hdos, itshould at a minimum include that they create data files according to wellknownprecepts and methods for publicuse tapes and transfer data only through thosemeans. further steps are examined in chapter 4. in sum, hdos can probablynot be expected to police the proper and responsible use of their data beyondtheir own walls. they can, however, cut off from further access to their data anyusers who have abused these principles, and the committee advises that hdosbe authorized or empowered to do so.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners112health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using valid analytic techniquesthis chapter has dealt chiefly with descriptive or evaluative studies andrelated activities that hdos might pursue and then release publicly; it has alsoconsidered the responsibilities that hdos might have to make data available toothers for private qa/qi programs and for other analytic purposes. consistentwith the discussion of data quality in chapter 2, however, the committee wishesto emphasize that valid studies will require valid analytic techniques, oftenmultivariable methods.such techniques are powerful, complex, and arguable in details amongexperts, but they are easily understood in principle. properly used, they providethe best methods for comparing institutional, provider, plan, or clinicianperformance. this is so because only such approaches can isolate performancefrom the potentially confounding effects of differences in the prevalence ofdisease, severity of illness, presence of large numbers of elderly or poorpatients, and so forth. variables that reflect these factors are often termedseverity, risk, or casemixadjustors.serious criticisms can be leveled at studies with inadequate orinappropriate adjustors and analyses;11 such studies, and the organizations thatconduct them, can readily be discredited. the consequences could bedevastating to the entire publicdisclosure effort. to help protect against suchcriticisms, the committee advises that hdos use only proper statisticaltechniquesšparticularly multivariable analysesšfor comparisons released tothe public.in addition, the committee holds that hdos ought to use only severity andriskadjustment techniques and programs that are available for review andcritique by qualified experts. it also believes that hdos would do well torequire, as a condition of data release, that entities or investigators conductingsecondary analysis of these data adopt the same precept.11 moses (1990, p. 187) argues that such adjustments can be quite difficult, as follows:''to be fully effective, it [such severityor riskadjustment] requires three things: (a)recognition of what variables are influential on outcomes; (b) measured values of thesevariables for each subject; and (c) understanding of how those adjustments are to bemade correctly.... the promise of adjustment is hard indeed to realize, even in principle,and the practical problems of unrecognized and unmeasured influential variables,incomplete data, and necessarily ad hoc adjustment strategies compound the difficulties."with respect to these practicalities, for example, greenfield et al. (1988), iezzoni (1989),iezzoni et al. (1992), and greenfield (1993) all provide useful reviews of issues relatingto comorbidity, case mix, and risk adjustment. greenfield (1993) emphasizes thedistinction between presence of a comorbid condition and the severity of that conditionin the context of analyses that might be done on data from the endstage renal disease(esrd) program or from individual esrd treatment units.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners113health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.related issuesprivacy protections for personidentifiable datachapter 4 deals with the issues of privacy and confidentiality of personidentifiable data in depth. in advocating release of data to providers,researchers, or others, however, the committee recognizes the possibility thatinformation identifying patients or other persons may be inadvertently revealedto those with neither a right nor a need to know. this brief commentary on howprivacy might be protected is intended to signal the committee's strong viewthat it must be protected.generally, committee members believe that encrypting, encoding, andaggregating patient data can go a long way toward protecting the identity ofpatients and other persons in hdo databases. although no one can everguarantee zero probability that an individual can be identified through concertedeffort and ingenious devices, these methods make it possible to issue assurancesabout privacy at a reasonable level of confidence. such assurances are strongerregarding tabular or aggregated information than data in discrete records, butthey might still be reasonably strong at the level of tapes and otherdisaggregated databases.some committee members were not convinced that such steps will besufficient to ensure anonymity and protect the identity of patients. they arguedthat a less ambitious goalšthat of protecting the identity of patients to theextent feasiblešis more realistic. it has the further advantage of conveying tothe public that absolute protection of the identity of individuals when theirinformation is in a computerized data bank is very difficult, if not impossible.consistent with the principles developed in chapter 4 on access to personidentifiable information for researchers, the committee argues that appropriatelyqualified, institutionbased researchers with approvals from their institutions'institutional review boards can receive data with intact identifiers. thecommittee suspects that most investigators will not wish to acquire data tapeson analyses that hdos have already performed. rather, they will wish to obtaindata that permit original analyses on a broad array of topics relating to theeffectiveness and appropriateness of health care interventions. the committeedoes make provision in chapter 4 for researchers interested in hdo data forthese purposes to receive personidentifiable information.constrained staff capabilitiesthis chapter assumes that hdos will have an affirmative responsibility tocarry out analyses and public dissemination activities. clearly, however,public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners114health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what studies they choose to do and how actively they pursue communication ofresults will be constrained by available resources and dictated by their ownperceptions of critical issues. hdos, for reasons of political disinclination, lackof staff, or other factors, may not wish or not be able to conduct certain analysesthat outside requestors, such as consumer groups or newspapers, regard asextremely significant or timely. such outside requestors might even be able topay for such work, or at least to underwrite the costs of acquiring the data;hdos may still find it impossible or unattractive to attempt to respond to suchrequests. the committee developed no consensus on how these problems mightbe addressed, beyond the points made earlier that hdo charters ought tomandate consumeroriented studies.12obligations to correct analyses or retract informationa complex issue that proponents of hdos need to consider is whatincentives are required to ensure the accuracy of their analyses and subsequentpublications. the market for the work may act as one corrective, as discussedearlier. in theory, if it becomes known that an hdo has published informationdemonstrated to be false, wrongly interpreted, or inappropriate, then political,economic, and social support for the hdo will falter. in practice, the committeewas not convinced a marketoriented solution like this would have much effecton an hdo's later performancešthere is essentially no evidence on the pointšand it was even less persuaded that harms to individuals could be prevented orredressed in this manner.an alternative, more activist approach may be to require that hdospublish retractions in the same way and through the same media that publishedthe original erroneous material. some remedies for injury to individuals orproviders might be available through civil litigation when false12 to overcome some of the difficulties hdos might face in responding to outsiderequests for studies (e.g., staffing constraints or inability to price analytic servicesappropriately to recoup costs), one committee member proposed that hdos mightcontract with at least three "analysis consultants," who will have the same clearance tosee patient identifiers as hdo staff. these analysis consultants would compete to doanalyses for any outside requestor and to release to the requestor analysis results that donot permit or include patient identification. the rationale for this suggestion is that"outsiders," such as newspapers, employers, consumer organizations, or othernonacademic organizations, will find it difficult to meet the institutional review boardrequirements for direct access to patientidentified data (a condition elaborated inchapter 4 on privacy and confidentiality); such entities may also find it difficult toidentify experts (within academic institutions) who can or would be willing to do suchstudies. the full committee was divided on whether this approach was either desirable orfeasible but regarded it as worth consideration.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners115health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information has done material harm to their reputations, incomes, or careers,although bringing libel actions that demonstrate malicious intent orforeknowledge of the falsity of the information may be extremely difficult. afurther drawback to this strategy is the same feeling that inhibits individualswhose privacy has been breached from bringing lawsuitsšthe disinclination tomake public again what was painful, defamatory, or otherwise harmful when itfirst was publicized.a related question is what to do when data are corrected long after theyhave been processed, used in analyses, or transferred to other users. forexample, should hdos notify users or recipients of their data when somethinghas been augmented, corrected, or changed? ought they go further and insistthat the users alert the public or others to whom they have disclosed studyresults or transferred data of such matters? the committee did not developconsidered opinions on these questions, but it did believe that individual hdosshould be prepared to devise policies to address these issues in anticipation ofthe day when the questions will arise in their own operations.strengthening quality assurance and qualityimprovement programsdata feedbackthe primary focus of this chapter has been on actions hdos might take tomake reliable, valid, and useful information on health care providers andpractitioners easily available to the public. the committee concluded that hdoscould help improve the quality of health care through more direct assistance tohealth care institutions, facilities, and clinical groups. one technique toaccomplish this is termed feedback, namely, efforts to make available toproviders and practitionersšin as nonthreatening, nonconfrontational, andconstructive a way as possiblešthe data used or the results of evaluativestudies about themselves and their peers.despite high hopes and some years of experience with public disclosure ofproviderspecific information, qa/qi experts are not yet clear whether and howan uninhibited approach to public disclosure will foster better qa/qi initiativesin the health care community. to the best of the committee's knowledge, nosystematic or rigorous analysis of the short or longterm effects of publicdisclosure has been conducted. anecdotal evidence suggests that some providergroups may seize the opportunity to take a hard look at their own operations andact aggressively on what they find, whereas others may adopt an essentiallydefensive posture. nevertheless, virtually no conclusive information indicateswhether public disclosure activities materially improve quality of care or qa/qiprograms or, for that matter, makepublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners116health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.any lasting impact on the public's mind.13 on balance, the committee believesthe risk of damage to qa/qi effortsšfor instance, if public disclosure forcesinstitutions to divert qa/qi funds to efforts to defend themselves againstnegative publicityšis likely to be less than the gain from timely publicdisclosure of such information, but this proposition remains a question forempirical study.to support advances in qa/qi, the committee advises that hdos makeavailable to provider organizations the information they need to conduct theirown internal qa/qi programs more assertively. this might mean, for example,that hdos would supply hospitals with their own data and equivalent, butprobably nonidentified, data on their peers (e.g., all other hospitals in theregion, or all other hospitals of certain types). the notion is generalizable tovirtually all kinds of entities that deliver health care in a region, from small feeforservice practices of physicians, to large multispecialty health plans, topharmacies and nursing homes. here the intent is more to transfer raw data thanto transmit results of evaluative studies, although in principle hdos coulddevelop a set of reports that would personalize such results for each of thespecific institutions or clinicians included in the study.some hdos may elect to take a lowerprofile, less prodisclosure position.for example, they may opt to postpone public release of their own evaluativestudies or insist on delay by groups to whom they provide data until theinformation has been made available to providers for their use in qa/qiprograms. this option would probably entail more delay before publicdisclosure than is assumed for the earlier recommendation about supplying suchdata for providers to reanalyze for possible challenge to or comment on hdostudies. consistent with its stance above, however, the committee would urgehdos to assess carefully the pros and cons of operating in this manner, withparticular attention to whether they are thereby supplying a useful publicservice or acting more in the interests of the health care community.13 the focus here is on providerspecific information made available in lay media tothe public at large. some experience suggests that providers identified through databaseanalyses as delivering poor care can be targeted for followup of various sorts (e.g.,patient chart review or more intensive analysis of information in the databases) by qa/qi programs (see, e.g., des harnais, 1990; dubois, 1990; iom, 1990). this is certainlythe philosophy underlying shifts in the medicare peer review organization (pro)program scope of work in the mid1990s (wilensky and jencks, 1992), although thefeasibility of new plans for changing provider behaviors through applications of data,feedback, and continuous quality improvement methods has been called into question(nash, 1992).public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners117health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.quality assurance and quality improvementthe committee assumed that the qa/qi activity prompted by hdo datawould occur chiefly as a part of or an adjunct to the formal qa/qi process thatvarious providers and plans might themselves conduct. 14 information onidentified providers and individual clinicians concerning questionable, andperhaps quite poor, performance would be made available to organizations' qa/qi programs so that they could act constructively on that information;information on superior accomplishments as well as on average performanceshould also be forthcoming. such feedback implies that health care institutionsand individual practitioners will review, analyze, and make judgments aboutthis information and use it to improve the quality of care.of course, qa/qi programs can be (and are often accused of being)ineffective. for instance, they may not act meaningfully or in a timely way oninformation about poor providers and clinicians; and efforts that should betaken to improve performance or remove substandard providers from the scenemay be delayed. here, it is argued, is where nearrealtime public disclosure ofinformation can play a significant sentinel role, illuminating problems andperhaps encouraging, if not forcing, provider groups and health institutions totake actions they would otherwise have softened, postponed, or not initiated.nevertheless, the committee believes that the health care community todayis moving more forcefully toward meaningful qa/qi efforts. contemporaryqa/qi philosophy would call hdos to provide information that willaccomplish several tasks equally well: identifying poor providers, identifyingsuperior providers, and improving average levels of practice. the committeewould encourage hdos to give these qualityofcare goals equal weight.privilegingon a narrower point, qualityrelated information can be used to grantpractitioners various kinds of privileges, for instance, to admit patients to14 this committee was not constituted to explore issues of quality of care per se; it hasopted to use a hybrid phrase, quality assurance and quality improvement (qa/qi), torefer to the wide set of approaches to assessing, maintaining, and strengthening theequality of health care in this country. for a comparison of the two generic approaches,see iom (1990). for a recent description of industrial quality improvement systems, seeblumenthal (1993). other seminal publications of the past quartercentury include:donabedian, 1966, 1980, 1982, 1985; brook, 1973; brook and appel, 1973; williamson,1978; palmer, 1983; inquiry, 1988; batalden and buchanan, 1989; berwick, 1989;goldfield and nash, 1989; berwick et al., 1990; couch, 1991.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners118health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hospital and perform certain kinds of invasive, diagnostic, or therapeuticprocedures. this process can also be used to withdraw privileges in certaincircumstances, such as for specific surgical procedures. it is applied most oftento physicians but can be directed at other clinicians as well. related applicationsin this area involve various forms of selective contracting, in which physiciansor other providers are selected for or excluded from participation in certaintypes of health plans.15hdos may be asked to provide information on specific practitioners on aprivate basis to health plan and group administrators, precisely for formalprivileging or contracting purposes. some potential for harm to physicians doesexist in this application of hdo data; the particulars depend on who actuallyreceives such information and the presence or absence of due process, inaddition to the quality of the information per se. the committee believes thatwhen privileging procedures are used creatively, they are compatible with qa/qi efforts. it cautions, nonetheless, that hdos need to be alert to the possibledrawbacks of making information privately available in these circumstancesand to take appropriate steps to minimize them.peer review informationsome kinds of qualityrelated information, developed through formal qa/qi and peer review efforts, are not covered by this discussion. 16 the content ofprivate peer review efforts, for instance, those of hospital qa committees orother investigative or disciplinary actions, are protected from15 issues relating to selective contracting for hmos, ipas, ppos, and other types ofhealth plans that may emerge in the coming years of health care reform go well beyondthose mentioned in chapter 2. selectivecontracting decision making on the part ofhealth plan managers is likely to differ in philosophical, operational, legal, and otherways from steps that patients and consumers take to choose (or drop) plans, providers, orphysicians. in this context, one might speculate that patients and consumers would useinformation obtained through public disclosure to make judgments or choices abouthealth plans, providers, or physicians, whereas plan executives might rely more oninformation developed internally. nevertheless, hdos (and policymakers) should notunderestimate the sensitivity that health plan executives may have to public opinion andimage, however, and this factor may have a synergistic or leveraging effect on theeffectiveness of hdo disclosure activities.16 the rules governing due process and other aspects of quality assurance and peerreview are too complex to explore here, but see the iom report on confidentiality of peerreview information in the professional standards review organization (iom, 1981) andother work by gosfield (1975). the iom report on a quality assurance strategy formedicare describes the pro program in detail and reinforces the extent to whichinformation on substandard performance of physicians and hospitals will be keptconfidential through many steps before a more public "sanction" step is begun (iom,1990).public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners119health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disclosure.17 in 1981 an iom committee issued a study (access to medicalreview data) on disclosure policy for professional standards revieworganizations (psros, which were the precursor organizations to medicarepeer review organizations, or pros); it addressed several questions about thetypes of information that psros collected and generated and the potentialbenefits and harms of disclosing individual institutional and practitioner profilesand other data. that committee concluded that the protection of patient privacymust be a primary component of any disclosure policy and, indeed, is not reallyat issue. by contrast, major problems do arise in the context of data aboutfacilities, institutions, systems, and practitioners that can be identifiedindividually. the study concluded that disclosure of utilization data aboutidentified institutions could be justified on the grounds of public benefits suchas enhanced consumer choice and public accountability of health careinstitutions. conversely, that study did not conclude that utilization data onidentified practitioners ought to be released because of concerns about"unwarranted harm to professional reputations caused by misleading orincomplete data, and the likelihood of a chilling effect on peer review stemmingfrom physician fears of data misuse" (p. 8). finally, that committee decided thatwhen the data in question relate to quality of care, "the potential harms ofrequiring public disclosure [by psros] in identified form would outweigh thepotential benefits" (p. 8).a decade later, essentially the same approach is in place for pros. prosclearly provide considerable information to individual physicians under reviewand to the hospitals where they practice. pro regulations, however, hold mostqualityrelated information to be confidential and not subject to publicdisclosure,18 and pros are exempted from the require17 privacy protections for individual practitioners are also part of the proceduresfollowed by the national practitioner data bank, which was created by the health carequality improvement act of 1986 (p.l. 99660). providers such as hospitals and statephysician disciplinary boards are mandated to report to the data bank information onphysicians and dentists involved in cases of malpractice (judgments or settlements) orother disciplinary actions that last more than 30 days. organizations with a peer reviewprocess (e.g., hospitals and medical and dental plans) must make inquiries about suchinformation concerning physicians or dentists who apply for employment, admittingprivileges, or additional privileges. except for the physicians who can query the databank to check on the accuracy of its information about them, no others, including thepublic, are permitted access. questions have been raised about: (1) the handling ofsensitive material by the data bank (related to handling of mail and mailing to incorrectaddresses; see gao, 1993b), and (2) requests to physicians by ppos and insurers toquery the database and turn over information about themselves (doyle, 1992).18 confidential information includes, among other things, data that explicitly orimplicitly identify an individual patient, practitioner, or pro reviewer; reports from thepro on sanctions and other recommendations; and other pro deliberations. "implicitlyidentifies" means that "the data are sufficiently unique or the numbers so small" thatidentification of the patient, practitioner, or reviewer would be easy (iom, 1990, p. 202;also see blum et al., 1977).public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners120health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ments of the freedom of information act. pros are required to disclose someconfidential information to appropriate authorities in cases of risk to publichealth or fraud and abuse.public disclosure and feedbacksome readers may believe that a tension exists between public disclosureand feedback, but the committee believes that both will be important toolsavailable to hdos to improve quality and foster informed choices in healthcare. thus, it voices support for both functions, believing that one activity doesnotšor at least need notšdiscredit the other and that effective combinationstrategies can be designed. it sees public disclosure as a powerful motivator forphysicians to participate more fully in their organizations' qa/qi activities.the challenge to hdos may be to decide on policies that will foster thegreatest improvements in quality of care, patient outcomes, and use of healthcare resources. some advances will be achieved more by public disclosure,particularly actions that aim to get useful descriptive data to the public in atimely way, but others may be aided chiefly by private feedback in the qa/qicontext. this clearly is not an either/or situation. combinations of approacheswill probably be the most desirable strategy, and the exact combinations arelikely to differ by type of provider, geographic area, nature of the data underconsideration, and similar factors.summarythis chapter has addressed the challenges posed for hdos in two criticalsets of activities: public disclosure of quality and cost data and information andprivate feedback of similar information to health care providers in efforts tohelp them monitor and improve their own performance. the hdo will have tohave an impeccable reputation for fairness, evenhandedness, objectivity andintellectual rigor. this will be hard to earn and hard to maintain but essential ifhdos are to play the key roles envisioned for them.the committee believes that public disclosure of information, particularlyevaluative or comparative data, must give due regard to the possible harms thatmay unfairly be suffered by institutions and individuals. the committee thustakes the position that public disclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to theextent that it is carried out with due attention to accuracy and clarity andcontributes to the qa/qi programs that health care institutions andorganizations conduct internally.the committee identified several important aspects of public disclosure.these included: topics for hdo analysis and release, who is identipublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners121health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fied in material so released, questions of the vulnerability to harm of providersand clinicians so identified, various methodologic questions about analysis,alternative approaches to public disclosure, and specific considerations aboutusing qualityofcare data in qa/qi programs and the protections accorded peerreview information.in explicating its findings and conclusions, the committee advancedseveral recommendations advocating analyses and public disclosure of results.it specifically recommended that hdos produce and make publicly availableappropriate and timely summaries, analyses, and multivariate analyses of all orpertinent parts of their databases. the committee recommends that hdosregularly produce and publish results of providerspecific evaluations of costs,quality, and effectiveness of care (recommendation 3.1). furthermore, thecommittee recommends that a health database organization report the followingfor any analysis it releases publicly: its general methods for ensuringcompleteness and accuracy of their data; a description of the contents and thecompleteness of all data files and of the variables in each file used in theanalyses; and information documenting any study of the accuracy of variablesused in the analyses (recommendation 3.2).in protecting against harms to individuals or institutions by the publicationof evaluative studies, the committee also recommended that hdos adhere toseveral principles apart from those just noted. it recommends that to enhancethe fairness and minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication ofevaluative studies that identify individual providers, each hdo should adhereto two principles as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) makeavailable to and upon request by institutions, practitioners, or providersidentified in an analysis all data required to perform an independent analysis,and do so with reasonable time for such analysis prior to public release of thehdo results; and (2) accompany publication of its own analyses with notice ofthe existence and availability of responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of,or explanations of the findings. to foster qa/qi efforts, the committee arguesthat hdos ought to make available to provider organizations the informationthey need to conduct their own internal programs.consistent with its public interest stance, the committee also states somerecommendations intended to promote wide applications of healthrelated data.hdos should release nonpersonidentifiable data upon request to a variety ofother entities that meet certain criteria; these criteria involve public missions topromote public health and publicly released information and explicit policiesabout data protection. the committee also recommends that hdos make publictheir policies governing data release (recommendation 3.4).this chapter has only tangentially touched on privacy and confidentialpublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners122health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ity matters as they relate to personidentified and personidentifiable data. thenext chapter presents those issues in some detail.appendix 3achapter 3 advances the proposition that an appropriate balance must befound concerning fairness to the public and to providers in the public disclosureof healthrelated information by health database organizations. the committeenotes that this balance may be more difficult to attain than is commonlyappreciated, in part because of inappropriate reliance on technical and statisticaldecisions and methods. this appendix attempts to illustrate the pitfalls that mayconfront even relatively straightforward public disclosure activities, usinginformation that is in the public domain from the statewide study in new yorkstate on hospitalspecific deaths following coronary artery bypass graft(cabg) in 1991.actual numbers, computed values, and risk adjustmentwhen hdos attempt to disseminate information about providers in waysuseful to the public, they are likely to rank providers according to data thateither report actual events or reflect computed values. the former might includethe number of patients who undergo cabg in each hospital in new york stateand the number of patients who die in hospital following cabg (figures 3a1and 3a2); these numbers describe actual events and, barring inaccuratereporting, are certain. the computed or derived information might include thepercentage of patients undergoing cabg who died in hospital (figure 3a3).such information is likely to be of some use to the public, but thelimitations should be clearly stated. for example, suppose that 2 percent ofpatients in hospital a and 8 percent of patients in hospital b died in a givenyear and that this information is made available to the public at large. anindividual contemplating an elective operation might conclude that she shouldgo to hospital a. suppose further, however, that hospital a had only very lowrisk patients undergoing elective procedures, whereas hospital b had a largenumber of highrisk patients or patients undergoing emergency operations and amortality of only 0.5 percent among its lowrisk elective patients. suppose yetfurther that this information was not publicly disclosed. with this additionalinformation, reasonable persons might well conclude that the expertise ofhospital b for the type of operation the individual needs might be greater thanin hospital a, despite hospital a's lower overall hospital mortality.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners123health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a1 the number of patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graftin each hospital in new york state, 1991.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners124health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a2 actual (observed) number of patients who died in the hospitalafter coronary artery bypass graft in each hospital in new york state, 1991.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners125health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a3 actual (observed) proportion of patients who died in thehospital after coronary artery bypass graft in each hospital in new yorkstate,1991.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners126health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.releasing data only on actual mortality rates clearly is unfair to the public;it is equally unfair to the providers in question. for example, more and morepatients would seek care from hospital a, and these actions collectively mightrender hospital b's cardiac surgical program sufficiently underutilized that itwould be closed. this would serve the interests neither of future lowriskpatients, for whom expected mortality would be lower in hospital b than inhospital a, nor of future highrisk emergency patients, with whom hospital ahas no experience.this kind of unfairness had led to the process generally referred to as riskadjustment. this may be defined as a process that allows the effect of a variableof interest on patient outcomes, such as a hospital or a surgeon, to be isolatedfrom the effect of all other variables believed to influence that outcome. thiscommonly is accomplished by multivariate analysis to determinesimultaneously the variables that, with a stated degree of uncertainty, determinethe outcome in question in the population under study.1 in the example justabove, the question would be the effect of hospital on the outcomes of patientsundergoing elective or emergency cabg. the analysis would be used to riskadjust actual hospital mortalities for hospitals a and b so that they reflect onlyšor at least largelyšthe effect of the expertise of the hospitals on patientoutcomes. by extension the same process can be applied to determine physicianspecific outcomes; in this example, mortality rates by surgeon.it can be argued that properly riskadjusted hospital mortality rates, andtheir conversion by one or another means to inferences about quality of care, isa fair method of comparing providers. some would counter, however, thatrandom assignment of treatment (e.g., cabg or no cabg in the example athand) is the only reliable method of risk adjustment. whether or not thisargument is persuasive in theory, random assignment is not practical in manysituations, including the one under consideration here. the conclusion to thispoint might be, however, that hdos should publicly release not just actualnumbers of events but also the results of appropriately riskadjusted analyses.certainty, probability, and correct inferenceseven with all these refinements all derived information and comparisonsinherently have only a degree of certainty, not absolute certainty. the1 risk adjustment can also be approached by polling expert opinion about indicationsfor an interventionšas for example, in the indications of appropriateness for cabg thathave been developed by the rand corporation (chassin et al., 1986b; leape et al.,1991)šand then stratifying groups of (actual) patients in the analysis according to thoseindications.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners127health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reason is that such analyses yield information and inferences relating to ahypothetical group or population on the basis of investigation of a presumablyrandomly selected sample of that population. simple ''secure" facts, such asthose cited in the figures above for hospitals a and b, do give some of theinformation required for fair comparisons, reliable predictions, and secureinferences. nonetheless, comparisons, predictions, and inferences requiresomething more, and that something more always has a degree of uncertainty.thus, the comparisons, predictions, and inferences must take into account boththe amount or magnitude of any differences displayed by derived information(as well as that shown in actual information) and the related degree of certainty(or uncertainty). this iom committee has asserted that hdos have aresponsibility to ensure that public disclosures of their data and analyses donewith their data clearly portray these considerations. again, it may suffice toinclude detailed warnings concerning how not to use the data.one pitfall that hdos should avoid is releasing only that information theyregard as criticallyor statistically significantlyimportant. they may do thiswhen the multiplicity of providers and computations produces such a largeamount of information that not all of it can be published, but doing so may beunfair both to providers and the public. for example, studies might show, with ahigh degree of certainty, that in a group of 30 hospitals, hospitals x, y, and zare the only ones determined to have less good results than the remaining 27institutions. this degree of certainty, or criterion for differentiating between onesubset of the whole group and another, is conventionally defined as a "pvalueless than 0.05."assume, in this example, that no other members of this group of 30hospitals are shown with a high degree of certainty to be different from oneanother. a public release containing only this information is an attractive optionon practical grounds, but it may not be fair. some readers will intuitively realizethat one or more other institutions may also have somewhat inferior outcomes,and thus are different from the others in the group, but this conclusion will nothave as high a degree of certainty as for hospitals x, y, and z.in short, the use of pvalues and establishment of criteria using degrees ofcertainty are based on arbitrary decisions. the point is illustrated in table 3a1,which shows the usual tabular form of public disclosure of hospital deaths aftercabg for the purpose of identifying hospitals with poor outcomes. the singleasterisk in the figure identifies the only three institutions (here, st. peter's, st.vincent's, and university hospital of brooklyn) that the analyses showed to bedifferent from all others in riskadjusted mortality rates with a high degree ofcertainty (p < 0.05).although technically this portrayal may be correct, is it fair? that is,should the public be left with the general impressionšwhich may not bepublic disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners128health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accuratešthat the other institutions were not different one from the other? ascan be seen in figure 3a4, three other hospitals (bellevue, erie county, andupstate medical) had less good outcomes as well, but with slightly lesscertainty than the three already noted. the arbitrary designation of a pvalue(here of less than 0.05, but it could be any a priori pvalue) has led to theerroneous general impression that only the firstnamed three hospitals aresomehow "different" and are to be regarded as outliers.the criticism can be generalized: why should "the ruler"šin this case anarbitrary pvaluešnot be placed so that st. luke's, arnotogden, and longisland jewish are included as outliers? where, indeed, ought the ruler, if appliedto figure 3a4, be brought to rest?the educational content of public information disseminationpublic release of information about the variability in the ranks of varioushospitals that is produced by different methods of analysis helps the public tounderstand the degree of uncertainty in overall inferences about "the best placeto go for surgery." much of this can be expressed in some combined index (infigure 3a4, this is the riskadjusted percentage mortality). depicting otherinformation, and displaying information in bar diagrams (see, for instance,figures 3a5, 3a6, and 3a7) encourages, if not forces, the public to see howcomplex a matter it is to distinguish between the best and the worst (or betterand poorer) hospitals. it also portrays the small differences that sometimesseparate these facilities. thus, this committee believes that hdos must realizethat the fairest approach to the public release of evaluative information involvesdisclosing rankingsšof all actual data as well as derived datašalong withappropriate explanations.the knowledge base on effective ways to communicate and disseminatequalityrelated information to consumers is comparatively scanty, yet muchhealth policy today presumes that health care policymakers and providersunderstand how to carry out such efforts. to overcome gaps in this area, morethan one research agenda in the qualityofcare arena has specifically called forwork on information dissemination techniques (iom, 1990; vanamringe andshannon, 1992). the committee endorses these calls for additional research onthese topics.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners129health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 3a1 hospital deaths following coronary artery bypass graft (cabg) in new york state, 1991hospital deathsriskadjusted mortalityhospitalpatients(n)numberactual (observed) % mortalityexpected % mortality%95% confidence limits (cl)albany medical center831263.132.853.382.204.95arnotogden466132.792.144.012.136.85bellevue5946.782.817.422.0019.00beth israel16942.373.052.390.646.11binghamton general32582.463.352.260.984.46buffalo general1,151262.262.522.761.804.04erie county14853.381.935.391.7412.59lenox hill507183.553.173.452.045.45long island jewish369133.522.704.022.146.88maimonides608223.623.633.071.924.64millard fillmore496153.022.443.822.146.30montefiore moses30551.642.821.790.584.18montefiore weiler19600.002.290.00a0.002.51mount sinai497153.022.843.281.835.40new york hospital831232.773.772.261.433.39north shore465163.443.253.251.865.28nyu medical center707314.385.382.511.703.56presbyterian275103.642.953.801.826.99rochester general959222.293.402.081.303.15public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners130health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.st. joseph's521112.112.562.531.264.54st. luke's734243.272.444.122.646.13st. peter's437204.582.126.64b4.0610.26st. vincent's481224.572.136.61b4.1410.01strong memorial331144.233.643.571.955.99univ. hosp. brooklyn216125.562.377.21b3.7212.59univ. hosp. stony brook27793.255.271.900.873.60upstate med. ctr. syracuse266124.512.715.122.648.95westchester county605182.982.663.442.045.44winthrop451112.444.241.770.883.17total14,9444603.08 (95% cl = 2.81%3.37%)note: this is the usual new york state tabular form of public disclosure of hospital deaths after cabg, with each hospital being identified. although the ranking here isalphabetical, the media often reranks the institutions according to the riskadjusted mortality. the number of patients and the number of hospital deaths are the onlyhappenings depicted that occurred and about which there is no uncertainty. the actual percent mortality is a derived datum, obtained from the previous two numbers bycomputation. the expected percent mortalities and the riskadjusted percent mortalities depend upon computations using a multivariable logistic riskfactor equation andhave a degree of uncertainty. the uncertainty in the riskadjusted percent mortality is expressed here in the 95% confidence limits. note that the public's attention is calledprimarily to three institutions whose riskadjusted percent hospital mortalities are nearly certainly higher than those of the state as a whole. (this is essentially the same asthose hospitals with nearly certainly larger actual mortality than expected mortality.) the decision as to which hospital is to receive the designations in footnotes a and b isentirely arbitrary (although based on conventional criteria), as will be seen later.a the only hospital whose lower than statewide riskadjusted percent mortality is unlikely to be due to chance alone (p < 0.05).b p < 0.05.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners131health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a4 the riskadjusted percent mortality from coronary arterybypass graft in new york state, 1991, shown numerically in table 3a1. thehigher the riskadjusted percent mortality, the less the perceived expertise ofthe institution.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners132health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a5 the computed difference between the observed (actual) and theexpected percent mortality from coronary artery bypass graft in new yorkstate, 1991. the hospitals with lower (negative) differences can be held tohave greater expertise than the state as a whole; those with higher (positive)differences can be held to have less expertise.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners133health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a6 the computed ratio between observed (actual) and expected(computed) percent mortality. the smaller the ratios, the greater the expertiseof the institution.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners134health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 3a7 the pvalue for the difference in observed and expectedmortality from coronary artery bypass graft in each institution in new yorkstate, 1991. this says nothing about the amount of the difference shown infigure 3a5 and figure 3a6, but speaks only to the degree of certainty(believability) that the difference is not due to chance alone.public disclosure of data on health care providers andpractitioners135health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4confidentiality and privacy of personaldataearlier chapters introduced the institute of medicine (iom) committee'sconceptualization of health database organizations (hdos), outlined theirpresumed benefits, listed potential users and uses, and examined issues relatedto the disclosure of descriptive and evaluative data on health care providers(institutions, agencies, practitioners, and similar entities). this chapter examinesissues related to information about individuals or patientsšspecifically, whatthis committee refers to as personidentified or personidentifiable data. itdefines privacy, confidentiality, and security in the context of healthrelatedinformation and outlines the concerns that health experts, legal authorities,information technology specialists, and society at large have about erosions inthe protections accorded such information. it pays particular attention to thestatus that might be accorded such data when held by hdos.existing ethical, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentialityand privacy of personal health data offer some safeguards, but major gaps andlimitations remain. the recommendations at the end of this chapter are intendedto strengthen current protections for confidentiality and privacy of healthrelated data, particularly for information acquired by hdos.historical perspectives and generalobservations on disclosure of informationthe privacy protection study commission (ppsc) was created by theprivacy act of 1974 to investigate the personal data recordkeeping practicesconfidentiality and privacy of personal data136health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of governmental, regional, and private organizations. in its landmark 1977report, personal privacy in an information society (ppsc, 1977a), thecommissioners noted that:every member of a modern society acts out the major events and transitions ofhis life with organizations as attentive partners. each of his countlesstransactions with them leaves its mark in the records they maintain about him.the report went on to point out that:... as records continue to supplant facetoface encounters in our society, therehas been no compensating tendency to give the individual the kind of controlover the collection, use, and disclosure of information about him that his facetoface encounters normally entail.the warnings implicit in the commissioners' statement are even morepertinent today. the emergence of hdos in the 1990s comes at a time when theamerican public is expressing growing concern about threats to personalprivacy. a 1993 louis harris poll found that 79 percent of the american publicis "very" (49 percent) or "somewhat" (30 percent) worried about the threat topersonal privacy (harris/equifax, 1993).1 this response has remained stablesince 1990 when it rose sharply from a figure of 64 percent cited for 1978.there was agreement by 80 percent of respondents that "consumers have lost allcontrol over how personal information about them is circulated and used bycompanies." the 1992 survey also asked about the effect of computers onprivacy. sixtyeight percent agreed strongly or very strongly that "computersare an actual threat to personal privacy," and almost 90 percent agreed thatcomputers have made it much easier to obtain confidential personal informationimproperly (equifax, 1992).many privacy experts have described the ready availability of personalinformation (e.g., see piller, 1993). rothfeder (1992) asserts that about fivebillion records in the united states describe each resident's whereabouts andother personal information. he also claims that such information is moved fromone computer to another about five times a day (pp. 2223):information about every move we makešbuying a car or a home, applying fora loan, taking out insurance, purchasing potato chips, requesting a governmentgrant, getting turned down for credit, going to work, seeing a1 in october 1993, equifax, a credit reporting company, released the results of a louisharris poll, the most recent in a series of surveys commissioned by equifax andconducted periodically since 1978. for the first time, the 1993 survey assessed thebeliefs and attitudes about privacy and disclosure of health information of a sample ofthe public and of "health leaders." a number of the survey questions bear directly on theissues addressed in this chapter.confidentiality and privacy of personal data137health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.doctoršis fed into ... databases owned by the credit bureaus, the government,banks, insurance companies, direct marketing companies, and other interestedcorporations. and from these databases it's broadcast to thousands ... ofregional databanks as well as to numerous information resellers across thecountry.rothfeder believes that such pervasive data acquisition and exchange canlead to a feeling of powerlessness in the face of privacy intrusion. his languageis evocative (p. 30):increasingly, people are at the whim of not only pressure groups, but also largeorganizationsšdirect marketers, the credit bureaus, the government, and theentire information economyšthat view individuals as nothing but lifeless datafloating like microscopic entities in vast electronic chambers, data that exists[sic] to be captured, examined, collated, and sold, regardless of the individual'sdesire to choose what should be concealed and what should be made public.it may be that the increasing aggregation of personal data documenting thedetails of our physical attributes and defects, behaviors, desires, attitudes,failings, and achievements creates a virtual representation of us. some havecalled this a ''computerized alter ego" or a "digital version of each of us to gowith our public personae" (rothfeder, 1992, p. 16, citing miller). to the extentthis is so, the privacy of this "virtual person" requires protection.recently the u.s. congress has given serious attention to reform of thefair credit reporting act (public law [p.l.] 102550; see below). it has alsolooked at technologydriven privacy issues: most pertinent are legislativeproposals to restrict caller i.d. programs (s. 652; h.r. 1305; also see, housereport no. 102324, 102nd congress 2d session), junk telephone calls and junkfaxes (p.l. 102243, "telephone consumer protection act of 1991"). somecongressional efforts, such as bills related to dna testing and genetic profiling(s. 1355, "dna identification act of 1991"; h.r. 2045, "human genomeprivacy act"), were intended to protect individuals against threats posed bymedical technologies or initiatives. in october 1991, the committee ongovernment operations of the u.s. house of representatives, subcommitteeon government information, justice, and agriculture, held hearings on geneticprivacy issues, and in april 1992 it issued a report calling for reforms related tothe privacy of genetic information.both the u.s. congress and the administration have undertaken activitiesrelated to the protection of medical information. in october 1993 the senatecommittee on the judiciary held hearings on high tech privacy issues inhealth law, and in november, the subcommittee on government information,justice, and agriculture of the committee on government operations held ahearing on a report prepared by the office of technologyconfidentiality and privacy of personal data138health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment (ota, 1993) at the request of that subcommittee and the senatesubcommittee on federal services, post office, and civil service. the formercommittee has also been drafting legislation to protect the privacy of healthinformation.2a task force on privacy was established in 1990 by the assistantsecretary for planning and evaluation to report on the privacy of private sectorhealth records. another dhhs group established at the same time, theworkgroup on electronic data interchange (wedi, 1991) also addressed theprotection of information when medical insurance claims are handledelectronically. the recommendations of that workshop are discussed later inthis chapter.two of president clinton's health care reform task forces met duringthe spring of 1993. they considered the implications of and generated plans forthe protection of healthrelated data that would be acquired and held under theadministration's proposal for health reform. the legislative proposals in thehealth security act contain specific privacy protection provisions.32 the ota report was released just as the iom report was being completed.3 the administration's health security act (hsa, 1993) calls for the development ofhealth information system standards within two years of its enactment to promulgatestandards and security safeguards for the privacy of individually identifiable healthinformation that is in the health information system (see footnote 1, chapter 2). theproposed legislation states the following principles: (1) all disclosures of individuallyidentifiable health information by an individual or entity shall be unauthorized unless (a)the disclosure is by the enrollee identified in the information or whose identity can beassociated with the information; (b) the disclosure is authorized by such enrollee inwriting in a manner prescribed by the board; (c) the disclosure is to federal, state, orlocal law enforcement agencies for the purpose of enforcing this act or an act amendedby this act; or (d) the disclosure otherwise is consistent with this act and specificcriteria governing disclosure established by the board. further, disclosure of individuallyidentifiable health information shall be restricted to the minimum amount of informationnecessary to accomplish the purpose for which the information is being disclosed. itwould require that any individual or entity who maintains, uses, or disseminatesindividually identifiable health information implement administrative, technical, andphysical safeguards.it stipulates that an enrollee (or an enrollee representative) has the right to know (a)"whether any individual or entity uses or maintains individually identifiable healthinformation concerning the enrollee; and (b) for what purposes the information may beused or maintained" (sec. 5120). it also specifies a right to access to see, copy, and haveentered a notation of any amendment or correction of his or her information. it specifiesa right to receive a written statement concerning (1) the purposes for which individuallyidentifiable health information may be used or disclosed by, or disclosed to, anyindividual or entity; and (2) the right of access described above. the legislation also callsfor the use of a unique identifier to be used in transmitting information. it furtherspecifies that individually identifiable health care information may not be used in makingemployment decisions.sec. 5121 calls for the national health board to sponsor (1) research relating to theprivacy and security of individually identifiable health information; (2) the developmentof consentconfidentiality and privacy of personal data139health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.state legislatures have also been active. in the past three years, forexample, many states have adopted legislation that prohibits employers fromdiscriminating against applicants and employees on the basis of offthejob,lawful activity or some specific subset of lawful activity, such as cigarettesmoking.sources of concerns about privacy and theconfidentiality of health recordstwo somewhat distinct trends have led to increased access to the primaryhealth record and subsequent concerns about privacy. one has to do withprimary health records regardless of how they are created and maintained; theother involves health records stored electronically.health care recordsthe quantity and type of health care information now collected has alsoincreased dramatically in recent years. the participation in health care deliveryof many different individuals and groups of providers exerts strong pressures todocument in ever greater detail. the expanding numbers of availabletechnologies for diagnosis and therapy mean that details that a provider could atone time recall must now be recorded and thus become available for inspectionby others. further, information on lifestyle (e.g., use of tobacco or alcohol),family history, and health status have become of greater interest and relevanceas we learn more about the relationship of these factors to overall health andwellbeing. in addition, genetic data are becoming more readily available, notonly for prenatal testing but also for assessing an individual's degree of risk foran inherited condition.4the more detailed the information about an individual or class ofindividuals, the more appropriate, one hopes, is the treatment they will be given.further, documentation of care and risk factors are essential to promotingforms governing disclosure of such information; and (3) the development oftechnology to implement standards regarding such information. it should also establisheducation and awareness programs, foster adequate security practices, train personnel ofpublic and private entities in appropriate practices.sec. 5122. calls for a proposal not later than three years after enactment of the hsa toprovide a comprehensive scheme of federal privacy protection for individuallyidentifiable health information that would include a code of fair information practicesand provide for enforcement of the rights and duties created by the legislation. (healthsecurity act. title v. part 2. privacy of information.)4an iom report on assessing genetic risk explores these issues in considerable detailand develops a strong proprivacy stance (iom, 1993b).confidentiality and privacy of personal data140health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuity of care over time and among providers. it is also a first defenseagainst charges of malpractice.the primary health record is no longer simply a tool for health careproviders to record their impressions, observations, and instructions. rather, itserves many purposes beyond direct health care. thirdparty payers accesspatient record information to make payment determinations, and managed careorganizations access patient records for precertification and case management.other parties external to the healing relationship seek personidentifiedinformation and assert socially beneficial reasons for access. what was once the"business" only of patients and possibly their physicians has now become thebusiness of such groups as: (1) officers of government entitlement programschecking on eligibility, and on patient and provider fraud and abuse; (2)agencies granting security clearance; (3) attorneys bringing criminal or civilcharges; and (4) social service workers protecting possibly abused children, toname only a few. others access secondary health records or obtain portions ofthe medical record when making decisions about hiring, granting a license, orissuing life, health, or disability insurance.electronic recordsother trends give rise to particular concerns about the confidentiality ofhealth information that is stored electronically. first is the ability to access,transmit, and copy large volumes of data easily. photocopying paper records is,of course, possible, but it is hardly feasible for large numbers of geographicallydispersed medical records. electronic storage and transmittal of data, bycontrast, enable interested parties to aggregate information for individuals overtime and across institutions and providers of care.second, databases were at one time discretešoften held in physicallysecure rooms on tape drivesšwith identifiers that were unique to a giveninstitution or insurer. now, however, data from diverse sources can becombined and linked. once data are stored electronically, networks of databasescan be explored almost imperceptibly from remote locations. unless securitysystems are designed to record access, the curious, entrepreneurial, or venal canenter databases without leaving evidence of having done so.third, computerbased health data have become a very valuablecommodity. some companies obtain information from physicians' computersand pharmacy records for sale to pharmaceutical companies in return forincentives such as lowcost computer hardware and software. these companiesgather such identifying variables as age, sex, and social security numbers evenif patient names are either not taken or are later stripped off (miller, 1992).other companies resell information from prescription or claims dataconfidentiality and privacy of personal data141health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bases to companies that sort it by physician for marketing purposes. forexample, health information technologies, inc., helps automate privatephysicians' insurance claims. when it transmits claims and payments betweenthe insurance company and the physician, it retains electronic copies of theserecords, and it can later sell them (presumably without physician or patientnames) for pharmaceutical and other related kinds of marketing (miller, 1992).in august 1993, merck & company purchased medco containmentservices, a mailorder prescription firm. the purchase price, $6 billion, wasbased in part on the value of the information in its databases to influencephysician prescribing practices (tanouye, 1993). hdos will control a goldmine of information, and they may find it difficult indeed to resist economicbenefits from allowing access to their data files by third parties.finally, because developers of hdos have compared claims transmittal toelectronic funds transfer (eft), it is helpful to examine how the privacyprotection study commission regarded confidentiality in eft. thecommissioners were alert to problems that might result if records created byeft could not be controlled by institutions. noting that automatedclearinghouses centralize information that would otherwise be segregatedamong diverse depository institutions, their report (ppsc, 1977a) expressedworry about threats posed by the accumulation and centralization of thefinancial information that flows through such clearinghouses. thecommissioners also recognized that the resulting pools of information wouldbecome attractive sources of personidentifiable information for use "in waysinimical to personal privacy" (p. 121). they urged that adequate protections beestablished for personidentifiable information flowing through an eft datacommunications network and that such account information be retained for aslimited a period of time as was essential to fulfill operating requirements of theservice provider. thus, in contemplating eft, the commissioners did notforesee, and certainly did not encourage, the creation of an informationrepository now contemplated under the concept of an hdo.definitionsbelow, the committee offers definitions of critical termsšprivacy(especially informational privacy), confidentiality, security, and healthrelatedinformation.privacythe most general and common view of privacy conveys notions ofwithdrawal, seclusion, secrecy, or of being kept away from public view, butwith no pejorative overtones. by contrast, an invasion of privacy occursconfidentiality and privacy of personal data142health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.when there is intentional deprivation of the desired privacy to which one isentitled. in public policy generally and health policy in particular, privacy takeson special meanings, some derived from moral theories, others from legaldoctrine, and one from the widespread use of health information.privacy is sometimes characterized as the "right to be left alone" (cooley,1880; warren and brandeis, 1890; elison and nettiksimmons, 1987;turkington, 1987; herdrich, 1989). many experts, however, have objected thatsuch a definition is too broad to be helpful in the health context. there areinnumerable ways of not being left alone that arguably have nothing to do withprivacy (thomson, 1975; reiman, 1976; parent, 1983), such as when anindividual is subjected to aggressive panhandling on a city street. consequently,theorists have sought to refine their conceptions of privacy. their aim has beento isolate what is unique about privacy, to identify what constitutes its loss, andto distinguish among a variety of conceptually related but separable senses ofprivacy (gerety, 1977; mccloskey, 1980; schoeman, 1984).the development and application of the concept of privacy in americanlaw encompasses three clusters of ideas.5 first, privacy embodies autonomyinterests; it protects decisions about the exercise of fundamental constitutionalliberties with respect to private behavior, such as decisions relating to marriage,procreation, contraception, family relationships, and childrearing. this isfrequently characterized as decisional privacy (tribe, 1978). second, privacyprotects against surveillance or intrusion when an individual has a "reasonableexpectation of privacy." examples include protections against unlawfulsearches of one's home or person and unauthorized wiretapping. third, privacyencompasses informational interests; this notion is most frequently expressed asthe interest of an individual in controlling the dissemination and use ofinformation that relates to himself or herself (shils, 1966; westin, 1967), or tohave information about oneself be inaccessible to others. this last forminformational privacyis the main subject of this chapter.informational privacyinformational privacyš"a state or condition of controlled access topersonal information" (schoeman, 1984; allen, 1987; powers, 1993)šisinfringed, by definition, whenever another party has access to one's personalinformation by reading, listening, or using any of the other senses. such loss ofprivacy may be entirely acceptable and intended by the indi5 in the united states, privacy is restricted to real persons. in europe, legal persons aregenerally included.confidentiality and privacy of personal data143health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vidual, or it may be inadvertent, unacceptable, and even unknown to theindividual.this definition of privacy thus reflects two underlying notions. first,privacy in general and informational privacy in particular are always matters ofdegree. rarely is anyone in a condition of complete physical or informationalinaccessibility to others, nor would they wish to remain so. second, althoughinformation privacy may be valuable and deserving of protection, manythoughtful privacy advocates argue that it does not, in itself, have moralsignificance or inherent value (allen, 1987; faden, 1993).nonetheless, informational privacy has value for all in our society, and itaccordingly has special claims on our attention. in his pivotal book, privacy andfreedom, westin (1967) described it as "the claim of individuals, groups, orinstitutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extentinformation about them is communicated to others" (p. 7). this definitionserved as the foundation for the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93579; 5 u.s.c. §552a). this act, arguably the most significant step to protect privacy in recentdecades, was enacted to control use of personally identifiable informationmaintained in federal government databases.recordkeeping privacyin recent decades, discussions about privacy have almost exclusivelyaddressed the use of information about people to make decisions about someright, privilege, benefit, or entitlementšsocalled "recordkeeping privacy."this focus was of particular interest to those framing the privacy act of 1974.more recently the desire for informational privacy has become animportant expectation, not because of a benefit or entitlement sought, but for itsown sake. information may be created as a byproduct of some eventšforexample, an individual's geographic location becomes available when he or sheuses a bank card for a financial transaction; similarly, one's preferences areknown when one buys goods by mail order or uses a checkverification card atthe local supermarket. in yet other cases, information derives from aggregatingdata from many sources, including public records; such aggregation can alsoinclude data that have been derived from computer processing (e.g., buyingprofiles or dossiers).data subjects want informational privacy to be respected in such contextsas well. many people in the united states would like to believe that datacollected about them legitimately, in connection with some transaction orincidentally through participation in the general activities of society, will not beexploited for secondary purposes such as advertising, soliciting, telemarketing,promotional activities, or other actions that are distinct from and unrelated tothe activities for which the data were originally collectedconfidentiality and privacy of personal data144health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(see harris/equifax, 1993). as should be clear from the discussion in thischapter, however, these hopes are often not realized in general or in relation tohealth information.privacy rightsto assert a right is to make a special kind of claim. rights designate someinterests of the individual that are sufficiently important to hold others under aduty to promote and protect, sometimes even at the expense of maximizing oreven achieving the social good (raz, 1986). two interests are widely cited asproviding the moral justification for privacy rights: the individual's interest inautonomy and the instrumental value that privacy may have in promoting othervaluable human goods.with respect to autonomy, privacy fosters and enhances a sense of self(reiman, 1976). respecting privacy enhances an individual's autonomy(westin, 1967; benn, 1971; bloustein, 1984). it allows the individual todevelop the capacity to be selfgoverning or "sovereign," a notion analogous tothe sense in which autonomous states are sovereign (beauchamp and childress,1989). the loss or degradation of privacy can enable others to exercise aninordinate measure of power over the individual's economic, social, andpsychological wellbeing (gavison, 1980; parent, 1983).with respect to the value of privacy to promote other ends, its instrumentalvalue, privacy permits the development of character traits and virtues essentialto desirable human relationships. these include trust, intimacy, and love.without some measure of privacy, these relationships are diminished or maynot be possible (fried, 1968; rachels, 1975).the existence of informational privacy rights means that someone is undera duty either not to disclose information or to prevent unauthorized access toinformation by others. dworkin (1977) has argued that for a right to bemeaningful implies that any policy or law overriding such duties mustwithstand rigorous scrutiny and that considerations of social utility alone areinadequate grounds to override it. that is, to take rights seriously is to recognizesome limits on the prerogative of government or others to mandate the commongood at the expense of the individual. this is not to say, however, that rightsfunction as an absolute barrier to the pursuit of collective goals; indeed, thetension between individual and social goals is reflected in the issues raised inchapter 3, as well as in this chapter.balancing benefits of hdos against loss of informational privacythere cannot be much doubt that hdos will serve legitimate societalinterests as described in chapter 2. nevertheless, because hdos will representone of the most comprehensive and sensitive automated personal recordconfidentiality and privacy of personal data145health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.databases ever established, they inevitably implicate interests protected byinformational privacy principles. accordingly, hdo advocates will be wellserved from an ethical as well as legal viewpoint if they consider what socialgoods justify possible loss of privacy and such loss can be minimized orprevented.whether hdos can achieve their potential for good in the face of theirpossible impact on privacy will likely turn on the interplay of threeconsiderations. first, to what extent do the hdos provide important (andperhaps irreplaceable) health care benefits to their regions and perhaps to thenation? second, do the societal benefits resulting from the implementation ofhdos outweigh the privacy risks? third, to what extent have adequate privacysafeguards been incorporated into the hdos?federal and state privacy protectionno explicit right to privacy is guaranteed by the constitution of the unitedstates; in fact, the word "privacy" does not appear. the presumed right as thebasis of a civil action is based on legal opinion written by justice louis d.brandeis in 1890, and its constitutional status derives from various amendmentsto the bill of rights.the issues surrounding the constitutional status of privacy protection aretoo numerous and controversial to explore in detail here. most constitutionalscholars agree that federal constitutional protections are unlikely to provide thefirst line of defense for privacy of health information. the constitutiongenerally has not provided strong protection for the confidentiality of individualhealth care information; the constitutional protection for informational privacyis thus very limited and derived from case law interpreting the constitution.the courts have made clear that, at least theoretically, information privacyprinciples based on the constitution limit a government agency's collection anduse of personal information to situations in which the use bears a rationalrelationship to a legitimate governmental purpose. the government's interest inthe information program must outweigh the threat to personal privacy posed bythe program.6in whalen v. roe (429 u.s. 589 [1977]), for example, the supreme courtbalanced the privacy threat posed by a new york state law against the statute'sbenefits. the new york state statute required pharmacists and physicians toreport sensitive health record information to state officials, in6 see, plante v. gonzalez, 575 f. 2d 1119, 1123 (5th cir. 1978). however, in j.p. v.desanti, 653 f. 2d 1080, 1090 (6th cir. 1981), the sixth circuit held that theconstitution's righttoprivacy standard does not extend to the disclosure of personalinformation.confidentiality and privacy of personal data146health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this case prescriptions for controlled drugs. it required physicians to report thenames of patients receiving certain types of prescription drugs to a state agency.the court concluded that the statute was constitutional on two grounds: thesocietal interests served by the statute (combating the illegal use of otherwiselegal drugs) and extensive privacy and confidentiality protections in the law(redisclosure of the drug information, for example, was prohibited). the courtsuggested that if the statute had lacked these confidentiality protections it wouldhave been found to violate constitutional privacy principles (chlapowski,1991). thus, privacy rights are to be considered derived and not explicit rights.in united states v. westinghouse electric corp. (638 f. 2d 570, 578 [3rdcir. 1980]), the third circuit identified seven factors that should be weighed indetermining whether to permit a government agency to collect personalinformation and thus undertake a program that infringes privacy. these werethe type of record requested; the subject matter of the information; the potentialfor harm in a subsequent nonconsensual disclosure; the damage to therelationship in which the record was generated; the adequacy of safeguards toprevent unauthorized disclosure; the degree of need for access; and whetherthere is an express, statutory mandate, articulated public policy, or otherrecognizable public interest tilting toward access.various state constitutional provisions offer more protection. for one tohave a claim for a violation of a constitutional privacy right, however, theindividual generally must show that state action caused the violation.california's constitution (cal. const., art. 1, § 1) is an exception to this generalrule because it makes privacy rights explicit. california courts have held thatthe state's constitutional privacy provision can be asserted against private partieswho infringe on citizens' privacy; see, for instance heda v. superior court, 225cal. app. 3rd 525 (cal., dist. ct., app. 1990) and soroka v. dayton hudsoncorp., 1 cal. rptr. 2nd 77 (1991). other common law and statutory remedies,as well as institutional policies and practices, will be of greater immediateimportance. this and the relevance of existing laws to hdos is discussed in thenext section.confidentialityconfidentiality relates to disclosure or nondisclosure of information.historically a duty to honor confidentiality has arisen with respect toinformation disclosed in the context of a confidential relationship, such as thatbetween an individual and his or her physician, attorney, or priest. in suchrelationships, the confidante is under an obligation not to redisclose theinformation learned in the course of the relationship. now the law applies suchduties to some holders of information who do not have a confidentialrelationship to a patient. in the health sector, this includes such holders asconfidentiality and privacy of personal data147health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.utilization management firms in many states and local, state, or federal healthagencies that receive reports of communicable diseases.when one is concerned about data disclosure, whether or not anyrelationship exists between a data subject and a data holder, an essentialconstruct is that of data confidentiality. data confidentiality is the statusaccorded data indicating that they are protected and must be treated as such. inthe federal freedom of information act (foia, 5 u.s.c., section 552), certaincategories of data are specified as confidential and thus not disclosable; forinstance, exemption 6 states that foia is not applicable to ''personnel andmedical files and similar files, the disclosure of which would constitute clearlyunwarranted invasion of personal privacy." data confidentiality is discussed inmore detail in a later section.confidentiality obligations in health careprofessional obligations to privacy and confidentiality. the importance ofconfidentiality to the medical profession is reflected in the physician's "oath ofhippocrates." adopted in roughly the fourth century b.c.e., it remains arecognized element of medical ethics:whatsoever things i see or hear concerning the life of men, in my attendanceon the sick or even apart therefrom, which ought not to be noised abroad, i willkeep silence thereon, counting such things to be as sacred secrets (bulger,1987).in similar fashion, the american medical association principles ofmedical ethics (ama, 1992, section 5.05) states that "the informationdisclosed to a physician during the course of the relationship between thephysician and patient is confidential to the greatest possible degree . . . thephysician should not reveal confidential communications or informationwithout the express consent of the patient, unless required to do so by law."within the healing relationship, four justifications may be offered formedical confidentiality (adapted from faden, 1993). first is a respect forprivacy and patient autonomy. in the earliest practice of medicine, physicianstreated patients in their homes, and medical privacy was an extension of theprivacy of the home. the hippocratic oath, for instance, does not justifyconfidentiality on any ground other than respect for privacy. if informationconcerning a patient's mind and body are viewed as extensions of the patient,than the concept of autonomy requires that the patient be able to controldisclosure and use of that information. the value placed on personal autonomygives rise to the notion of informed consent. as justice benjamin n. cardozowrote in his opinion in schloendorff v. society of new york hospital, 211 n.y.125, "every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right todetermine what shall be done with his body."confidentiality and privacy of personal data148health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a second justification related to respect for privacy is the implicit andsometimes explicit expectation or promise of confidentiality. third is thespecial moral character of the doctorpatient relationship, which is characterizedby trust and intimacy. confidentiality can be instrumental in fostering patients'trust in their physicians; when this trust encourages patients to speak freely anddisclose information they would otherwise keep secret, it facilitates diagnosisand treatment. fourth, respecting confidentiality protects patients from harmthat might befall them if the information were to become widely available andindiscriminately used.legal obligations of confidentiality. various federal and state laws imposea duty to preserve the confidentiality of personal health information. these lawscan be divided into two categories: those imposing confidentiality obligationson recordkeepers and those protecting health information that is deemed highlysensitive. examples of the former include general confidentiality statutes abouthealth care information such as the uniform health care information act(national conference, 1988) and the california confidentiality of medicalinformation act (cal. civil code §§ 5656.37 [1992]), as well as various statelaws and medicare and medicaid regulations. laws and regulations imposingconfidentiality requirements for sensitive personal health information includethose related to alcohol and drug abuse records and laws governingnondisclosure of records of patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome(aids), the results of antibody tests for human immunodeficiency virus (hiv),psychiatric and developmental disability records, and information concerningresults of genetics screening and testing.courts have also recognized a legal obligation to maintain theconfidentiality of personal health care information. in response to harmresulting from unauthorized release of personal health information, courts havegranted legal relief under a number of theories: breach of trust, breach ofconfidence, breach of implied contract, invasion of privacy, defamation, andnegligence (waller, 1992).disclosure of health informationas one looks beyond the protected sphere of the patientproviderrelationship, it is not always clear who is rightly in the community of"knowers," nor is there universal agreement on principles that ought to controldisclosure. with the growth of managed care, utilization review, thirdpartypayment systems, and claims administration for selfinsured health plans,information sharing for purposes of adjudicating claims and managing highriskor highcost cases has become part and parcel of the provision of health care.westin has described these supporting and administrative activities asconfidentiality and privacy of personal data149health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved."zone 2" in comparison to "zone 1," which refers to information flow tosupport direct medical care (westin, 1976; harris/equifax, 1993). these wideranging claims of need for sensitive health information, which are emblematicof modern health care, raise difficult problems for the preservation of privacyand maintenance of confidentiality.patients generally understand that, with consent, information in theirmedical records will be shared widely within a hospital and for insurance andreimbursement purposes. they also expect that data collected about them willbe used only for the purpose of the initial collection and that such data will beshared with others only for that same purpose. outside the health careinstitution, patients expect that confidential data will not be shared with peopleor organizations not authorized to have such information and that legitimateusers of the data will not exploit such access for purposes other than those forwhich the information was originally obtained (e.g., see harris/equifax, 1993).consent. such exceptions to the rule of confidentiality as described aboveare rationalized as being conducted by consent of the patient or a patientrepresentative. a patient may be asked to accede to disclosure by signing ablanket consent form when applying for insurance or employment. in suchcases, however, consent cannot be truly voluntary or informed. suchauthorizations are often not voluntary because the patient feels compelled tosign the authorization or forego the benefit sought, and they are not informedbecause the patient cannot know in advance what information will be in therecord, who will subsequently have access to it, or how it will be used.although consent may be the bestrecognized way to permit disclosures ofprivate information, consent is so often not informed or is given undereconomic compulsion that it does not provide sufficient protection to patients.as will be seen in the recommendations section of this chapter, this committeegenerally does not regard "consent" procedures as sufficient to protect sensitiveinformation from inappropriate disclosure by hdos, although they are anecessary adjunct to other autonomy protections.mandatory reporting and compulsory process. other situations exist inwhich sensitive health information about individuals must be disclosed to thirdparties. such sharing of health information for socially sanctioned purposesmay be truly voluntary; it may also be required through mandatory reporting orcoerced by court order.mandatory reporting requirements are justified by society's need forinformation; these include filing reports of births and deaths, communicablediseases, cancer, environmental and occupational diseases, drug addiction,gunshot wounds, child abuse, and other violencerelated injuries. someconfidentiality and privacy of personal data150health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statutes requiring that records be retained for 10 to 25 years in some cases makepast diagnoses retrievable long after they no longer accurately describe thepatient. another type of reporting requirement involves the expectation thatthird parties require warning about threats to their life.7physicians and others may also find themselves compelled to divulgepatient information when they would otherwise choose not to do so. suchrequirementsšsometimes termed "compulsory process"šmay take the form ofsubpoenas or discovery requests and may be enforced by court order. in someinstances personal health care information may be protected from disclosure incourt and administrative proceedings by virtue of the physicianpatientprivilege, which may be mandated by statute or derive from the common law.information that is so privileged cannot be introduced into evidence and isgenerally not subject to discovery.weaknesses of legal protection for confidentialitylegal and ethical confidentiality obligations are the same whether healthrecords are kept on paper or on computerbased media (waller, 1992). currentlaws, however, have significant weaknesses. first, and very important, thedegree to which confidentiality is required under current law varies according tothe holder of the information and the type of information held.second, legal obligations of confidentiality often vary widely within asingle state and from state to state, making it difficult to ascertain the legalobligations that a given hdo will have, particularly if it operates in a multistatearea. these statebystate and intrastate variations and inconsistencies inprivacy and confidentiality laws are well established among thoseknowledgeable about health care records law (e.g., see powers, 1991; waller,1991; wedi, 1992; gostin et al., 1993; ota, 1993; for examples rangingacross many types of professionals, institutions, and ancillary personnel). thisis important because some hdos will routinely transmit data across state lines.interstate transmission already occurs with data such as claims or typeddictation. when confidential data are transmitted across state lines, it is notalways clear which state's confidentiality laws apply and which state's courtshave jurisdiction over disputes concerning improper disclosure of information.third, current laws offer individuals little real protection against redisclosure7 in a california case, tarasoff v. regents of the university of california, 17 ca. 3d425,551 p.2d (1976), a psychiatrist who was told of a patient's homicidal fantasiesregarding the patient's girlfriend did not warn her because he believed that confidentialityconstraints prevented him from doing so. soon after, the patient killed the woman. thecourt found that the physician had a duty to warn third parties in such circumstances.confidentiality and privacy of personal data151health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of their confidential health information to unauthorized recipients for a numberof reasons. once patients have consented to an initial disclosure of information(for example, to obtain insurance reimbursement), they have lost control offurther disclosure. information disclosed for one purpose may be used forunrelated purposes without the subject's knowledge or consent (sometimestermed secondary use). for instance, information about a diagnosis taken froman individual's medical record may be forwarded to the medical informationbureau in boston, massachusetts (mib, 1989; and see kratka, 1990) and laterused by another insurance company in an underwriting decision concerning lifeinsurance. redisclosure practices represent a yawning gap in confidentialityprotection.as a practical matter, policing redisclosure of one's personal healthinformation is difficult and may be impossible. at a minimum, such policingrequires substantial resources and commitment. with the use of computer andtelecommunications networks, an individual may never discover that aparticular disclosure has occurred, even though he or she suffers significantharmšsuch as inability to obtain employment, credit, housing, or insurancešas a result of such disclosure. pursuing legal remedies may result in additionaldisclosure of the individual's private health information.8fourth, in some instances federal law preempts state confidentialityrequirements or protections without imposing new ones. for example, theemployment retirement insurance security act (erisa) preempts some stateinsurance laws with respect to employers' selfinsured health plans, yet erisais silent on confidentiality obligations. because 74 percent or more ofemployers with 1,000 or more employees manage selfinsured health plans(foster higgins, 1991, in iom, 1993e), such preemption is particularlytroublesome.last, enforcing rights through litigation is costly, and money damages maynot provide adequate redress for the harm done by the improper disclosure.securityin the context of health record information, confidentiality impliescontrolled access and protection against unauthorized access to, modificationof, or destruction of health data. confidentiality has meaning only when the8 a suit brought by an aids patient under the name john doe against shady groveadventist hospital resulted in the hospital's trying to force the patient to reveal his truename to the press and public (john doe v. shady grove adventist hospital, et al., 89md. app. 351, 598 a.2d 507 [1991a]).confidentiality and privacy of personal data152health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data holder has the will, technical capacity, and moral or legal authority toprotect datathat is, to keep such information (or the system in which it resides)secure (nrc/cbasse, 1993). data security exists when data are protectedfrom accidental or intentional disclosure to unauthorized persons and fromunauthorized or accidental alteration (iom, 1991a).in computerbased or computercontrolled systems, security isimplemented when a defined system functions in a defined operationalenvironment, serves a defined set of users, contains prescribed data andoperational programs, has defined network connections and interactions withother systems, and incorporates safeguards to protect the system against adefined threat to the system, its resources, and its data. more generally,protective safeguards include: hardware (e.g., memory protect); software (e.g., audit trails, logon procedures); personnel control (e.g., badges or other mechanisms to control entry orlimit movement); physical object control (e.g., logging and cataloging of magnetic tapesand floppy disks, destruction of paper containing personidentifiableprintouts); disaster preparedness (e.g., sprinklers, tape vaults in case of fire, flood,or bomb); procedures (e.g., granting access to systems, assigning passwords); administration (e.g., auditing events, disaster preparedness, securityofficer); and management oversight (e.g., periodic review of safeguards, unexpectedinspections, policy guidance).the collective intent of these safeguards is to give high assurance that thesystem, its resources, and information are protected against harm and that theinformation and resources are properly accessed and used by authorized users.healthrelated informationin a study that focuses on the protection of healthrelated data aboutindividuals, defining which items are health related is more difficult than onemight initially think. the most obvious categories are medical history, currentdiagnoses, diagnostic test results, and therapies. other pieces of information aremore distantly related to healthšbecause of what one might infer about aperson's health. examples include type of specialist visited, functional status,lifestyle, and past diagnoses. nevertheless, not everything in a medical record isrelevant to health status or is health related.confidentiality and privacy of personal data153health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.insurance coverage and marital status are cases in point. some elementscould nevertheless be considered sensitive because of the social stigma thatcould result if they are revealed. examples include sexual preference, address,or the receipt of social services.the same disclosure might be harmful to one individual but not another, orharmful to an individual in one circumstance but not in another. personal data,particularly healthrelated personal data, are not inherently sensitive, but theybecome so because of the harmful way(s) in which they might be used. thus,any data element in medical records, and many data items from other records,could be considered either healthrelated or sensitive, or both. where theboundaries for the protection of personal health information lie is not at allobvious. in considering the actions of hdos, this committee takes a relativelybroad view of healthrelated data; it proceeds from an assumption that allinformation concerning an individual and any transactions relating directly orindirectly to health care that hdos access or maintain as databases must beregarded as potentially requiring privacy protections.9expanded definitionsthe foregoing discussions of confidentiality are based on historical,ethical, and legal usage and have served to guide legislators and practitioners.legally and medically, confidentiality has been treated as arising from arelationship such as that between physician and patient or attorney and client.such usage may not be as useful to administrators, vice presidents for dataprocessing, or system designers who must design hdo systems and areworking not with relationships but with access to secondary records.the committee suggests, therefore, that an expanded interpretation using ataxonomy that is not derived from interpersonal or interprofessionalrelationships might be more helpful to those responsible for protection ofinformation in these hdos. in this taxonomy one begins with dataconfidentiality, defined as the status accorded data that have been declared tobe sensitive and must be protected and handled as such. the rationale for thestatement about sensitivity is based on potential harm to people, potentialinvasion of privacy, and potential loss of entitlements or privileges.two consequences flow from defining data as sensitive and requiringprotection. first, the data must be made secure; second, access must becontrolled. as described earlier, data security includes system and network9 waller (1991) provides a detailed discussion of legal considerations affectingcomputerbased patient records, including privacy rights.confidentiality and privacy of personal data154health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protection and assures the integrity of datasuch that they are not altered ordestroyed accidentally or intentionally. some system security safeguards (e.g.,control of personnel) also assure data integrity.figure 41 a new taxonomy of data confidentiality, security, andinformational privacy.the second consequence of declaring data sensitivešthe need for accesscontrolšis related to the concept of informational privacy described above.access control can be operationalized by hdo planners and legislators in aform that this committee would term "informationuse policy." informationusepolicy in the automated system context gives rise to decisions about who can dowhat, with which data, and for what purpose. it leads to policymaking aboutwho may be allowed to use healthrelated information and how they may use it.it also requires decisions about how health information can be used as a matterof social policy and might also include consideration of whether some datashould be collected at all.the three issuesšdata confidentiality, security, and information usešareobviously related (figure 41) they overlap to some extent and collectivelyrepresent the area of direct concern in this report. one reason to keep the threeissues separate is that different remedies are relevant to each.data confidentiality is a matter of law and regulation. legislation would berequired to establish that healthrelated information is confidential, to spell outthe rationale for the position, and to clarify the ramifications and consequencesof attaching protection to health data.security is a matter of technology, management controls, procedures, andadministrative oversight. in the public sector, the action agents are regulators; inthe hdo, a policy and oversight board could establish security policies.implementation and management would be provided by technical and systemdesign personnel.informational privacy (information use) is the most difficult to sort out.confidentiality and privacy of personal data155health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the nation needs to agree on the proper use of healthrelated information.it is not yet clear how this will or can be done, nor is it obvious who the actionagents will be. at the level of the hdo, information use would be decided bythe governing board. at a regional or national level, federal agencies,legislators, professional bodies, consumer advocates, and industrial lobbygroups are all likely to be involved.in the remainder of this chapter, the terms confidentiality (rather than themore cumbersome data confidentiality), privacy (rather than informationalprivacy), and security continue to be used, but the committee intends that theybe understood in the context just described. the committee believes thisconceptualization will make it easier to translate recommendations into policiesand procedures that can be implemented and enforced.harm from disclosure and redisclosure ofhealth record informationvery little systematic or empirical evidence supports the widespreadperception of the threat or the reality of harm from disclosure and redisclosureof healthrelated information. this is because the origins of the information maynot be known by the person harmed, because of the natural preference not tofurther publicize confidential information about oneself, and because inquiry inthis area has been to date more anecdotal than systematic.this section presents examples of the potential confidentiality and privacyproblems that might be encountered with health data, either in patient recordform or in databases accessed or held by hdos. although these concernscannot easily be quantified, reports to the committee during this study, casesmentioned in media such as the privacy times and the internetbased privacyforum digest, incidents known to or recounted to committee members, andsimilar inputs make clear that the threats and potential harm are real and notnumerically trivial.health leader respondents to the 1993 harris/equifax survey showed that71 percent were somewhat or very concerned about threats to the confidentialityof medical records, and 24 percent were "aware of violations of theconfidentiality of individuals' medical records from inside an organization thatembarrassed or harmed the individual." respondents identified test results anddiagnostic reports as the most frequently disclosed information.of the responding public, some 27 percent believed that their own medicalrecords had been improperly disclosed. that group identified health insurersmost often as having been responsible (15 percent). fewer respondentsidentified hospitals or clinics (11 percent), public health agencies (10 percent),and employers (9 percent).this section describes three categories of disclosure of patient informaconfidentiality and privacy of personal data156health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tion common today and the problems and harm that may result: (1) commondisclosures that are breaches of confidentiality; (2) covert, illegal, or unethicalacquisition and use of information; and (3) harm from disclosure of inaccuratedata. it also raises questions about unforeseen uses of databases accessed byhdos."common" disclosuresthree types of common disclosures pose threats: inadvertent, routine, andrerelease to third parties.inadvertent releasea form of disclosure that the committee has termed "unthinking" oftenoccurs within medical institutions. examples include discussions with or aboutpatients within earshot of other patients in waiting areas and discussions ofcases in elevators, halls, cafeterias, and social settings. disclosure related to thehuman penchant for gossip and carelessness in leaving medical records "lyingaround" or leaving information displayed on computer terminals is common.westin (1972) concluded that such disclosures (sometimes to patients' relativesor friends) were less likely to be related to automated databases than to commonindiscretion by hospital workers and health care providers. as the nation movesinto yet more sophisticated telecommunication systems, such disclosure caninclude leaving detailed patient information on answering machines, sendinginformation on fax transmissions that accumulate in common areas, or holdingconversations about patients or dictating patient histories or notes about patientvisits over cellular telephones.if the diagnosis stigmatizes or indicates a disabling or fatal condition, harmcan be especially serious. the harm can be great both to the famous and "vip"patient and to noncelebrities, especially for coworkers or patients in a smallcommunity. one wellknown case involved a staff physician whose hiv statusbecame known in his hospital when his diagnosis was discussed by hospitalpersonnel (estate of behringer v. medical center at princeton, 249 n.j. super.597, 592 a.2d 1251 [1991]).the committee believes many safeguards exist that can and should be putin place in any health care institution or hdo to anticipate and preventdisclosures of this sort. preventing disclosure requires greater sensitivity toconfidentiality issues and better training of health care workers. the mayofoundation, for example, has successfully developed and maintained a cultureof adamant protection of the confidentiality of its patients' health information(mayo foundation, 1991).confidentiality and privacy of personal data157health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.''routine" releases or uses in accordance with prevailing practiceshealth information is frequently shared without knowledge of theindividual based on "uninformed" or "blanket" consent. in addition to theconsent to disclose information routinely obtained from a patient before care isadministered or when enrolling in a health insurance plan, another example ofdata disclosure is the wholesale photocopying of medical records that areforwarded to insurers, when much of the information does not pertain to thegiven insurance claim. the committee believes that the ability to preventinappropriate release and use (misuse) must be strengthened. such protectionsfor data in hdos are at the heart of this report and its recommendations.rerelease to third parties without the subject's knowledge or consent(secondary use)the "secondary use" principle is an important component of fairinformation practices. it reflects the notion that when personal information iscollected for a particular purpose the information should be used for only thatpurpose or a compatible one.10an especially troublesome problem is the difficulty of confining themigration of information to third, fourth, or fifth parties without the individual'sknowledge or consent. examples include the sharing of health recordinformation within organizations in one industry (e.g., between the healthinsurance and life insurance division of a company or between the personnelbenefits division and the personnel or supervisory unit of an employer). otherexamples include sharing between organizations in one industry (e.g., betweenthe medical information bureau and a second insurer). yet a third sort ofsharing can occur between organizations in two different industries (e.g.,between insurer and credit bureau or between a current employer and a potentialemployer). a final example involves sharing genetic information with relativeswho are at risk of an inherited disorder.a major concern among commentators writing about the collection andstorage of genetic information is that there will be increased pressure on theholders of such information to reveal to other patients and their physicians10 the report of the secretary's advisory committee on automated personal datasystems, records, computers and the rights of citizens (usdhew, 1973) was agroundbreaking report of the secretary of health, education, and welfare thatarticulated five fair information practice principles, including the secondary useprinciple. the federal privacy act at 5 u.s.c. § 552a(b) reflects the secondary useprinciple by permitting nonconsensual secondary uses of personal data only for purposesthat are consistent with the purpose for which the data were first collected.confidentiality and privacy of personal data158health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information gained about family members. these individuals might want toassess their own genetic risks of inheritable disease or use the information whenmaking reproductive decisions. some indeed have argued that there is anexception to physician duties of confidentiality analogous to that of duties towarn (or protect) people at risk from those with psychiatric disorders or hivinfection.given the growth in fringe benefits offered by employers and theirsubsequent stake in managing the costs of such benefits, there are fewlimitations on information that can be gathered for use in administering health,disability, and pension plans. committee members were told repeatedly thatselfinsured employers are given access, when they insist, to patientidentifiedhealth claims information. indeed, some thirdparty administrators (tpas)provide human resources personnel with dialin capability to perform their ownanalyses of data concerning a firm's employees and dependents (personalcommunication, thirdparty software and services vendor, 1993). whetheremployers have the right to data incident to the health care for which they havepaid is highly debatable, but this rationale is commonly accepted by tpasunder the pressure of competition, and there is great risk that data will not bepartitioned from use in personnel actions. the 1993 harris/equifax surveyconfirmed the public's concern about this problem. forty percent weresomewhat or very concerned that their job might be affected if their medicalclaims information was seen by their employer. another example ofinformation that is in some ways mandated and also creates a database ofproblematic information is that which is compiled by medical review officers inconnection with employee drugtesting programs.although corporate and professional ethics tend to discourage abuse, fewbarriers exist to an employer's use of its employees' medical and insuranceclaims records. the threat of liability under the americans with disabilities acthas served as a brake on some employers' access to and use of their employees'health records. in addition, some state laws limit access. employers, however,may be required by federal or state regulations to access records in order toidentify employees who pose threats to security. information available undersuch permission may pertain to spouses and dependents as well as employees.the committee believes secondary use of medical information byemployers is common and may be increasing as employers seek to find ways tomanage highcost cases, to adjust their benefit packages to control their healthcare exposure,11 and perhaps even to identify or terminate highcost11 a recent case upheld the right of any employer to change (and thereby reduce) itshealth insurance benefits to reduce exposure. in mcgann v. h&h music co, 742 f.supp. 392, affd 946 f.2d 401, after a current employee was diagnosed with aids, hisemployer changed the health benefit plan to become selfinsured and subsequentlyestablished a $5,000 limitation on aidsrelated medical expenses.confidentiality and privacy of personal data159health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employees or those with highcost dependents. real or potential harm rangesfrom the inconsequential to the calamitous. it is likely that the ability to limitsecondary use can be strengthened, and ways to accomplish this are at the heartof the committee's concerns.covert acquisition and use of data for illegal or unethicalpurposesanother problem involving acquisition and use of medical informationoccurs covertly through illegal or unethical means. examples includeinformation brokers who tap into computerized systems by using false names orby bribing database employees to supply information about celebrities or thenames of individuals with certain characteristics. in health care institutions,there is also a risk that employees will browse through medical records out ofcuriosity (as tax and credit bureau employees have done).the character of the threat to confidentiality posed by the aggregation ofdatabases is altered. celebrities have long been vulnerable to loss of privacythrough both paper and computerized searches as documented by rothfeder(1992). the new vulnerability posed by computerized searches is to those whountil now have been (relatively) anonymous. that is, information brokers seekto identify information not about an identified individual but about the identitiesof individuals with given characteristics (e.g., those with a diagnosis of aids orwomen who have had an abortion).isikoff (1991) describes the growth of the informationbroker industry,which boasts instant access to a range of confidential computer datašcreditreports, business histories, driver's license records, social security records, andcriminal history backgrounds. some of these records are public, but some are ingovernment and private computer databases; in the latter, illegal access mayinvolve insiders (e.g., employees of the social security administration, policeand other law enforcement employees). of particular concern is the problem ofunauthorized disclosure by often lowpaid individuals who have legitimateaccess to information but who use it to facilitate illegitimate searches or toprofit from the sale of recordsša practice some have termed "insiderinformation trading" and known to data system security specialists as the"insider threat."hendricks (1992) described a recently published hacker's manual forpenetrating trw's credit bureau database; it was complete with dialupnumbers, codes, and methods for persuading credit bureau subscribers todivulge their passwords over the phone. he described how the traditionallyyouthful hackers have been supplanted by profitoriented criminal enterprisesand the emergence of individuals who, in this case, proclaim the right of theindividual to conquer and destroy the "system" and its laws and to damageindividuals for excitement and profit. those who are determined toconfidentiality and privacy of personal data160health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.break into a system can be thwarted only with thoughtful and comprehensivesystem safeguards.although harm from this source is likely to occur rarely in comparisonwith others, the harm can be great because so many individuals are affected.further, the data holder can be severely damaged in the public's eye. one goalfor an hdo must be to assure the public of reasonable, if not absolute, safety.release of inaccurate dataa different harm can result from release of information when data areincomplete, inaccurate, or out of date. examples are medical records orinsurance claims on which diagnoses are listed or coded incorrectly (e.g.,mastectomy for myringotomy). other problems involve diagnoses that wereconsidered at one time and ruled out but are still listed as a final diagnosis,incorrect inferences drawn from diagnostic tests, and clinical distortions thatresult from coding limitations. data inaccuracies also arise from actions that areintended to be beneficialšfor example, to protect the patient from astigmatizing diagnosis, to permit insurance reimbursement for a test orprocedure that might otherwise not be covered (as in the case of preventive andscreening tests), or to allow a frail patient to be treated on an inpatient ratherthan outpatient basis.the committee does not know how often these irregularities occur. studiesof the accuracy of medical records consistently show unintentional andsometimes intentional errors (burnum, 1989), and medical records personneland researchers report that errors and omissions are extremely common in allhealth records. harm from such problems may range from trivial to severe. anyreliance on databases for such social benefits as credit ratings or life insurancemeans that data that are incomplete, inaccurate, or false (for example, whenrecords of several different people are combined) are not merely useless, theyare pernicious. such errors and omissions were not a major focus of the studycommittee. it should be noted, however, that the converse of this problem is thatthe more accurate and comprehensive the databases, the more pressure therewill be for access, which in turn raises the chances of harm in the othercategories already discussed.harm resulting from inaccurate or outofdate data can be mitigated orprevented in a number of ways, including adequate and regular attention to thereliability and validity of database contents as described in chapter 3. allowingindividuals to obtain, challenge, and correct their own records can also help toimprove their accuracy.confidentiality and privacy of personal data161health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy interests and hdoshdos may pose a threat to privacy interests in four ways. the first arisesthrough harm from secondary use. this includes the potential for stigmatizingand embarrassing patients; adversely affecting their opportunities foremployment, insurance, licenses, and other benefits; undermining trust andcandor in the health care providerpatient relationship; and defeating patients'legitimate expectations of confidentiality. second is the unpredictable effectthat will be produced by the mere existence of hdos as described. third,hdos may exacerbate societal concerns about the emergence of national,centralized personal record databases, which may be perceived as a nationalidentification system or dossier. issues concerning the social security numberand its analogs are especially pertinent here. finally, hdos will need to bemindful of the possible effect that research uses may have on privacy.foreseen and unforeseen circumstancesin addition to the current risk of breaches of confidentiality and the risk ofharm from inaccurate data inherent in the paper record, the existence of anyaccumulation of valuable data will spawn new users, new demands for access,and new justifications for expanded access.hdos may unintentionally create a heightened risk of disclosure resultingwith the new forms of data becoming available through the hdos, newinquiries and types of inquirers, new uses, and new legal and governancestructures. the mere presence of the hdo may, over time, encourage newpractices or changes that may be harmful to at least some segments of thepopulation.hdos must also realize that the more information it holds or can access,and the more valuable that information, the greater the temptation will be forothers to acquire and covertly use the information. an hdo database becomes,in some sense, like a swimming pool or an abandoned refrigerator to a childanoverwhelming opportunity or, in legal terms, an attractive nuisance.computerization poses problems for the protection of privacy andconfidentiality, but it also offers new opportunities for protection. for example,access to records and to defined parts of records can be granted, controlled, oradapted on a needtoknow (or functionrelated) basis; this means that users canbe authorized to obtain and use only information for which their access isjustifiable. it will also be possible to implement authentication procedures(discussed below) and to implement and publicize the use of methods to permitthe hdo to know if anyone has browsed in the databases, who has done so, andwhich data were accessed. automaconfidentiality and privacy of personal data162health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tion could also greatly mitigate the disclosure that now occurs when, forinstance, an entire medical record is copied to substantiate a claim for a singleepisode of care, and software could prevent the printing or transfer of databaseinformation to other computers.a national identification system or dossierprivacy advocates can be expected to express sharp concerns about thepotential for hdos to be linked with one another or with other types of personaldatabases such as the financial, credit, and lifestyle databases maintained byconsumer reporting agencies and information services. one particular threat isthe possible contribution of linked databases to development of a de factonational identification (and data) system. such a system would comprise acomprehensive, automated dossier on virtually every citizen.conventional wisdom holds that after a personal information database isestablished, some consequences are inevitable (gellman, 1984): expansions inpermissible uses of the database; demands to link the database withcomplementary databases to improve the database product; and relaxations ofconfidentiality restrictions. with respect to hdos, privacy advocacy groups andthe media are likely to be concerned that over time various regional hdos willestablish telecommunications links and that these entities will become anational network linkable to other financial and government records such asthose serving the social security administration or the internal revenue service.as potential users of hdo data files, many persons in these groups mightregard this scenario as desirable and beneficial; as potential record subjects,however, most would probably be uncomfortable with this threat to theirprivacy. once such a system were in place, some fear that both those with andwithout bona fide access would be able to call up a remarkably comprehensiveand intrusive dossier comprising detailed biographic information, family historyinformation, employment information, financial and insurance information, and,unless prevented, of course, medical record information about every citizenparticipating in the system.in the view of many, this development would bring the nation perilouslyclose to a national identification database. indeed, at that point the "national"network would lack only a means of positive identification and a requirementthat all citizens participate to constitute such a national identification system.12hdos will need to take steps to be certain that they do not contribute to thesedevelopments.12 for a history of the national identification debate in this country, see department ofjustice, 1976; burnham, 1983; u.s. senate, subcommittee on courts, committee on thejudiciary, 1983; and shattuck, 1984; eaton, 1986.confidentiality and privacy of personal data163health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.although many people carry credit or health insurance cards and have noobjection to doing so, others would view any requirement that a specialidentification card must be carried by participating consumers with specialalarm because such an instrument is thought to connote totalitarian values. inthe former soviet union, for instance, all soviet citizens were required to carryan internal passport and to produce this passport upon request. in this way, thepassport served not only to regulate internal travel but as a means ofidentification and social control (pipko and pucciarelli, 1985). the harris/equifax survey found that the great majority of the public (84 percent) iswilling to accept a personal identity card but had mixed feelings about beingassigned a numberšperhaps reflecting concern about whether such a numbercould be used to link their health information to other databases.admittedly, a few western democracies employ national populationregistries and automated and centralized personal record data banks, butvirtually all these systems are principally statistical and research systems, ratherthan systems that are used for administrative or investigative purposes.moreover, even these primarily statistical and research systems "inspire fearsabout the expanded power of central government, visàvis the legislature, thelocal administration, the private sector and most especially the citizen"(bennett, 1992, p. 49). in sweden, for example, the press harshly criticized thelinkage of cancer registry databases and abortion record databases for medicalresearch purposes (stern, 1986).moreover, european democracies that use unique personal identificationnumbers assigned at birth for each citizen have a history of the use of personal,numerical codes. even in sweden and germany, two european democraciesthat make extensive use of personal identification numbers to track individualsand link databases, personal identification numbers are not used as a standarduniversal numeric identifier for participation in all aspects of the society. inaddition, reports are increasing of popular resistance in these countries to theuse of universal numeric identifiers (stern, 1986). as bennett (1992) commentsin regulating privacy:the issue in these countries [sweden and germany] has been the incrementaland surreptitious use of these numbers for ends unrelated to those for whichthey were created. where proposals have been introduced for a new universalidentifier accompanied by a personal identification card, such as in germanyand australia, they have been met with strong resistance because of the beliefthat nonuniformity and nonstandardization with all the attendant problemsfor administration, are vital to the maintenance of personal privacy. (p. 51)over the years the congress, the press, and privacy advocates have fiercelyresisted any proposal for the development of databases that appeared tofacilitate establishment of a national identification or database system.confidentiality and privacy of personal data164health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some observers urge that entities like hdos eschew the use of any type ofpositive identification, such as a biometric identifier, and avoid the use of thesocial security number. the aim is to minimize the likelihood that hdos willcontribute intentionally or unintentionally to a national identification system orto the development of a standard universal identifier (usdhew, 1973). if thehdo initiative is viewed by opinion leaders as a precursor to the establishmentof any type of automated, national identification or dossier system, the initiativewill likely fail.hdo proponents should take every practicable step to assure advocacygroups, the media, legislators, and the american people that the emergence ofhdos will not contribute to the development of a centralized, automatednational dossier system or a national identification system through linkage withnonhealthrelated databases or the gradual relaxation of confidentiality policies.personal identifiers and the social security numberthe personal identifier (id) used by an hdo to label each of theindividuals in the database is a crucial issue. it is related not only to pastpractices but will also be strongly influenced, if not mandated, by the healthcare reform actions now under way in the nation.of necessity, identifiers are used in present health care systems. forpractical purposes the identifier in many systems is either the person's socialsecurity number (ssn) or, as in medicare, the social security number of anindividual with a letter appended. issues relating to the social security numberare examined below (see also usdhew, 1973).an ideal personal identifierthe ideal personal identifier must, whatever its design, minimize oreliminate the risk of misidentification. an ideal identifier would meet certainrequirements, including the six discussed below.first, it must be able to make the transition easily from the presentrecordkeeping environment to one that will prevail in hdos (and undernational health care reform). further, organizations will need to know where toapply for new numbers, to verify numbers that patients give verbally, to trackdown uncertainties in identification, to find current mailing addresses, and to beable to backtrack errors and correct them. this requirement also has technicaldimensions. for example, if a new identifier contains more digits or characters(or both) than the 10 used for the medicare identifier, there will be softwarerepercussions in many systems, and redesign of datacapture forms may benecessary.second, the identifier must have errorcontrol features to make entryconfidentiality and privacy of personal data165health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of a wrong number unlikely. control implies that errors of many kinds aredetectable and possibly correctable on the basis of the digits and characters inthe id alone. ideally it will protect against transpositions of characters andagainst single, double, or multiple errors. at a minimum the errorcontrolfeatures must be able to indicate whether the id is valid and to do so with highconfidence (usdhew, 1973).error control is certain to be a systemwide requirement in any automatedsystem. it will involve not only the structure of the id itself, but also theprocessing software (or the residual manual processes) in every system that willhave to use and verify the id.13third, the id will have separate identification and authentication ele13 the term check digits is often used as short hand for error correcting and detectingcodes used extensively in modern computers and communications systems. it issometimes suggested, almost casually as though it were a magic solution, that theaddition of a check digit to the social security number would allow the verification of itsaccuracy. the addition of extra characters could in principle accomplish a number oftasks, including:1. identifying that something is wrong, but not indicating the error,2. detecting and locating a single error,3. detecting and locating multiple errors,4. detecting, locating, and correcting single errors, and5. detecting, locating, and correcting multiple errors.the number of additional characters needed depends on the degree of error detectionand correction that designers think is necessary for the circumstances. for example, asingle check digit can identify an error but does not locate which digit is wrong or how.moreover, it would not catch the common manual error of transposed characters. asimple singledigit check can sometimes say a bad message is good. for such reasons, asingle check digit is not a very strong error control mechanism.the issue of designing error codes becomes complex rapidly. it is essential, however,to realize that any error correction feature added to an established number such as thessn will have hardware and software consequencesšor both. the data fields in storagewill have to be longer; the software will have to be modified to handle the longer datafields; additional softwarešor hardware or bothšwill have to be added to do whatevercalculations the particular errordetection/correction scheme requires.error control is a systemlevel problem, not just an issue of the identifier per se. if onecan arrange procedures so that the identifier is always known to be correct at the time itis entered into the automated system, then the problem within the system itself becomessimpler. the method of providing the identifier will result in higher or lower assuranceof its accuracy: an individual's memory is probably the least assurance of correctness; anembossed card is better; and an electronic reader for the card is better still.the present health care information infrastructure runs largely without external visibleerror controls. although mainframes and communications equipment almost certainlyhave error controls to catch equipment malfunctions and communication faults, there isno error control on some, possibly much, of the data in the data base. it relies, instead, onpeople outside the system to detect errorsšproviders and patientsšand risks majormistakes in processing.confidentiality and privacy of personal data166health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ments. the distinction between identification and authentication is made wherestrong security is required. "identification" implies that (in this case) anindividual indicates who he is, but authentication is a separate process withdifferent parameters (known only to the individual) that allow the system toverify with high confidence that the identification offered is valid. banks, forexample, sometimes require an individual to provide his mother's maiden name;a personal identification number (pin) is another authenticator. in many,perhaps most, medical systems this distinction is not made, and a simpleidentifier (e.g., insurance plan identification number) is presumed to be correct.in the future, however, some consideration should be given to separating thesefunctions.fourth, the id must work in any circumstance in which health careservices are rendered, whether or not the situation was anticipated in the designof the system. at a minimum, the id must never be an impediment to theprompt, efficient delivery of health care. for example, it must work when thepatient requiring health care is not able to cooperate (e.g., is unconscious ordoes not speak the same language as the health care personnel) and regardlessof the patient's mental and physical abilities.fifth, the id must function anywhere in the country and in any provider'sfacilities and settings. by extension, it must also be able to link events that haveoccurred at multiple providers.sixth, the id must help to minimize the opportunities for crime and abuseand perhaps help to identify their perpetrators.issues relating to the ssnwhen the initial social security law was passed in 1935, the ssn wascalled the ssan, the number of one's "account" with the social securityadministration (ssa). the ssa has always held that the ssn is not to be usedas a personal identifier.14in 1943 president franklin roosevelt signed an executive order requiringfederal agencies to use the ssn whenever a new record system was to beestablished. the department of defense adopted it as a military identificationnumber during world war ii, and in 1961 the internal revenue service (irs)adopted it as the taxpayer identification number. when medicare legislationwas passed in the 1960s, the government adopted the ssn plus14 the most comprehensive treatment of the ssn as a recordkeeping personalidentifier in the government is in the ppsc report (1977a) and the report of thesecretary's advisory committee (usdhew, 1973). an examination of the latter alsoexamines the role of the ssn in some commercial and privatesector circumstances.hibbert (1992) gives a brief overview of the ssn in recordkeeping with advice for theindividual in controlling its use.confidentiality and privacy of personal data167health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an appended letter as the medicare health insurance number. many expertsregard this as a serious undermining of privacy protection because the manyrecordkeeping activities associated with health care delivery act to disseminatea piece of information that differs from the ssn by only an appended letter.in the privacy act of 1974šlargely in response to the position of adepartment of health, education, and welfare (usdhew, 1973) committeethat had studied the issuešcongress prohibited states from using the ssn forenumeration systems other than by authority of congress; however, statesalready using it were allowed to continue. the tax reform act of 1976undermined this position, however, by authorizing the states to use the snn fora variety of systems: state or local tax authorities, welfare systems, driver'slicense systems, departments of motor vehicles, and systems for finding parentswho are delinquent in courtimposed childsupport payments (ota, 1986).in short, the government has caused the proliferation in the use of the ssn,sometimes by positive actions but sometimes by indifference or congressionalfailure to act. some government decisions, notably to use the ssn as thetaxpayer identification number and as the basis of the medicare number, forcedits wide diffusion throughout the private sector through financial transactionsand benefits payments. in this wayšpartly deliberately and partly inadvertentlyša very sensitive item of personal information has become widely disseminated.ssn uses for other than medical paymentsorganizations that use the ssn as a personal id and that most citizens willdeal with frequently include federal government agencies (e.g., the socialsecurity administration for benefits, the internal revenue service for taxes andwithholding, the health care financing administration and its contractors formedicare payments, and the securities and exchange commission); educationalinstitutions, which frequently use it as a student identifier for campuswidepurposes; state governments (e.g., for state taxes, property and other local taxes,driver and vehicle registrations, real property records, financial transactions,and medicaid payments); and private organizations (e.g., providers for healthcare services, industrysupport databases such as the medical informationbureau, mortgage and loan agencies, credit reporting organizations, realproperty records, and banks).organizations, especially those in the private sector, choose to use the ssnfor a number of pragmatic reasons and for expediency. organizations alreadyhold the number legally in connection with tax, financial, and wage matters.moreover, there are no prohibitions against its use as a personal identifier in theprivate sector. individuals usually have an ssn, or theyconfidentiality and privacy of personal data168health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can get one easily. in addition, people have become accustomed to willinglyproviding an ssn when asked; hence, its acquisition is a matter of merelyasking, not legal compulsion.15 finally, administration of an enumerationsystem can be burdensome, and the choice of ssn shifts that consequence ontothe government.although federal, state, or local governments usually require the ssnunder law, privatesector requests serve the purposes and motivations of theorganization. the essential point is that the ssn is in extraordinarily wide useas a personal identifier. as a result, any given person is indexed in a hugenumber of databases by his or her ssn, and an unknown number of linkagesand data exchange among such databases are routine business.if health care reform were to mandate a patient id that is either the ssn ora closely related number, it will in effect have forced the last step of making thessn into a truly universal personal id. this is the issue that launched thedhew committee in 1970 (ppsc, 1977a).shortfalls of the ssn as an identifierthe choice of a personal id that is satisfactory for the operational needs ofhealth care delivery, but at the same time assures the confidentiality of medicaldata and the privacy of individuals is neither easy nor casual. superficially, thechoice would be the ssn, medicare number, or something similar simplybecause people are accustomed to using them, systems are used to handlingthem. the government would bear the burden of administering the enumerationsystem but would avoid the cost of creating a new one. for informationmanagement, however, the shortfalls of the ssn are well known. the followinglist is representative of the problems.1. any 9digit number rendered with hyphens in the appropriate placesšthat is, xxxxxxxxxšhas a high likelihood of being alegitimate ssn that belongs to someone or at least appears to. thisprovides little security, and data commingling can occur that wouldresult in erroneous records, mistaken conclusions and actions, andincorrect payments.2. the allowable entries in each of the three groups in a ssn are wellknown. thus, it is easy to counterfeit an ssn and have a highprobability that it will not be challenged.3. it has no error correcting features. it is fallible to transpositions andsingle or multipledigit mistakes.4. the ssn is not coupled to an authenticator. some organizations,15 for example, some largevolume retail stores in the washington, d.c., arearoutinely ask for a customer's social security number when he or she pays for anypurchase by check.confidentiality and privacy of personal data169health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such as banks, attempt to provide such a feature by using some adhoc data element that an individual is likely to remember but is notcommon knowledge (e.g., mother's maiden name).5.the ssn circulates widely, particularly in the finance industry. it isrelatively easy to acquire someone's number and to parlay it into afalse identity that supports fraud or other malicious or illegal actions.6.there are often multiple holders of the same ssn, which introduceserrors and clouds the records. especially among less wellinformedor immigrant households, the purpose of the number is not wellunderstood or is colored by the role that a number might haveplayed in another country or society. for example, all members of ahousehold might use the same ssn because they believe it isintended to apply to all of them. some numbers have achieved verywide use. the most famous is the ''wallet incident" in which areplica of an ssn card complete with a number was included in aninexpensive, widely sold wallet; an appreciable number of peopleimproperly believed that this ssn was to be used.7.the ssn is closely related to the medicare identifier, whichidentifies virtually all members of the population over age 65. formarried people who receive ssa title ii benefits paid to anindividual and the spouse on the basis of one person's earnings, themedicare number of the primary beneficiary is the ssn followedby an a; for the spouse, the medicare number is that same ssnfollowed by a b.8.not everyone needing health care has an ssn; for instance, foreignvisitors, newborn infants, and the indigent or homeless are all likelyto lack ssns. this would require that health care providers beprepared to assign substitute numbers.9.the crucial, almost overwhelming, objection to the ssn as amedical identifier, however, is that it has no legal protection, andbecause its use is so widespread, there is no chance of retroactivelygiving it such protection. as a data element, it is not characterizedby law as confidential; hence, organizations that use it are under nolegal requirement to protect it or to limit the ways in which it isused. for all practical purposes its use is unconstrained, this makesthe risk of commingling health data with all other forms of personaldata enormously high.confidentiality of research uses of hdo databasesthrough expenditures for medical research, the government and privatesector indirectly contribute to thirdparty intrusions. although epidemiologicalresearch was originally concerned with the causes and prevention of infectiousdiseases and focused chiefly on populations, such research has expanded toinclude chronic, noninfectious diseases with low rates of occurrence (ppsc,1977a). progression of such ailments may be slow, andconfidentiality and privacy of personal data170health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.because their causes are frequently insidious, their study often requires medicalsurveillance of a substantial population at widely disparate times.in some cases, hdos may serve research and statistical uses, and thisraises consideration of how privacy interests might be affected. first, thebenefits of such databases generally accrue not to the individual data subject butto society; this makes assessments of risks and benefits more complex becausethe person at risk is not the same as the beneficiary. second, research databasesdepend on the voluntary cooperation of subjects, providers, or both in providingaccurate and reliable information. if patients or clinicians distrust the ability orwillingness of hdos to protect the confidentiality of information, they mayintentionally withhold or distort information. third, it will become extremelyimportant to understand the implications of differing methods of data collectionand sources of datašfor instance, abstraction of primary records and analysisof claims databases compared with patient responses to surveys fielded by thehdo. each will have different sources of bias in the population reached,reasons for missing data, and accuracy.with respect to research and statistical studies, congress and agencies ofthe federal government have acted to protect the interests of individuals who aresubjects of research and statistical records developed under federal authority orwith federal funds (ppsc, 1977a). a report from the national research council(1993) analyzes available technical and administrative procedures that can betaken to protect confidentiality of data while permitting legitimate data use. anumber of such disclosure limitation techniques are described: (1) collecting orreleasing a sample of the data; (2) including simulated data; (3) "blurring" of thedata by grouping or adding random error to individual values; (4) excludingcertain attributes; (5) swapping of data by exchanging the values of certainvariables between data subjects; (6) requiring each marginal total of the table tohave a minimum count of data subjects; (7) using a "concentration rule"(described in chapter 3); and (8) using controlled rounding of table entries(nrc, 1993). whether these steps are sufficient in the hdo context requiresreexamination.because hdo databases will include many elements of personalinformation collected for single, specific purposes and subsequently used formultiple, diverse purposes, they have the potential to conflict with thesecondary use principle. if such secondary use does not, however, involve adecision about the individual, then the privacy threat is by no means as acute asit would be if the information were used to make a decision directly affectingthe individual (usdhew, 1973). individuals' interests have not beencompromised, for example, when these data are used anonymously forstatistical or research purposes and not for administrative decision making thatwill affect them directly. although the harris/equifax survey (1993) found thatrespondents objected to such use of their medicalconfidentiality and privacy of personal data171health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information without their express consent (64 percent of respondents), the iomcommittee believes that individualsšand collectively, the publicšmay need tobetter understand the benefits of health services research using nonpersonidentifiable data and protections that are available for research use of personidentifiable data. researcher access to hdo databases is addressed in thecommittee's recommendations.relevance of existing laws to hdosthe committee examined existing lawconstitutional, statutory, andcommon lawfor its relevance to hdos and its adequacy for protecting patientprivacy. the committee also examined the way these laws might affect thedesign, establishment, and operation of hdos.it concludes that most of this body of law is unlikely to apply to hdos.with the exception of laws regulating information considered sensitive, existinglaws regulate recordkeepers and their recordkeeping practices; they do notregulate on the basis of either the content or the subject matter of a record.current law thus seeks to regulate the information behavior of health careproviders, government recordkeepers, insurers, consumer reporting agencies,quality assurance organizations, and researchers. for this reason, it is importantto understand how hdos are likely to be viewed by the legal systemthat is, inwhat legal context their recordkeeping will be seen.the committee believes that hdos are unlikely to be treated as health careproviders, payers, or quality assurance organizations. if they are treated asmedical researchers, very little in the way of standards would apply. somepossibility exists that they will be subject to regulation as consumer reportingagenciesšand they will probably want to avoid thisšor as insurance supportorganizations, at least in states that have passed the national association ofinsurance commissioners (naic) information and privacy protection modelact of 1981 (naic model act). implications of being treated as either aredescribed briefly below. hdos may well have governmental status, and thelegal implications of that status are described in more detail, with particularattention to the privacy act of 1974.laws governing insurance support organizationsthe naic model act defines an insurance support organization as "anyperson who regularly engages, in whole or in part, in the practice of assemblingor collecting information about natural persons for the primary purpose ofproviding the information to an insurance institution or agent for insurancetransactions" (emphasis added). because hdos will likely provide informationto insurance institutions on a regular basis in connectionconfidentiality and privacy of personal data172health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with insurance transactions (defined in the naic model act as a determinationof an individual's eligibility for insurance coverage, benefit, or payment), it ispossible they will be considered insurance support organizations.in states that have passed the naic model act, an hdo would be subjectto the following six requirements. first, the hdo could not disclose personalinformation about an individual without the written authorization of theindividual or unless the disclosure was needed: to further an insurance function,provided there is no redisclosure; to a health care institution or healthprofessional; to an insurance regulatory authority; to a law enforcementauthority; in circumstances otherwise permitted or required by law; in responseto compulsory process; for the purpose of a bona fide research study, providedthat no individual can be identified in any subsequent research report; formarketing purposes; to consumer reporting agencies; to a group policyholder; toa professional peer review organization; or for a licensing activity.second, when subject consent is obtained, the hdo would have to assurethat the consent has several properties: that it (1) is written in plain language;(2) is dated; (3) specifies the types of persons authorized to discloseinformation; (4) specifies the nature of the information authorized fordisclosure; (5) names the institution authorized to disclose; (6) specifies thepurposes for which the information is being disclosed; (7) specifies the lengthof time for which the authorization is valid; and (8) advises the individualwhose information is the subject of the consent that the individual has a right toa copy of the consent form.third, the hdo would have to provide record subjects with a right ofaccess to their records, either directly or through a health care professionaldesignated by the individual. fourth, the hdo would be required to provideindividuals with rights of correction, amendment, and deletion. fifth, the hdocould not maintain information concerning any previous adverse underwritingdecision relating to the individual. sixth, the hdo would be subject to theregulatory and investigatory powers of the state commissioner of insurance.in states that have not adopted the naic model act, there is little or nostatutory regulation of the information practices of insurance institutions orinsurance support organizations (trubow, 1991) to apply to hdos. in theory,the above requirements might not apply at all in those states, or they mightapply piecemeal by virtue of statespecific situations.laws governing consumer reporting agenciesit is possible, but by no means likely, that hdos could be viewed asconsumer reporting agencies under the federal fair credit reporting actconfidentiality and privacy of personal data173health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(fcra) or state versions of the fcra. these statutes regulate the collection,use, and dissemination of personal information by consumer reporting agencies.federal law defines a consumer reporting agency as an organization that"regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling orevaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers forthe purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties" (fcra 15 u.s.c. §1681a[f]) for fees or on a cooperative, nonprofit basis. "other information onconsumers" includes medical record information.the fcra defines "consumer report" as any written or oralcommunication that bears on consumers' credit worthiness, credit standing,credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or modeof living when that report "is used or expected to be used or collected in wholeor part for the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing the consumer'seligibility for: credit or insurance to be used primarily for personal, family orhousehold purposes" or used "in connection with a business transactioninvolving the consumer'' (fcra 15 u.s.c. §§ 1681a(d) and 1681b(3)(e)).if data from an hdo are used only in connection with insurance claimsdeterminations, the hdo should not, at least by virtue of the insurance claimsfunction, be classified as a consumer reporting agency. the federal tradecommission (ftc), which is charged with enforcing the fcra, has stated thatsupplying data for insurance claims purposes does not constitute a consumerreport.if, however, hdos were to acquire and supply personal financialinformation to health care providers to assist providers in makingdeterminations about a patient's payment of a medical bill (including theacceptance of a consumer's credit card or check or the allocation of chargesbetween the patient and various health care payment programs), hdos wouldbe providing information for use "in connection with a business transactioninvolving the consumer." courts have held, for example, that providingfinancial information for pointofsale determinations of whether to accept aconsumer's check represents a disclosure in connection with a businesstransaction involving a consumer. this kind of action brings the party makingthe disclosure within the scope of the fcra.if, though highly unlikely, the fcra were judged to be applicable tohdos, then they would be subject to its provisions. these include limitations ofthe kind of personal information that could be collected and maintained;requirements with respect to consumer access to the database; restrictions onthe disclosure of the information from the database; and a variety ofadministrative, civil, and criminal sanctions. given the reach of the fcra, thecommittee judged that hdos will want to avoid action and responsibilities thatwill put them within the purview of the fcra.confidentiality and privacy of personal data174health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hdos as governmental entities: general confidentialityprotections in public lawthe governmental or private status of an entity that maintains or usespersonal record information is particularly significant for recordkeeping.constitutional principles, legislative charter, statutory law, and regulations mustbe considered separately.constitutional lawif an entity has a governmental status, whether federal or state,constitutional privacy standards apply to the entity's handling of personalinformation. as noted earlier, various provisions of the u.s. bill of rights areaimed at protecting citizens from governmental abuse, and privacy rights arederived from limited case law (e.g., whalen v. roe). for federal or stateconstitutional protections to apply, an hdo would have to be operated by agovernmental entity or pursuant to a governmental charter.legislative chartereven if hdos are not operated by federal governmental entities,constitutional information privacy standards can affect their operations in twoways. first, hdos may well operate under a state legislative charter. if thatcharter were to require the submission of personally identifiable medical recordinformation (on the part of record subjects, providers, or others), this statutoryrequirement provides a basis for a challenge on constitutional privacy grounds,just as did the reporting requirements in whalen.second, even if the hdos are not statutorily chartered, constitutionalinformation privacy concepts are used by the courts as benchmarks forassessing whether a privacy violation has occurred under common law orstatute. accordingly, if an hdo were challenged on tort or other common lawor even statutory privacy theories, the extent to which the hdo violatesconstitutional informational privacy rights could well be influential indetermining the outcome.freedom of information actsin addition to any constitutional protections (which will be limited at best),a body of statutory law would also apply to hdos if they were considered to bepublic agencies. for example, federal agencies and agencies in every state arecovered by freedom of information (foi) or public records acts. these statutesare intended to make records held by government agencies available to thepublic. the federal foia, however, containsconfidentiality and privacy of personal data175health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.express language that exempts from disclosure "personnel and medical files andsimilar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarrantedinvasion of personal privacy" (5 u.s.c. § 552[b][6]). most state freedom ofinformation statutes include a similar exemption. washington state's foia, forexample, includes an exemption for medical records, pharmacy records, clientrecords held by domestic violence programs, and various types of research data.the washington courts have also held that medical records are exempt fromdisclosure under washington's foi statute.16fair information practicesin addition, the federal government and approximately onethird of thestates have adopted fair information practices and statutes coveringgovernmental agencies within each jurisdiction. the federal privacy actprohibits federal agencies, or contractors acting on behalf of an agency, fromdisclosing information accessible by personal identifiers and contained in asystem of records without the prior written consent of the individualconcerned.17 the federal government and states that have adoptedcomprehensive privacy laws are also required by statute to make recordsrelating to a record subject available upon request to that individual. federalagencies and those in some states can, however, adopt special procedures thatbar direct access to medical record data when officials have reason to believethat such access would be harmful to the subject (cleaver, 1985; andrussier,1991).the right to know about, challenge, control, and correct information aboutoneself are hallmarks of american privacy law. the elements of fairinformation practices derive from the report of the secretary's advisorycommittee on automated personal data systems (usdhew, 1973). the fiveprinciples in the original code are enumerated in that report (p. 41) as a code offair information practices:1. there must be no personal data recordkeeping systems whose veryexistence is kept secret.2. there must be a way for an individual to find out what informationabout him is in a record and how it is used.16 note, however, that foia would not necessarily exempt physicianor providerspecific information as discussed in chapter 3.17 the federal privacy act contains 12 exceptions that permit disclosures withoutobtaining subject consent. one such exemption is for research purposes (federalregister, 1991b). personally identifiable health record information held by medicarepeer review organizations can be shared with authorized researchers without subjectconsent.confidentiality and privacy of personal data176health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3. there must be a way for an individual to prevent information abouthim obtained for one purpose from being used or made availablefor other purposes without his consent.4. there must be a way for an individual to correct or amend a recordof identifiable information about him.5. any organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminatingrecords of identifiable personal data must assure the reliability ofthe data for their intended use and must take reasonable precautionsto prevent misuse of the data.the privacy act of 1974. the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93579; 5 u.s.c. §552a) concerns databases held by the federal government.18 along with fcraand the family educational rights and privacy act of 1974, this act investsrecord subjects with rights to see, copy, and correct their records, as well aswith limited rights with respect to authorizing the collection and disclosure ofinformation.the privacy act of 1974 incorporated the five elements of the code of fairinformation practices as eight principles that are manifest as specificrequirements (ppsc, 1977a):1. there shall be no personal data recordkeeping system whose veryexistence is secret and there shall be a policy of openness about anorganization's personal data recordkeeping policies, practices, andsystems (the openness principle).2. an individual about whom information is maintained by arecordkeeping organization in individually identifiable form shallhave a right to see and copy that information (the individualaccess principle).3. an individual about whom information is maintained by arecordkeeping organization shall have a right to correct or amendthe substance of that information (the individual participationprinciple).4. there shall be limits on the types of information an organizationmay collect about an individual, as well as certain requirementswith re18 other federal laws address the use of personal information in an immense array ofcircumstances and settings: criminal justice information systems; student records andtests; tax information; financial information held by banks and other financial institutionsincluding electronic transfers of funds; press offices; and identification of intelligenceofficers, bad debtors, cable service users, renters of videotapes, and rape victims.confidentiality provisions also appear in statutes pertaining to the national census, socialsecurity, child abuse information, and federally supported drug and alcohol treatmentfacilities (ota, 1986). such protections are often filled with lists of exceptions,however, sometimes to the point of effectively negating the purpose of the legislation.confidentiality and privacy of personal data177health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spect to the manner in which it collects such information (thecollection limitation principle).5. there shall be limits on the internal uses of information about anindividual within a recordkeeping organization (the uselimitation principle).6. there shall be limits on the external disclosures of informationabout an individual a recordkeeping organization may make (thedisclosure limitation principle).7. a recordkeeping organization shall bear an affirmativeresponsibility for establishing reasonable and proper informationmanagement policies and practices that assure that its collection,maintenance, use, and dissemination of information about anindividual is necessary and lawful and the information itself iscurrent and accurate (the information management principle).8. a recordkeeping organization shall be accountable for its personaldata recordkeeping policies, practices, and systems (theaccountability principle).in addition to establishing privacy guidelines for federal databases, theprivacy act also created the privacy protection study commission (ppsc),whose charter required it to examine recordkeeping practices in the privatebusiness sector and in selected federal domains (e.g., tax records). the ppscrevisited the fair practices doctrine and reoriented the thrust of the fairpractices somewhat by placing emphasis on promoting consent andparticipation rights, which it referred to as "fairness protections for individuals"(ppsc, 1977a, pp. 1718). in fact, the majority of the commission'srecommendations relate directly to fairness in recordkeeping. in the case of anindividual, essential fairness protections include a right of access to recordsabout oneself for reviewing, copying, and correcting or amending them asnecessary, plus some control over the collection and disclosure of informationabout oneself.the ppsc offered an illustrative revision of the privacy act to incorporatechanges it suggested in its report. these modifications included steps in thefollowing areas: amending records; limitations on disclosure; collecting andmaintaining information; "propagating corrections" (which involves takingpositive steps to correct information); uses for research or statistical records;notices about agency systems; policies and practices; rights of parents and legalguardians; agency implementation; civil remedies and criminal penalties;application to government contractors and grantees; archiving records; givingnotice of new systems or alterations to old systems; reporting to the u.s.congress; the effect of other laws; and prohibitions on selling or rentinginformation for mailing lists (ppsc, 1977b).a decade later, the computer matching and privacy protection act of1988 (p.l. 100503) amended the privacy act to include a new section ofconfidentiality and privacy of personal data178health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conditions that must be met before computer matching would be permitted.another new section pertained to computer matching and required: (1)verification of adverse administrative actions and provision for individuals tocontest findings and (2) notification of the public and evaluation of the effect ofnew systems or matching programs.options for protecting privacy andconfidentiality of healthrelated data in hdostwo assumptions should drive the policymaking process with respect toprivacy protection strategies and options for the establishment and operation ofhdos. first, from both a public policy and a legal standpoint, privacyprotection will be a material issue. accordingly, the issue warrants carefulattention. second, because hdos are not health care providers or federalentities, hdos will escape the reach of most existing privacy law. nevertheless,many of the entities contributing data to hdos will be bound by confidentialityobligations, and these obligations may affect their ability to submit personidentifiable data to hdos, particularly if hdos do not adopt stringentprotective measures. that is, entities contributing information to hdos will notescape existing privacy law.19the committee's prevailing assumption is that hdo policymakers will beunder pressure to develop effective privacy protection safeguards. they willalso enjoy some degree of flexibility in the development and implementation ofthose safeguards and will have a striking opportunity to develop internalsafeguards in advance of public or legislative pressure. the development ofcomputerized databases can be seen asšor can evolve intoša way of givingpeople greater confidence about and real control over their personalinformation. when considering policies about privacy that might beimplemented, gostin (1993) posed seven questions about the human rightsimpact of disclosure of information that should be addressed even before dataare collected.1. what is the purpose of the information?2. will collection achieve a compelling public health purpose?3. will collection result in effective health policy; that is, might itdrive people underground if they fear the consequences ofdisclosure?19 some state and federal laws will restrict the ability of providers to disclose medicalrecord information to hdos, at least in the absence of patient consent or a legislativemandate. in addition, in some states it may be difficult or impossible to word a patientconsent to such disclosure that does not result in waiver of the physicianpatient privilege.confidentiality and privacy of personal data179health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4. who will have access to the information? can it be disclosed byforce or law? what will be the effect of negligent disclosure?5. what impact will it have on human rightsis there a stigma toindividuals or communities?6. are there less invasive alternatives?7. what safeguards are available to reduce the risks?the committee views these points as useful considerations for fashioning asensible approach to privacy protections and choosing among a range of optionsfor protecting privacy and confidentiality. threats to confidentiality and privacymight be seen as posing options within a series of "layers" of protection. suchlayers could include: (1) uniform state or federal preemptive legislation; (2)enabling legislation and organizational articles of incorporation and bylaws; (3)limiting categories of information acquired or accessed by hdos; (4)administrative rules and regulations including institutional and user codes ofconduct and employee training; (5) comprehensive security safeguards in allautomated systems and networks; (6) controlled access to databases; (7)techniques to reduce the risk of inferential identification, such as suppression ofsmall cell sizes; and (8) enforceable administrative, civil, and criminal sanctionsand penalties for misuse. at each level, more stringent efforts at security incurtradeoffs of inconvenience for users and costs born by the partiespatients,users, supporting organizations, providers, researchers, and (perhaps) taxpayers.in the remainder of this section, several options for addressing privacyprotections are presented. the committee's recommendationsšin effect,judgments about the seven questions posed by gostin and choices among a setof optionsšappear in the next section of this chapter. they address uniformlegislation establishing a clear set of rights, duties, administrative procedures,and remedies for all persons and institutions affected by the implementation andoperation of hdos. the recommendations also address administrative policiesand procedures that hdos should adopt.uniform legislationfederal preemptive legislationthe committee considered one important option to be enactment of federalpreemptive legislation. federal preemptive legislation refers to federal law thatsupersedes any state law or legislation that either covers the same matter orconflicts with the federal legislation. such preemptive legislation in this areacould establish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for health data about individuals because healthdata, particularly in electronic form, will cross state boundaries when accessedand disclosed by hdos.confidentiality and privacy of personal data180health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as noted earlier, existing state laws pertaining to the actions ofrecordholders will likely not apply to hdos, but hdos might wish to complywith them. yet, state protections for confidentiality of data contributed to hdosmay be lacking, inconsistent, or even in conflict from state to state. where theyexist, they create an extraordinary patchwork of regulations embedded in lawspertaining to a variety of recordkeepers such as hospitals, hmos, nursinghomes, state health departments, insurers, employers, and so forth. a briefreview of state statutes indicated that in one state more than 50 different statutesand regulations pertain to the confidentiality of medical information.compiling, understanding, and complying with conflicting or arcane regulationsfor each state would be virtually impossible for hdos operating in numerousstates. making such policies clear to the public would likely be even morehopeless.during the period of this study, a number of groups were examining thequestions of privacy rights with electronic transfer of health information.among the more significant was the workgroup on electronic data interchange(wedi).in its 1992 report, wedi identified three principles for databasescontaining sensitive personal information that could be associated withidentifiable persons; these principles involved computer system security, fairinformation practices, and privacy protection. to satisfy these principles, wedirecommended federal preemptive legislation. its proposals referring to thecollection, storage, handling, and transmission of data were intended tofacilitate and ensure the uniform, confidential treatment of personidentifiableinformation in electronic environments.wedi recommended that federal legislation include the following stepsand provisions: establish uniform requirements for preservation of confidentiality andprivacy rights in electronic health care claims processing and payment; apply these requirements to the collection, storage, handling, andtransmission of individually identifiable health care data, includinginitial and subsequent disclosures in electronic transactions by allpublic and private payers, providers of health care, and all otherentities involved in the transactions; exempt state public reporting laws; delineate protocols for secure electronic storage and transmission ofhealth care data; specify fair information practices that ensure a proper balance betweenrequired disclosures, use of data, and patient privacy; require publication of the existence of health care data banks; establish appropriate protections for highly sensitive data, such as dataconcerning mental health, substance abuse, and communicable andgenetic diseases;confidentiality and privacy of personal data181health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. encourage use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms whereappropriate; establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be adefense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,equitable remedies, and attorneys' fees where appropriate; and provide for enforcement by government officials and private,aggrieved parties.as described earlier in this chapter, protections for data independent of therecordholder is an important option to consider, and federal legislation providesan opportunity to establish such protections.privacy advocates see two possible drawbacks to federal legislation. first,such legislation could weaken rather than strengthen protections if the federallegislation is less stringent than good state legislationšhence the need forstrong federal law. if federal legislation leaves room for states to implementmore stringent standards, multistate hdos will still, however, be subject toconflicting requirements, and this may add to, rather than decrease,administrative cost and complexity.second, to the extent that federal legislation encourages uniform standardsthat foster interlinkage and creation of a national database, it will contribute tothe development of national databases and, by linkage, to nonhealthrelateddatabases, dossiers, and national identification systems. the committee's dimview of the development of national identification systems has already beennoted.uniform state legislationthe main alternatives to federal legislation would be the status quo orenactment of model state acts. adoption of uniform state legislation wouldundoubtedly involve a lengthy and cumbersome process and would not ensureadoption by all states. even if a uniform law were adopted by all the states, itwould likely be adopted with variations by some states, much as in the case ofthe uniform commercial code. hence, the committee was not sanguine aboutthe utility of this approach.options for consent and participation rightsthe discussion above related mainly to federal preemptive legislation.whether or not such legislation is adopted, hdos will need internal policies,although such organizational, administrative, and governance approaches wouldbe informed by existing (if not new) federal or state law.consent and participation rights for record subjects are essential eleconfidentiality and privacy of personal data182health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ments of the privacy act. they provide individuals with rights to see, copy, andcorrect their records, as well as grant limited rights to authorize the collectionand disclosure of information. state statutes routinely give persons a right ofaccess to data about themselves and a role in authorizing (or limiting) thirdparty disclosures. hdo designers will be able to select from a range of consentand participation options that run from weak to quite stringent, with middlerange strategies possibly a useful approach.hdo access to datanotification. at a minimum, hdos could publish or give record subjectsnotice that information about themšincluding information that the individualsprovide directly to participating health care providers, insurers, and employersšwill be accessible by the hdo. they might also require notification by entitiessubmitting data to hdos. presumably this notice would provide individualswith at least a cursory description of the manner in which hdos or their agentsmight use their data.20 they would have no further rights, however, in terms ofaccess to the data. under current law in many states, patient consent will berequired to transmit data to or allow access by the hdo (see footnote 18).general releases. hdos could be designed so that individuals wouldsimply be notified about their data being accessible to hdos, but would alsosign a general release authorizing participating providers, payers, andemployers to share personal data with hdos. the presumption, of course, isthat such a release (and its implications) is well understood by those signing it.such a general release might also be crafted to give the hdo a blanketauthorization to redisclose.from a legal standpoint, this approach, however modest it may seem,would be adequate except in the case of extremely sensitive health informationsuch as alcohol and drug abuse, mental health treatment, and aids information.extremely sensitive health record data (e.g., that just noted) generally could notbe shared with the hdos or redisclosed by the hdos pursuant to generalrelease under existing federal and state law.another option is for individuals to receive a complete and detailed writtendescription of an hdo's permissible disclosures and other information practicesand a complete description of their information rights.stronger options would allow individuals the right to revoke theirauthorization and, in any event, the authorization would be effective only for20 notification is included as one of the recommendations of the iom committeestudying privacy and confidentiality protections in the genetics testing environment(iom, 1993b).confidentiality and privacy of personal data183health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a limited period. even stronger options would require that individuals sign aspecific consent form (described below) each time they provided data accessibleto an hdo or to hdo participants. in this case, each data element might requireseparate authorization and expiration dates.other consent and participation rightseven if this approach were to meet minimum legal requirements, however,it is likely to be politically unacceptable for issues of database maintenance anddisclosure by the hdo. given the comprehensiveness and sensitivity of hdodatabases and the high level of public concern about privacy, the committeeexpects that privacy advocacy groups, legislators, the media, and other publicopinion leaders will insist that hdos be brigaded with substantial consent andparticipation rights.participation. an hdo offering participation rights at the high end of the''protection spectrum" would have all or most of the following characteristics: individuals would receive a complete and detailed written descriptionof an hdo's permissible disclosures and other information practicesand a complete description of their information rights. record subjects would have a right of access to all data aboutthemselves that are held in the hdo at a nominal charge. access rightswould include the right to receive a copy of their records, not merely aright to review their record. persons would have a right to correct and amend their records and toadd a rebuttal statement if the hdo refused to make a requestedcorrection or amendment. record subjects would have a right to inspect an "audit trail" that canidentify all uses, disclosures, and other access events involving theirown files. alternatively, record subjects would receive notice in the mail eachtime the hdo discloses their data to third parties or, at the least, eachtime hdo data are used to make an adverse decision affecting theindividual. this latter formulation is not dissimilar to current noticerequirements in fcra.disclosure optionsrules about disclosure and confidentiality are at the heart of anyinformation privacy policy. here hdos will enjoy a significant degree of legalflexibility. under existing law, hdos could adopt confidentiality policies thatspan a spectrum from a disclosureoriented policy at one end to a strictconfidentiality and privacy of personal data184health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.confidentiality policy at the other. from a political standpoint, however, hdoproponents are likely to see advantages in opting for a confidentialitysensitivepolicy for personidentifiable data.disclosureoriented options (weak options)under a disclosureoriented policy, all personidentified or personidentifiable data accessible to hdos would be available to participating partiesfor any purpose and without specific subject authorization. exceptions wouldapply to particularly sensitive kinds of data, such as records on substance abuse,aids, and genetic tests. even under existing law most of these records cannotbe made available without specific authorization. adopting a disclosureoriented approach would also make most personidentifiable informationavailable to third parties, as long as the user had a legitimate business purposefor accessing the information.furthermore, under a disclosureoriented policy hdos would routinelymake personidentifiable information available in response to subpoenas, otherforms of compulsory process, or formal, voluntary requests from lawenforcement or regulatory authorities. if a disclosureoriented policy wereadopted, the principal confidentiality restrictions would relate to the handling ofsensitive subsets of health record information and to wholesale disclosures ofidentifiable information to the general public. the committee rejected this broaddisclosureoriented option as incompatible with its values and the effectiveimplementation of hdos.confidentialityoriented options (strong options)in contrast, a confidentialitysensitive approach to disclosure wouldinclude some, if not all, of the elements listed below.21 hdos could release information only in nonpersonidentifiableformats except under very restricted circumstances.21 the health care authority of washington state issued draft recommendations forhealth information systems in september 1992 (6.7[4]; pp. 7879). among the draftrecommendations were seven related to access to personspecific information. accesswould be permitted only for the following specified purposes: use by the individualaffected; use by service providers in the course of providing health services (subject tostandards of client consent); use in payment, utilization review, and eligibility or planmembership processes; legally required reporting of births, deaths, communicablediseases, and other information; to carry out or cooperate with epidemiologicinvestigation of disease outbreaks by state or local public health authorities; forconfidential research, when properly authorized by an institutional review board; and toestablish linkage among data sources necessary to avoid duplicative data collectionburden.confidentiality and privacy of personal data185health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. hdos could not release any information in personally identifiableform from an hdo database to third parties without a specificauthorization, either signed or given electronically by the person inquestion. hdos could opt never to release personidentifiable information evenwith subject consent, or to release information in a customized formatthat blocked parts of a subject's record, depending upon the user anduse for which it was requested.22 hdos could refuse to provide personidentifiable information to thirdparties that intended or could use the information to make decisionsabout an individual's access to particular benefits (standard processingof health insurance claims would be an exception to this policy). hdos could require users to sign "confidentiality agreements." theseagreements would obligate users to safeguard information obtainedfrom the hdo and use it only for the purpose for which it wasprovided. violations of the agreement would give the hdo (andperhaps record subjects) a claim of either breach of contract or ofconfidentiality (or both) against the offending user. they would adopt a policy of refusing to comply with voluntaryrequests for access from law enforcement or regulatory agencies. in legal matters, hdos could resist compliance with subpoenas orother forms of compulsory process, assert all available privileges, andnotify record subjects of an access request so that they could contestproduction. (the uniform act noted earlier takes a similar approachwith respect to compulsory process.)governance options as an approach to privacy protectionsissues relating to the structure and governance of an hdo will be criticalto both the substance and the appearance of privacy protection and, therefore, tothe hdo's political acceptability. in this context, the principal question will bethe extent of government involvement in the operation of the hdos. in theabsence of federal preemptive legislation, state legislation might include anumber of options. although the laws in this section are all state oriented, iffederal preemptive legislation is enacted, it would set confidentiality standardsfor hdos and possibly preempt state statutes.22 even if hdos chose never to release personidentified or identifiable data, andnotwithstanding that the record subject had authorized release, hdos would still beobliged to provide the person directly with a copy of his or her record. nothing wouldstop that individual from personally delivering a copy of the record to a thirdpartyrequestor.confidentiality and privacy of personal data186health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statebased systemsat one end of the governance spectrum, hdos could be operated by stateor local (but not federal) agencies. this kind of structure has privacy benefits.constitutional privacy protections, for example, would attach if the hdos wereoperated by public agencies. further, governmental operation would increasethe likelihood of effective public and regulatory oversight and accountability.under this formulation, legislative hearings for budgetary and policy purposescould be expected to be a regular feature of the hdo process.state or local agency operation of an hdo also carries significant dangersto privacy. this level of government involvement would exacerbate concernsabout the linkage of hdos with other sensitive government databases and thecreation of a dossier system. pressure for public access to hdo health recorddata means that hdos will need to be exempted from state foi laws.were an hdo to be operated by a state agency, it would resemble inseveral ways health data commissions now in place in a number of states.because some of these have operated for some time, typical characteristics areworth reviewing here.iowa, for example, created a health data commission as a "statewide healthdata clearinghouse for the acquisition, compilation, correlation, anddissemination of data from health care providers, the state medicaid program,thirdparty payers, and other appropriate sources." the iowa statute gave thecommission authority to require providers, payers, and others to submit medicalrecord information in a personidentifiable format to the commission. it alsoprovided that medical record data furnished to the commission would notconstitute a public record and that all of the confidentiality protections availableunder the laws of iowa would apply. data releases suppress patient identifiersand suppress data in small cells. early in 1993, bills introduced in the iowasenate and house called for implementation of a community healthmanagement information system (chmis) by the health policy corporation ofiowa through its subsidiary, the health information management center. themain elements of chmis entities were given in chapter 2.privatesector systemsat the other end of the governance spectrum, hdos could be operated bypurely private, forprofit or notforprofit entities with no governmental statusor legislative charter. even in this posture, an hdo could take steps in structureand governance to maximize privacy protections. these steps could include:confidentiality and privacy of personal data187health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. establishing a privacy ombudsman to respond to patient problems orcomplaints; establishing an advisory committee of representatives of organizationsaffected by the hdos, including consumer, patient, and privacyadvocacy groups; adopting a comprehensive privacy code to regulate all aspects of thecollection, maintenance, use, and dissemination of personidentifiabledata; designating a highlevel employee to assure compliance withapplicable privacy policies and standards and to prepare an annual"privacy status and compliance report" for submission to the boards ofdirectors or advisory committees of hdos; initiating a program of periodic audits to gauge compliance withprivacy standards and a privacy impact audit of all new programs orfunctions; and creating an employee privacy training program.mixed governance systemsfor privacy, an attractive governance approach is a middle ground,wherein the entity operating the hdo would be a private, notforprofitorganization with a legislative charter. such an approach is under way inwashington state. a legislative charter could serve at least nine purposes in theprotection of privacy.first, a legislative charter could bring constitutional privacy protections tobear in some circumstances. second, it could spell out a statutory cause ofaction for record subjects, which included remedies such as attorneys' fees andliquidated damages. third, it could give statutory effect to the hdos'confidentiality and other privacy standards. fourth, a legislative charter wouldaffect how federal law characterizes hdos and help to dispel any confusionabout the legal status of an hdo (by stating that the entity is not a health careprovider, a payer, or a consumer reporting agency). fifth, it could establish a"shield" to immunize the hdo databases from discovery and other forms ofcompulsory process in state courts and administrative proceedings. sixth, itcould criminalize egregious information practices such as intentional breachesof security or willful, unauthorized releases of information. seventh, such astatute could charge the attorney general or some other appropriate state agencyor official with oversight and enforcement responsibilities. eighth, the statutorycharter could institutionalize privacy safeguards such as auditing and training.finally, it could require an annual report to a legislative committee detailing thehdo's compliance with privacy safeguards or otherwise establish an effectiveoversight mechanism for assisting the hdo in complying with privacysafeguards.confidentiality and privacy of personal data188health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.state charter and mixed governance options will continue to be hamperedby the possibility that hdos will operate in multistate areas. in the absence offederal legislation, this lack of uniformity of requirements or predictability oflegal consequences of system design and operational characteristics would bemajor problems.other administrative options to protect privacy andconfidentialitysecurity risks may be exacerbated for hdos that have large numbers ofremote online terminals. hdos will need to implement comprehensive, stateoftheart administrative, personnel, physical, and technological securitysafeguards; of special interest are employment agreements and security systemsdesign. whatever confidentiality policies hdos adopt or are imposed by law,hdos must be able to implement them and assure their effectiveness.employee agreements would, at a minimum, require employees to observeguidelines related to hardcopy reports, diskettes, and downloaded data andwould instruct them about the dangers of altering, destroying, or revealing dataand the penalties attached to infractions. for employees such steps include:requesting only reports needed for a given job; notifying a securityadministrator of changes in duties; safeguarding confidential materials; sharinginformation only with authorized users; using only approved user codes andpasswords when requesting system access; not sharing such codes andpasswords with anyone, employee or not; disposing of reports and materials in asecure manner; logging off and securing equipment when leaving a terminal;and reporting data and system misuse.features to limit insider and outsider threats include providing systems toconduct audit trails, having fulltime security officers to enforce overall policyand monitor the system, employing expert systems to note unusual patterns ofrequests or employee behavior, assigning personal identification numbers(pins) and passwords, and granting access to parts of records only on a needtoknow basis.one option among many for addressing some of these problems isencryption (see ota, 1993); in this process data are electronically coded so thatonly the dataholder and authorized users can decode the data. medical recordsmay require securedšthat is, encryptedšcommunication because the inherentvalue of the records is very high.another option is the creation of a data integrity board. the computermatching and privacy protection act of 1988 (p.l. 100503) specified thecreation of data integrity boards for federal agencies to oversee theimplementation of computer matching programs. these boards were chargedwith overseeing a number of administrative requirements, which include thefollowing: to issue annual reports on matching activities and any violationsconfidentiality and privacy of personal data189health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that have occurred; to serve as a clearinghouse for receiving and providinginformation on the accuracy, completeness, and reliability of records; to provideinterpretations and guidance on requirements; and to review agencyrecordkeeping and disposal policies. these tasks illustrate what hdos will needto oversee in their own operations.committee recommendationsoverview and general principlesin arriving at its set of recommendations concerning privacy andconfidentiality protections, the committee reviewed federal and state statutesand regulations and common law that might apply to hdos; it also took underadvisement parallel studies related to these topics at the iom and elsewhere.the committee ultimately arrived at a set of preferences among the variousoptions described above, presented in the form of recommendations.if hdos are government entities or established by legislative charter,patients' rights embodied in federal, state, and local laws and statutes may applyto the acquisition and disclosure of personidentifiable data. given: (1) theunprecedented comprehensiveness and inclusiveness of information in the filesheld by hdos (as those terms were used in chapter 2), (2) the generally scantyand inconsistent legal protections across geopolitical jurisdictions, and (3) thecurrent public interest in and concern about privacy protections, the committeebelieves that hdos have both an obligation and an opportunity to fashion welldelineated privacy protection programs that will, at the same time, foster therealization of hdo goals. some of these protections, such as the establishmentof data protection boards and organizational policies regarding security andaccess control, can be implemented in the short term. others, such as passage offederal preemptive legislation, will likely require longerterm efforts.preemptive legislationrecommendation 4.1 preemptive legislationthe committee recommends that the u.s. congress move to enactpreemptive legislation that will: establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for personidentifiable health data andspecify a code of fair health information practices that ensures aproper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patientprivacy;confidentiality and privacy of personal data190health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate; provide for enforcement by the government and permit privateaggrieved parties to sue; establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be adefense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and exempt health database organizations from public health reporting lawsand compulsory process with respect to personidentifiable health dataexcept for compulsory process initiated by record subjects.the committee believes that both processes in the last itemšpublic healthreporting and responding to compulsory process such as subpoenasšshouldremain the continuing responsibility of the provider, as is now the case.arguments for federal legislationthe committee concludes that federal preemptive legislation is required toestablish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality andprotection of privacy rights for health data about individuals because healthdata, particularly in electronic form, will cross state boundaries when accessedand disclosed by an hdo. in general, the committee subscribes to the positionslaid out in the wedi report (1992) and thus advocates federal preemptivelegislation in preference to model state legislation or similar nonfederalapproaches. it further advises that congress enact such legislation as soon aspossible. at a minimum, federal legislation should establish a floor and allowstates or hdos to implement more stringent standards so that it does notweaken stateimposed safeguards.attaching privacy protection to dataalthough current state protections often apply duties of confidentiality tothe recordkeeper (e.g., the hospital), this protection is no longer in effect oncethe data have left the recordkeeper's control. this means that health data can bedeprived of legal protection unless such protection is specified by another law;furthermore, such protection is likely to be left to the discretion of theorganizations or individuals who acquire such information as secondary data.at the present time, that is little shelter indeed.therefore, legislation should clearly establish that the confidentiality ofpersonidentifiable data is an attribute afforded to the data elements themselves,regardless of who holds the data. there is precedent for attaching umbrellaprotection to sensitive data either by regulation or by law. examples includeexecutive order 12356 (april 12, 1982), which gives deconfidentiality and privacy of personal data191health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fense agencies authority to establish levels of sensitivity and classifyinformation in them; the tax reform act of 1976 (p.l. 94455), whichstipulates that tax information is considered confidential, requires that the irsand states protect it as such. according confidentiality protections to data, not toholders, would help to remedy the current lack of protections and to simplifythe establishment of, compliance with, and communication of healthinformation practices.uniform requirementsthe committee has concluded that ensuring an appropriate balancebetween the protection of confidentiality of health data about individuals anddisclosures of database information requires several important features inlegislation or implementing regulations. the first is the inclusion andobservance of selected fair information practices, such as those found in theprivacy act of 1974.23 these practicesšnot yet available or understood in thehealth sectoršare described in more detail in the following recommendation ondata protection boards. their significance lies (apart from historical precedent)in promulgating uniform expectations and protections for health data.second, federal legislation can be expected to encourage standard setting(e.g., connectivity and transmissions standards). as noted in chapter 2, the lackof standard setting is a major obstacle to the development of automated medicalrecords (gao, 1991, 1993a); it will be no less a problem for advanced hdos.thus, the committee sees federal legislation as one more mechanism foraddressing this problem for all computerbased systems dealing with health data.specific elements of federal legislationgood information practices24 include the collection, transmission, andstorage of only the information that is needed. they imply (if not explicitlydemand) that data not be collected for unlawful purposes. thus, properpreemptive legislation should also provide for enforcement by government23 when capitalized, the phrase "fair information practices" refers to proceduresestablished in the privacy act of 1974. when used without capital letters it is a genericphrase with a broader or narrower meaning, depending on the context.24 good information practices include good security practices. a strong stance onprivacy requires strong and comprehensive system and network security. whetherfederal legislation would establish security practices and procedures or whether suchpolicies would be left for promulgation by the hdos, however, was considered by thecommittee to be beyond the scope of its charge.confidentiality and privacy of personal data192health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.officials and private aggrieved parties and should impose penalties forviolations of the legislation. these might include civil damages, equitableremedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate. it will be important that thelegislation clarify whether individuals have standing to bring suit.hdos may find themselves in complex legal thickets as demands mountfor disclosure of various types of information, some of which may well includeprotected personidentifiable data. if it is likely that such disclosure will bedeemed improper, hdos may be understandably unwilling to release ordisclose much information. this stance may in turn stifle the very contributionsthat hdos can offer (as discussed in chapters 2 and 3). to overcome thispossible aversion to risk on the part of hdos, the committee argues thatcompliance with requirements of any federal legislation in this area ought to bea straightforward and sufficient defense against legal actions based on chargesof improper disclosure. in taking this position, however, the committee furtherstipulates its expectations that federal legislation will have strong privacy andconfidentiality protections that meet, if not exceed, the usual provisions of fairinformation practices statutes or regulations.exemption from compulsory reporting and compulsory processa special aspect of the committee recommendation concerns federal, state,and local public health reporting laws and compulsory process. federallegislation should exempt hdos from these types of requirements on thegrounds that the primary dataholders or originators are the proper target forsuch laws and regulations. the issue may be especially acute where state lawsspecify reporting by providers or by "anyone who has knowledge of certainevents" (e.g., a reportable communicable disease, a gunshot wound, or childabuse). the committee believes that hdos ought not to be considered, for thesepurposes, either a provider or an "anyone" with knowledge of reportable events.to make this clear, the committee believes that hdos should be directlyexempted from such reporting requirements. it should be noted, however, thatelectronic transfer of such data from health providers to an hdo or itsdatabases would facilitate independent reporting to the appropriate healthagency by the provider and thus improve the completeness of those agencies'records.in much the same way, the committee agrees that data that are essential forconduct of authorized activities by, for instance, the internal revenue service,the federal bureau of investigation, or legal authorities through subpoena orcourt order should be obtained from the primary recordholder, not the hdo.the committee believes that exemptions from compulsory reporting andcompulsory process regarding thirdparty disputes will strengthen the claimsregarding, and the actual protections accorded, the confidentialconfidentiality and privacy of personal data193health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personidentifiable health data held by hdos. compulsory process shouldapply, however, in disputes between hdos and record subjects.if federal (or state) legislation does not grant such exemptions to hdos,then the committee's view is that hdos should adopt a policy of refusing tocomply with requests for access from law enforcement or regulatory agencies tothe extent permitted by law, and it should actively seek exemptions in futurefederal and state legislation. they should also adopt policies of resistingcompliance with subpoenas or other forms of compulsory process, asserting allavailable privileges, and notifying record subjects of an access request so thatsubjects would have an opportunity to contest production of such data.data protection unitshdos will need clear, enforceable, written organizational policies andprocedures in several areas: patients' rights regarding their own data; how toprotect medical information and materials; how to ensure the accuracy of data;and how to know they have gained compliance with their policies. members ofthe public should be able to request and receive clearly written materialsdescribing these policies. although precise policies cannot be written to coverevery eventuality, they must be broad enough to address the most commonsituations, such as types of data, and potential requestors.if an hdo is chartered by legislation, legislative language willundoubtedly describe its goals. hdo policies implementing these goals,however, must emanate from the top leadership of the organization. leadershipmust delineate an ''enforceable expectation of confidentiality" (as advocated bythe ppsc, 1977a) and make clear that breaches will be rigorously addressed.organizations should also make considerable efforts to educate (and reeducate)staff and the public (i.e., potential requestors) about these policies.recommendation 4.2 data protection unitsthe committee recommends that health database organizationsestablish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate andimplement information policies concerning the acquisition anddissemination of information and establish whatever administrativemechanism is required to implement these policies. such an administrativeunit or board should: promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection andanalyses based on such data; develop and implement policies that protect the confidentialityconfidentiality and privacy of personal data194health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of all personidentifiable information, consistent with otherpolicies of the organization and relevant state and federal law; develop and disseminate educational materials for the generalpublic that will describe in understandable terms the analyses and theirinterpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and theprotections accorded their data by the organization; develop and implement security practices in the manual and automateddata processing and storage systems of the organization; and develop and implement a comprehensive employee training programthat includes instruction concerning the protection of personidentifiable data.establishing a data protection boardthe commitment of the governing body and executives of the hdo toprotection of confidentiality will be critical, and these objectives should bewritten at the outset into the organization's bylaws. one useful mechanism foraccomplishing these goals is to establish a policy and oversight "dataprotection" and "data integrity" unit or units to promulgate, publicize, oversee,and enforce formal policies and procedures concerning access to and release ofdata. such an entity within an hdo might be known generically as a dataprotection board, and that is the term employed in this report.25 (implementationof such policies and procedures would be the responsibility of specificoperational arms of the organization, not the policy units themselves.) suchpolicy boards and their formal policy statements should be in place beforehdos begin operations, and regardless of whether such policies are specifiedand enacted in federal preemptive legislation. policies and procedures shouldexplicitly deal with authorized and unauthorized access to and authorized andunauthorized release of information from hdo databases.functions and responsibilities. a data protection board would have fullauthority to monitor data protection activities, intervene in potentially harmfulsituations, make exceptions to privacy and confidentiality policies on a casebycase basis, address questions of new uses and new users of information overtime, and undertake other responsibilities that will fulfill the spirit and the letterof the organization's policies.25 this term is used by some privacy advocates, and particularly in europe, to mean atoplevel federal entity. it is also described in the proposal for the health security act(1993). it is used here in a more general sense and intended to refer to units that any typeof hdo, of any size, might create and support.confidentiality and privacy of personal data195health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in terms of actions that hdo data protection boards might undertake, theyshould: (1) promulgate a code of fair health information practices (orimplement one if included in federal or state legislation) and make that codeavailable on request to any member of the public; (2) monitor compliance withsuch a code, audit for breaches of confidentiality, and respond in a timely wayto public concerns; (3) establish, publicize, and implement formal policies andprocedures concerning access to and release of data before full operation oftheir databases begins; and (4) ensure that such policies and procedures dealexplicitly with authorized and unauthorized access to and authorized andunauthorized release of information from the database.drawbacks and limitations. the committee acknowledges that dataprotection boards will not provide a full solution without external (and probablyfederal) legislation and commitment from the governing boards and topleadership of hdos. moreover, this stance raises the issue of whether a dataprotection board should be a function of an hdošwhich may be private, quasipublic, or publicšor a governmental function applicable to all hdos. becauseof the limited powers of an hdo, particularly if it is private or quasipublic, thedata protection board will be able to enforce its policies rigorously only withinthe organization; externally it can merely track the compliance of others thathave contractual obligations to the hdo, but it will not have jurisdiction overthem. in the absence of a law giving it added powers, the most that such a boardcould do about breaches of confidentiality by a party that received informationwould be to pursue legal remedies for breach of contract or any violation thatmay have occurred.an additional problem with relying solely on contractual protections is thatthe real harm from improper disclosure of information will be suffered not bythe hdo, but by persons who in all likelihood will not be a party to the contractwith the hdo. (the exception might be when all such contracts name as thirdparty beneficiaries individuals whose information is on the system, but thecommittee regarded this as a remote possibility.) in the absence of legal actionby such thirdparty beneficiaries, the liability for improper redisclosure may beminimal.developing administrative policies and proceduresgeneral administrative points. hdos should develop and promulgatestrong internal policies and procedures concerning the protection of healthinformation with policies on public disclosure of information and evaluationstudies. the committee further advises that such policies, which it assumes willbe set by the data protection boards, specifically address the followingadministrative points:confidentiality and privacy of personal data196health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. who in the organization has final responsibility for setting, monitoring,and enforcing policies and procedures; who inside the organization is authorized to have access to which data,and under what circumstances; who has authority to override policies (i.e., what are the unusualcircumstances, to be decided on casebycase basis, and who will makethese decisions); and what are the penalties for unauthorized access or disclosure ofprotected information, and whether they will differ if disclosure isinadvertent, undertaken for financial gain, or for other inadmissiblepurposes.26implementation of such policies would likely be spread throughout theoperating organization. for example, the electronic data processing departmentwould be responsible for implementing security procedures, and the personneldepartment would likely carry out employee training in appropriate conduct.some blend of oversight and operational officers would determine authorizeduses of the data and rule on the exceptional case.policies should cover topics such as types and sources of data over time,notice to individuals about the databases accessed by the hdo, and similarmatters. as a broad principle, the committee believes that hdos must draw onthe privacy act of 1974 and its principles of fair information practices. thiscode and other significant issues that hdos should address are discussed below.fair health information practices. the committee strongly advises thathdos include in their policies and procedures fair health information practicessuch as those provided for in the privacy act; it further urges that hdosconsider applicable revisions of the privacy act suggested by the ppsc andothers. any hdo should consider this code as the foundation of its privacyframework and depart from it only after careful consideration and explanation.there will be a direct relationship between, on the one hand, the extent to whichrecord subjects are assured of notice, access, consent, and other rights withrespect to information maintained in an hdo and, on the other hand, thepolitical acceptability of hdos as a concept or a reality in a given location. thecommittee thus sees such fair health information practices as critical elementsin the eventual success of hdos.one procedural element of fair information practices is notice to subjectsof their inclusion in a database. hdos might provide for public notification in avariety of ways. at a minimum, periodic published notices26 if the hdo is not a governmental agency and is not authorized by law to do so, itcannot impose penalties.confidentiality and privacy of personal data197health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in newspapers or public interest broadcast spots could alert individuals, indicatehow more information could be obtained, and serve a public education functionin explaining what hdos do. notice might also be given at the time a healthservice is provided or when enrolling in a health insurance or provider plan; acase in point is when authorization to access the hdo is given.types and sources of data. the committee believes that hdos shouldcollect only personal information that is necessary to achieve their publiclystated purposes and that they should identify, in writing, specific categories ofpersonal information that they will not obtain under any circumstances.information relating to an individual's exercise of first amendment rights mightbe an example.hdos should agree to collect personal information to the fullest extentpossible directly from record subjects and their health care providers. thisstance reflects the approaches of both the privacy act and the ppsc.management of records over the long term. databases cannot be permittedto grow without bounds. given that the committee cannot foresee how thehdos will function, it cannot be more specific than to urge that hdos adoptpolicies and procedures for archiving records. hdo data protection boards willneed policies to respond to an individual's request to purge or seal a record.27confidentiality agreements. hdos should require those who are givenaccess to hdo data to sign confidentiality agreements. these legal agreementswould obligate users to safeguard information obtained from hdos and use theinformation only for the purpose(s) for which it was provided. violations of theagreement would give the hdo (and perhaps record subjects) a breach ofcontract and confidentiality claim against the offending user.the effort to require recipients to protect confidentiality brings onesquarely up against the limitations of contract provisions in this area. withoutpreemptive federal legislation that requires data recipients to protect the datathey obtain in the same way that the hdos are required to protect those data, noprotection can be assured. first, hdos would have to police the uses made ofdata by all recipients, and they would have to police27 this committee has proceeded on the assumption that hdos will not be therepository of the primary medical record. if they were, then they would need to retainrecords for longer periods of time in order to defend against malpractice suits and, insome cases, to comply with state record retention requirements.confidentiality and privacy of personal data198health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.redisclosures. as a practical matter, these steps are impossible. second, nomechanism such as a notarized affidavit would suffice, because such aninstrument is merely a sworn statement and has no special status as a contract.a representation of intended use in a confidentiality agreement should besufficient as a contract. in short, contractual protections are weak, so theyshould be used only as an adjunct to, and not as a substitute for, appropriatenew federal legislation to protect the confidentiality of sensitive patientinformation held by hdos.routine blocking of sensitive data. legislation and organizational policieshave sometimes distinguished among levels of sensitivity of various elements ofhealthrelated data in the belief that it is possible to identify categories of datathat warrant special protection (iom, 1991a; wedi, 1992). for instance, lawsprotect data related to treatment in federal drug abuse treatment facilities thatreceive federal funds.despite precedent for adopting such a stance, this committee has decidedotherwise. it has concluded that a given data element cannot always be reliablydesignated as inherently sensitive; rather, the sensitivity of data depends on thekinds of harm to which individuals are or believe themselves to be vulnerable ifthe information were known to others. such assessments could differdramatically from one person to another, one circumstance to another, one placeto another, and over time as cultural attitudes change. rather thanrecommending special protections for certain categories of data, the committeeprefers that all data accessed by hdos be afforded stringent, and essentiallyequal, protection.blocking divulgence by individuals of sensitive data. if no data areroutinely to be considered "sensitive" and thus more stringently protected thanother types of data, then might it be reasonable to permit individuals to blockdivulgence of particular kinds of information? that is, should persons be able toflag or label certain data as special or sensitive, so that those particular facts,specific to those individuals, would not be divulged to anyone? this could beaccomplished either by: (1) permitting individuals to block information fromdisclosure without flagging that information as being so blocked or (2) byletting them block the information but labeling it as blocked. the committeeconcluded that neither of these options, although perhaps attractive from thepoint of view of autonomy and empowerment, was desirable as a means ofprotecting privacy.the main reason for this position is that, unless care is taken in designingthe system, flagging information as having been blocked might in somecircumstance defeat or even exacerbate the challenge to privacy; such a label orflag would alert anyone reviewing the material that it includes sensitive data.more insidious from the viewpoint of a treating physicianšconfidentiality and privacy of personal data199health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for whom this information may someday be a proxy medical record (as wheninformation is unavailable by some other means)šit would compromise his orher ability to care for the patient. furthermore, if blocked material is not soflagged or labeled, the consequences for treating physicians could be even moredisastrous if that blocked information (e.g., the existence of a serious chroniccondition or use of a particular medication) is directly relevant to clinicaldecisions. although it is true that patients can always omit information in a facetoface encounter, it would seem to defeat one of the purposes of a database toallow it to be intentionally incomplete. thus, the committee does not subscribeto the view that specified material could be blocked (masked), whether labeledthat way or not.overseeing data integrityhdo data protection boards would oversee safeguards to prevent healthinformation from being disclosed to unauthorized recipients. they may alsoneed to be responsible for oversight of the protection of data from unauthorizedalteration and for data accuracy and completeness. (these tasks might,alternatively, be assigned to a "data integrity" unit, board, or committee.)at a minimum, this board would need to ensure that data and programs arechanged only in a specified and authorized manner, and it would be responsiblefor assessing and reporting the accuracy of the hdo's data. data integrity maybe maintained by implementing security measures, by implementing proceduralcontrols, by assigning responsibility, and by establishing audit trails asdescribed earlier in this chapter.security requires proper system design driven by policies that have beendetermined and approved by the governing board, chiefly because software andhardware vendors are likely to implement only the level of security specified bythe hdos. access must be limited to authorized users. mechanisms andprocedures must also be developed and implemented before the networkbecomes operational. these should address how data integrity will bemaintained by preventing alteration or loss of data and what steps will be takenfor authenticating users and maintaining records of communications with users.procedures to ensure availability and recovery after unanticipated disruptions(e.g., power loss, fire) are also crucial, including assurance that the systemsresume operation in a secure state and that data integrity is guaranteed.security in these environments presents special challenges, in part becauseit is only as adequate as that provided for the least secure database on thenetwork. further, remote access to computer systems, the possibility ofaccessing information over public telecommunications systems, and advancesin standardization of data elements and transmission requirements will enhancethe opportunities for data linkage, but they will also magnify the needconfidentiality and privacy of personal data200health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for security protections. data networks will become increasingly attractive tosabotage and access for financial gain and thus require special attention tomanage these risks.the basic intent is to provide assurance that the system, its resources, andinformation are protected against harm and that the information and resourcesare properly accessed and used by authorized users. the board should ensurethat, at a minimum, the following list of security safeguards would be in placeinternally for a defined operational system and environment: a defined set of users; prescribed data and operational programs; defined network connections and interactions with other systems; and protection against defined threats against the system, its resources, andits data.safeguards might include policy guidance in several areas: procedures forgranting access to systems and assigning passwords; administration and trainingof security officers for conduct of audits and disaster preparedness; andoversight of management review of safeguards and inspections.28hdos' resources will probably never be sufficient for all the activities andresponsibilities envisioned for them. longterm success is likely to bepredicated in part on their ability to protect confidentiality of personal healthdata, and the committee believes that they will therefore have to devoteadequate resources to some form of data protection board. it may well be thatmonetary or human resources sufficient to maintain independent data protectionand data integrity units will not be available; those resource allocationdecisions, however, are best left to individual hdos.release of personidentified datapolicies relating to access and disclosureit is clear that the question of who outside the hdo has access to whichdata, under what circumstances, is supremely important; this is directly28 specific concerns include physical risk management for disasters (e.g., fire, flood);memory protection and backup in case of hardware failure; design and use of audit trails,logon procedures, antivirus protection for software; assignment and monitoring ofbadges and other mechanisms to control personnel access; logging and cataloging ofmagnetic tapes and floppy disks; destruction of paper containing sensitive printouts andother documents; and monitoring the system for unauthorized access.confidentiality and privacy of personal data201health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.related to questions of disclosure and is the essence of the privacy issue fromthe patient's point of view. the committee takes up these matters in a series ofrecommendations (presented below) that refer to personidentified or personidentifiable information only. as laid out in chapter 3, this committeerecommends release and disclosure of information that protects patient identitybut provides reliable, valid, timely, and useful descriptive and evaluativeinformation on a full range of health care providers and clinicians. it alsoacknowledges that some hdos will have claims processing and paymentfunctions that will require transmittal of personidentified claims informationbetween the provider and payer.recommendation 4.3 release of personidentifieddatathe committee recognizes that there must be release of patientidentified data related to the processing of health insurance claims. thecommittee recommends, however, that a health database organization not release personidentifiable information in any other circumstances except the following: to other hdos whose missions are compatible with and whoseconfidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as theirown; to individuals for information about themselves; to parents for information about a minor child except when suchrelease is prohibited by law; to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information aboutthe patient; to researchers with approval from their institution's properlyconstituted institutional review board; to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients inlifethreatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care isrendered; and to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (nonlifethreatening) situations, but only with the informed consent of thepatient.otherwise, the committee recommends that health databaseorganizations not authorize access to, or release of, information onindividuals with or without informed consent.consentin the last item, the committee has specifically recommended that consentfor access to the database be a necessary and sufficient condition inconfidentiality and privacy of personal data202health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.only one circumstance: when needed by the treating practitioner. in such asituation it will be important that specific consent techniques be in place. thefollowing requirements, similar to those in the uniform health careinformation act, are based on ppsc recommendations for medical recordinformation consent forms. patient consent must: be in writing or electronically provided in an acceptable manner; be signed or authorized electronically by the individual on a datespecified; be clear about the entities being authorized to disclose information; be specific about the nature of the information to be disclosed; be specific as to the institutions or persons to whom the informationmay be disclosed; be specific about the purposes for which the information may be used,both at the time of the intended disclosure and at any future time; and be specific as to the date when the authorization expires.requirements of signed and written consent, which arose at a time whenall records were kept on paper, are still valid, but they will require modificationto permit consent by computer, such as by keypad attached to a terminal in atreating physician's office.the uniform act expressly states that the signing of an authorization is nota waiver of any privacy rights that the patient may have under other statutes,rules of evidence, or common law. it further requires that providers (or, in thiscase, hdos) retain a copy of each authorization and provides that anauthorization may not permit the release of health record information relating tohealth care that is to be provided more than 90 days in the future. (exceptionsare made for disclosures to thirdparty payers, but they would be irrelevant forhdos.) finally, the uniform act states that a patient may revoke a disclosureauthorization in writing at any time. even if consent and participation rights arein place, privacy protection is not ensured, because strategies used to obtainconsent, in particular, are fallible. as discussed earlier in this chapter, forexample, patients experience substantial pressure to sign authorizations andwaivers in order to facilitate both access to and payment for health care.release of personidentified datain the seven cases listed in recommendation 4.3, the committee believesthat values other than confidentiality justify access to personidentifiableinformation with or without consent, and that there exist adequate safeguardsfor the protection of data in these very limited circumstances. those valuesinclude autonomy for patients in accessing their records, fiduciary responsibilityfor those unable to care for themselves or make healthconfidentiality and privacy of personal data203health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.decisions for themselves, beneficence in providing health care in acutesituations, and the social benefits of epidemiologic and health services research.the rationale for each case is described below.the standing of other hdoshdos will need to acquire information about outofarea care provided topersons in their databases and should be able to do so for those specificcircumstances. for example, one hdo might ask another to provideinformation for state residents of given zip codes who have been hospitalized inother states. the committee concludes that if the requesting hdo hasconfidentiality and security protections that are at least as stringent as those ofthe hdo that would be releasing the information, the data should be released.such hdos might be in adjoining states (e.g., when vermont residents arehospitalized in new hampshire) or within a single state; in other cases theymight include overlapping geographical areas such as one or more states and ametropolitan area. in all such cases, individuals might be expected to be foundin several different hdos, and in their best interest (insofar as needed healthcare is concerned), their data ought to be shared or transferred.the standing of persons, parents, and legal representativesthe second case cited in recommendation 4.3 is selfevidentwhenšinformation about themselves is sought by individuals. the third and fourthcases reflect the need to care for minors and persons who are legallyincompetent to give consent for themselves.one important case concerns the parents of a minor child except whencertain actions are protected by state law. such exceptions include, for instance,family planning services. emancipated minors are those who live away fromhome or are in the armed forces and manage their own financial affairs. matureminors, although still dependent on their parents, are judged to be matureenough to understand the treatment or issue in question and to give informedconsent for their own care. the committee believes that privacy andconfidentiality for emancipated and mature minors should have the sameprotection as that given to adults. parental involvement should be related to theage and development of the minor. current state laws regarding emancipated ormature minors do not consistently protect such information, and uniform federallegislation is desirable.the other important case involves legal representatives of incompetentpatients. such legal or personal representatives include guardians as well asindividuals who are named in advance directives and granted durable power ofattorney.confidentiality and privacy of personal data204health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the special standing of researchthe fifth case in recommendation 4.3šresearchers with approval fromrelevant human subjects committees or institutional review boards (irbs)šis adifferent category. in this case personidentified information is not being soughtby the patient or for care of the patient, but to conduct studies that in somefashion are regarded to be in the public's interest. such uses of the databases areconsidered by this committee to be central and vital to the effectiveimplementation of hdos. for this reason, researchers whose research designand study plans are deemed appropriate and approved by a review panelštypically but not necessarily an irb at the lead researcher's university orinstitutionshould be permitted access to personšidentified or personidentifiable data in the hdo files.an irb is a specially constituted review body established to protect humansubjects, usually those recruited for biomedical and behavioral research, whenthat research is conducted under the auspices of the institution (usdhhs,1993b). review and approval by an irb is required for research that isconducted by investigators supported by a department or agency subject tofederal policy. irbs function under policies set by federal legislation (45 cfr46 for department of health and human services; federal register, 1991a) andby policies of the institution. members of the irb carefully weigh the likelyrisks and benefits of the proposed research and the procedures and protectionsfor the research subjects.when research involves only the review of records, such as those inhdos, the irb is encouraged to determine that an institutional approval or anexpedited review is sufficient. it may do so if it is persuaded: (1) of thesignificance of the research and that use of data in personally identifiable formis necessary, (2) that any risk of harm to subjects is minimal, (3) that adequatesafeguards will be implemented to protect the record or information fromunauthorized disclosure, and (4) that removal and destruction of identifiers willbe carried out when the research is complete. the committee urges institutionsto review applications when requested by serious investigators who many notbe affiliated with an institution. alternatively, such requests might beconsidered as exceptions by the data protection board on a casebycase basis.the committee believes it will usually not be necessary for researchers toobtain consent from record subjects for access to personidentified or identifiable material, but methods should be incorporated for protecting a recordsubject's privacy, including notification by the hdo of the uses that may bemade of the records.contacting potential subjects to obtain further information is a moresensitive matter. it requires careful attention and sensitivity to who would makeinitial contact and what information would be conveyed to potentialconfidentiality and privacy of personal data205health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.subjects or their relatives in the course of the contact. the informationconveyed should include the purpose of the study and the kind of data thatwould be collected, the identity of the persons who will have access to the data,the safeguards that will be used to protect the data from inappropriatedisclosure, and the risks that could result from disclosure. such negotiationsshould also give written assurance that any publications that result will presentthe data only in aggregate form so that individuals are not identifiable. researchsubjects should also be told if they will be contacted in the future (usdhhs,1993b).special patient care considerationsthe sixth case in recommendation 4.3 involves treating licensedpractitioners with a need to know in lifethreatening situations, whom thecommittee believes ought to be able to access data about a patient. this requiresthat the patient be unable to consent at the time care is rendered. a patient in asituation that threatens loss of life or limb sometimes cannot provide coherentbut needed medical information because of mental impairment, stress, orsubstance abuse and is not considered to be a ''reliable historian." in such casesthe committee believes it appropriate to access such data, if available, throughthe hdo. when the patient cannot be identified, access to the hdo might beparticularly helpful if biometric (nonvolitional) identifiers are part of thedatabase.the committee has chosen the term "licensed practitioner" advisedly, abroader concept than "physician." circumstances justifying access might occurin a hospital emergency department, in an intensive care unit, or outside thehospital when a health care professional is present and determines that in his orher judgment obtaining certain health information is crucial. all such casespresume that a primary medical record is not available and that no one (patient,family, or friend) can reliably provide needed health information in a timely way.the seventh casešthe release of data to licensed practitioners whentreating patients in all other (nonlifethreatening) situations, but only with theinformed consent of the patientšis the only case in which the committee hasrecommended the use of informed consent to release of personidentifiableinformation. such a circumstance might occur when a treating physician wishesto access the hod database in addition to the medical records he or she keeps.for example, information on medications prescribed by other practitionersmight be pertinent. in such cases, the treating practitioner should obtain explicitconsent of the patient. as discussed earlier, consent might be givenelectronically and might be time limited.confidentiality and privacy of personal data206health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prohibition on access to personidentifiable datathe committee recommended that hdos not authorize access to or releaseof health information on individuals, with or without the informed consent ofthe individual, in any situation or to any requestor other than those stated above.to ensure that individuals (i.e., patients, parents of minor children, or legalrepresentatives) are not placed in an untenable situation concerning release ofinformation, the committee has opted for a position that does not rely onconsent procedures in most uses or disclosures of data. it prefers to rely onstringent policies against disclosure or release of personal information onindividuals. it should be noted that the consent procedures described in thisrecommendation are for release of information by the hdo. patients willalways be able to consent to release of information by each of their careproviders. nevertheless, in some circumstances the committee envisions thatconsent procedures will be invoked before hdos will release personidentifiable information.the importance of consent as a concept, and adequate procedures forimplementing consent, is accentuated by the multiplicity of uses of hdos.given this multiplicity, it is difficult to argue that, by providing information,record subjects have implied their consent to subsequent uses and redisclosures.it may well turn out that record subjects will have little or no idea of the numberor variety of disclosures that could be made from an hdo.implications of recommendations denying accessthe reason for prohibiting broad disclosure following patient consent isthat hdos may contain a longitudinal record about all health care delivered to apatient and many personal details about the patient. permitting the same ritualof consent to authorize disclosure of this information will result in an increasedabridgment of patient privacy.the prohibition on access to personidentifiable information is very broad.if this limitation is enacted into law or such a policy is promulgated by thehdo, it would have several consequences. for example, employers could notobtain information about "outofhealthplan" use by their employees even forcase management purposes. no access for law enforcement would bepermissible through compulsory process (if prohibited by federal preemptivelegislation). attorneys could not access the database to build a case on behalf ofclients except through compulsory process in accordance with governing law.secret service agents seeking information about a person suspected of being asecurity threat to an elected official could not seek information from the hdo.confidentiality and privacy of personal data207health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prohibiting access could result in some disadvantage or inconvenience tothe recordholder as well as possible harm to society. nevertheless, thecommittee believes that risks to individual privacy and the importance of a clearand unambiguous policy for hdos outweigh such possible disadvantages.in some circumstances, the committee foresees difficult situations thatseem to present a conflict between policies. for example, an individual mightwish to obtain a copy of his information in the database that he could thensupply to an attorney who needs it for a malpractice case or to an employer whodemands it for determining new assignments or for case management purposes.the committee, as noted elsewhere, sees little way to "protect" patientinformation when the individual requests the information from an hdo andthen transfers it as he or she sees fit.employer accessrecommendation 4.4. restricting employer accessthe committee recommends that employers not be permitted torequire receipt of an individual's data from a health database organizationas a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits.special circumstances exist in the health sector of particular concern to thecommittee. one involves the current practice of extensive exchange of medicalinformation between employer and payer, with little control by providers orpatients. this practice has dramatic implications for patients whose informationis accessed by an hdo if the employer and payer are readily able to tap intodata in the network. hdos could make such exchanges of information moreharmful to patients because the information exchanged could cover allencounters the patient has with the health care system (not just those covered byinsurance or by the employer's health plan).the committee acknowledges the danger and inappropriateness of thesepractices. it thus concurs with a recent iom report (iom, 1993e) that urged thataccess to information collected in connection with employmentbased healthbenefits be limited through provisions analogous to those contained in theamericans with disabilities act of 1990 (p.l. 101336).in recommendation 4.4, the committee attempts to prohibit the use ofhdos by employers for employmentrelated decisions about employees. inparticular, it seeks to constrain access to personidentifiable data and preventemployers from coercing employees to provide such data about themselves ortheir families as a condition of employment (e.g., promotion, placement,retention, or termination). this recommendation applies only toconfidentiality and privacy of personal data208health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the hdo and would not, of course, prevent employers or others from acquiringhealth information from other sourcesšexamination, a treating physician, aninsurer, and so forth.employees might wish, however, to provide access to their records to theiremployer's case managers in circumstances relating to needed health care. toaccount for this, the committee advises that there be a clear and enforceabledivision of functions between employment and personnel decisions of anemployer and the employer's health benefits administration and casemanagement. in the absence of state or federal legislation limiting access andthreatening liability, employers should at least promulgate and enforce suchinternal policies.universal person identifiersunique, individual person identifiers are essential to facilitate the efficientoperation and data interchange of hdos. the committee also recognizes thestrong arguments against the use of the ssn as that unique identifier. the greatmajority of the committee agreed on the need for a new unique identifier of thegrounds that the ssn offers too many opportunities to breach confidentiality.the creation of a new number would: (1) permit legislative protection of thatnumber, (2) offer the possibility of greater protection for health informationthan is possible with the ssn, and (3) could occur at the time of implementationof universal health care coverage, which will, if enacted, require some schemefor unique identification.commentin this report the committee has addressed its views and concerns about anew entity in health care delivery and recordkeepingšthe hdo. little is reallyunderstood about how hdos will function, what effects they will really have asopposed to the benefits they are expected to offer, and how they will evolveover the next decade or so. these matters will be worked out in an environmentof change and stress, as the nation sorts out its posture toward health care andhealth reform. this report, therefore, must be seen as laying the groundwork forthe context in which hdos come into being and function. it cannot be read asproviding answers to all hdo issues that may arise, but neither could thecommittee ignore the future completely.in matters of privacy, the unique aspects of the hdo are two: (1) theconcentration of medical information about very large numbers of individuals,coupled with (2) the large number of end users who have authorized access tosome or all of an individual's record. the hdo will inevitablyconfidentiality and privacy of personal data209health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lead to much more varied use of health care information, and therein is aprivacy issue of substantial significance for the future.undoubtedly, both anticipated and innovative uses of hdo databases willbe evolutionary. in an operational sense, this is probably wise and unavoidable;in matters of privacy, it is risky because a small number of seemingly innocuoususes can cumulatively create a substantial privacy risk. some uses that arise willprove repugnant to society and will be impermissible; others will be consideredannoying, but will be tolerated. some could be so discriminatory or otherwisedistasteful that they might well be proscribed by law.the committee notes that the privacy dimension of medical records,regional databases, and hdos is not a matter that can be examined once andthereafter ignored. new dimensions of privacy will arise, as will extensions ofold concerns, new threats to privacy, and new uses of data that prove unwise.from time to time, perhaps every few years in the beginning of the "hdomovement," the privacy issue needs to be revisited and reevaluated. newmechanisms for assuring privacy may need to be invented; new actions bycongress may be needed.security safeguards that protect the confidentiality of data and theautomated systems themselves have similar characteristics. new threats willmaterialize; penetrators will become more skilled; new motivations forsurreptitiously acquiring health data will appear. from time to time, thesafeguards will need upgrading and strengthening.the new privacyprivacy concerns have centered historically on the use of informationabout an individual that governs some decision about her (e.g., a right,entitlement, or privilege) or some action taken for or against her. the benefit orharm as well as the risk of information misuse applies to the same individual.with the growth of an information industry that deals widely withinformation about people, the benefitrisk aspect has changed; the benefit hasturned toward organizations and society, but the risk has remained for theindividual. the traditional recordkeeping characterization of privacy is far toolimited given the intense pace of automation in recordkeeping and the electroniclinkages of systems of all kinds.conflicts have already begun to appear with regard to medical data. themost frequently quoted anecdote is that of the pharmaceutical company thatuses patient drug use as the basis for targeted mailings and advertising. somepeople will tolerate such nonmedical use of health data as an annoyance; otherswill feel strongly about it; some will be harmed because a mailing can reveal amedical condition that was being concealed. employerconfidentiality and privacy of personal data210health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.use of health data also brings two motivations into conflict: that of the employerwho, having paid for the health care in whole or in part, feels it is entitled tohave the data for more efficient management of the organization and that of theindividual who considers that health data are personal and to be shared only ashe sees fit.other conflicts will arise, and the concentration of so many kinds ofinformation in an hdo will be a stimulus to their further creation. looking wellto the future, therefore, a code of fair health information practices is likely tobe necessary. it need not be exactly like the one in the federal privacy act;indeed, it would probably have additional provisions for controlling the use ofhealth data.for example, society has not yet expressed its view on how very sensitivekinds of medical information can be used; genetic data is a case in point. it maybe decided that prohibitions against particular uses of information will beaccepted. if so, then one mechanism for implementation is incorporation of theprohibition, possibly stated in a very general way, into a fair code; another is tocast it into law. there is precedent for such prohibitions; for example, personnelforms cannot ask certain kinds of questions such as those dealing with religionor sexual orientation.for the most part, privacy law in this country has been formulated underthe assumption that holders of information about people may generally do withit what they please, constrained only by corporate ethics and the good taste ofbusiness, societal acceptance (or outrage), occasional attention by thegovernment, pressures of consumer activist groups, and the consequences oflegal actions brought by individuals or consumer groups. this historical viewmay prove inappropriate or even dangerous in regard to health data. there isnow evidence that the american public agrees. westin has found high medicalprivacy concerns among 48 percent of respondents and high privacy concerns ingeneral among 25 percent of survey respondents whom he terms privacyfundamentalists. this group would seek sharp limits on organized datacollection and legal protection for privacy. another 57 percent of the public hasbeen termed privacy pragmatists. he describes this group as examining eachsituation to see whether information is really needed for a legitimate societalfunction and whether safeguards are being followed. the final group he callsprivacy unconcerned. this small group is not apprehensive about the use ofpersonal data (harris/equifax, 1993).our society and country are designed to operate with what the engineerwould call feedback, or what society would call controls, weakly defined andoften ad hoc or de facto. the country, its people, its government, and itsinstitutions have survived thus far under this paradigm. with the comingconcentration of health information about huge numbers of people in theconfidentiality and privacy of personal data211health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hdo, is this an acceptable national posture for information that is potentiallythe most sensitive of all data ever collected about people?it is difficult to attempt answers to a question such as this because the nearfuture of health care is so poorly defined. events under wayšfor example,national health care reformšwill have a major impact on the motivations ofmanagers in charge of health care providers.the country might be safe with the perception and handling of privacy as ithas been done for over two decades, but it might not. there can easily arisedistasteful practices in the way health care information is exploited for otherthan delivery and payment of care. it is simply not known which uses of healthcare information will be acceptable to society, will wisely serve the needs ofsociety and the health care industry, and will strike an acceptable balancebetween the desires of a profitoriented health care industry (which may be evermore prevalent in the future) and the invasionofprivacy consequences forpatients. in short, the privacy dimension of health care information is dynamic,and it must be treated accordingly.summarythe committee has examined sources of concerns about informationalprivacy and the confidentiality of healthrelated information and security, and itdefines each in the context of health information. after a review of privacyrights, confidentiality obligations and disclosure policies, and disclosure as it istreated by law and in practice, the committee concluded that there was muchbasis for concern about confidentiality, but little applicable legal guidance forhdos. it reviewed options related to uniform legislation, consent andparticipation rights, disclosure policies, and governance, and advanced a set ofrecommendations favoring strong federal preemptive legislation andresponsible organizational policies to protect privacy and confidentiality ofpersonspecific information.in the context in which "confidential" is a designation given data to beprotected in terms of security and access, the committee has made a number ofrecommendations that would help hdos achieve these ends. first,confidentiality is addressed by a recommendation for preemptive federallegislation that all health care data be confidential, protected as such, and accessto it controlled.second, the committee recommends the establishment of data protectionand data integrity boards to provide oversight of security and access in hdos.to implement protection of health care data, the committee has addressedsecurity and recommended that automated systems and networks supportinghdos have comprehensive system and network security that reflect the state ofthe art.confidentiality and privacy of personal data212health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.third, to address patient privacy rights, the report has recommended thatpatients can have access and other rights regarding their records, and be dealtwith through a code of fair health information practices. to accommodatepatient expectations of privacy, the committee recommended that patients havecertain legally assured rights to recover damages and force compliance if healthcare information is misused, abused, or improperly released to unauthorizedparties.fourth, to address privacyšthe issue of access to personal informationšthe committee has made recommendations concerning who should and shouldnot have access to personidentified information and under what circumstances.confidentiality and privacy of personal data213health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesacs (american college of surgeons) fact sheet. the national trauma registry of the americancollege of surgeons (draft). chicago: american college of surgeons, 1992.adler, n.e., boyce, t., chesney, m.a., et al. socioeconomic inequalities in health. no easysolution. journal of the american medical association 269:31403145, 1993.ahcpr (agency for health care policy and research). ahcpr purpose and programs. rockville,md.: department of health and human services, public health service, ahcpr, 1990a.ahcpr. program note. medical treatment effectiveness research. rockville, md.: department ofhealth and human services, public health service, ahcpr, 1990b.allen, a. uneasy access: privacy for women in a free society. totowa, n.j.: rowman andallanheld, 1987.ama (american medical association). principles of medical ethics, current opinions of thecouncil on ethical and judicial affairs of the ama including the principles of medicalethics and rules of the council on ethical and judicial affairs. 1992.ampra (american medical peer review association). managed competition and the role ofquality oversight. washington, d.c.: ampra, 1993.anderson, h.j. managing data in a new era. medical claims management 1(4):2936, 1993.andrussier s.e., the freedom of information act in 1990: more freedom for the government; lessinformation for the public. duke law journal 729:753801, 1991.aronow, d.b., and coltin, k.l. information technology applications in quality assurance andquality improvement, part ii. journal on quality improvement 19:465477, 1993.ayanian, j.z. heart disease in black and white [editorial]. new england journal of medicine329:656658, 1993.ayanian, j.z., and epstein, a.m. differences in the use of procedures between women and menhospitalized for coronary heart disease. new england journal of medicine 325:221225,1991.references214health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.baker, n.a. medicare pros and assessment of quality: should physicianspecific data bereleased? utilization review 21(16):46, 1992.ball, m.j., and collen, m.f. aspects of the computerbased patient record. computers in healthcare series. new york: springerverlag, 1992.barnes, b.a., o'brien, e., comstock, et al. report on variation in rates of utilization of surgicalservices in the commonwealth of massachusetts. journal of the american medicalassociation 254:371375, 1985.batalden, p.b., and buchanan, e.d. industrial models of quality improvement. pp. 113155 in:providing quality care: the challenge to clinicians. n. goldfield and d. nash, eds.philadelphia: american college of physicians, 1989.beauchamp, t., and childress, j. principles of biomedical ethics. new york: oxford universitypress, 1989.becker, l.b., han, b.h., meyer, p.m., et al. racial differences in the incidence of cardiac arrestand subsequent survival. new england journal of medicine 329:600606, 1993.belair, r.r. regional health data networks: privacy law and policy. paper prepared for theinstitute of medicine committee on regional health data networks. washington, d.c.:kirkpatrick & lockhart, 1993.benn, s. privacy, freedom, and respect for persons. in nomos xiii: privacy. j. pennock and j.chapman, eds. new york: atherton, 1971.bennett, c.j. regulating privacy: data protection and public policy in europe and the unitedstates. ithaca, n.y.: cornell university press, 1992.berwick, d.m. sounding board. continuous improvement as an ideal in health care. new englandjournal of medicine 320:5356, 1989.berwick, d.m., godfrey, a.b., and roessner, j. curing health care. new strategies for qualityimprovement. san francisco: josseybass, 1990.bi (benton international). chmis. community health management information system. generaloverview. new york: bi, 1991a.bi. chmis. community health management information system. chmis overview. new york: bi,1991b.bi. chmis. community health management information system. generic specification. newyork: bi, 1992.bloustein, e.j. privacy as an aspect of human dignity: a reply to dean prosser. in philosophicaldimensions of privacy: an anthology. new york: cambridge university press, 1984.blum, j.d., gertman, p.m., and rabinow, j. psros and the law. germantown, md.: aspen, 1977.blumenthal, d. total quality management and physicians clinical decisions. journal of theamerican medical association 269:27752778, 1993.borbas, c., stump, m.a., dedeker, k., et al. the minnesota clinical comparison and assessmentproject. quality review bulletin 16:8792, 1990.braveman, p., oliva, g., miller, m.g., et al. adverse outcomes and lack of health insuranceamong newborns in an eightcounty area of california, 19821986. new englandjournal of medicine 321:508513, 1989.brook, r.h. quality of care assessment: a comparison of five methods of peer review. dhewpub. no. hra 742100. rockville, md.: department of health, education, and welfare,national center for health services research and development, 1973.brook, r.h., and appel, f.a. qualityofcare assessment: choosing a method for peer review.new england journal of medicine 288:13231329, 1973.brook, r.h., and lohr, k.n. efficacy, effectiveness, variations and quality: boundarycrossingresearch. medical care 23:710722, 1985.references215health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bulger, r.j. the search for a new ideal. pp. 921 in in search of the modern hippocrates. r.j.bulger, ed. iowa city: university of iowa press, 1987.burnham, d. the rise of the computer state. new york: random house, 1983.burnum, j.f. the misinformation era: the fall of the medical record. annals of internal medicine110:482484, 1989.burstin, h.r., lipsitz, s.r., and brennan, t.a. socioeconomic status and risk for substandardmedical care. journal of the american medical association 268:23832387, 1992.california office of statewide health planning and development. health data catalog. sacramento: state of california, january 1991.chassin, m.r. quality of care. time to act. journal of the american medical association266:34723473, 1991.chassin, m.r. explaining geographic variations. the enthusiasm hypothesis. medical care31:ys37ys44, 1993a.chassin, m.r. the missing ingredient in health reform. quality of care [editorial]. journal of theamerican medical association 270:377378, 1993b.chassin, m.r., brook, r.h., park, r.e., et al. variations in the use of medical and surgicalservices by the medicare population. news england journal of medicine 314:285290,1986a.chassin, m.r., kosecoff, j., park, r.e., et al. does inappropriate use explain geographicvariations in the use of health care services? a study of three procedures. journal ofthe american medical association 258:25332537, 1987.chassin, m.r., park, r.e., fink, a., et al. indications for selected medical and surgical proceduresa literature review and ratings of appropriateness. r3204/2cwf/hf/hcfa/pmt/rwj. santa monica, calif.: the rand corporation, 1986b.chassin, m.r., park, r.e., lohr, k.n., et al. differences among hospitals in medicare patientmortality. health services research 24:131, 1989.chlapowski, f. note: the constitutional protection of informational privacy. boston universitylaw review 71:133145, 1991.chqc (cleveland health quality choice). clevelandarea hospital quality outcomemeasurements and patient satisfaction report. volumes i and ii . cleveland, ohio:chqc, 1993.chueh, h.c., and barnett, g.o. clientserver, distributed database strategies in a healthcarerecord system for a homeless population. proceedings. seventeenth annual symposiumon computer applications in medical care, october 30november 3, 1993. new york:mcgrawhill, 1994.cleaver, c.m. privacy rights and medical records. fordham urban law journal 13:165, 184,n.133, 1985.cooley, t.m. a treatise on the law of torts, or, the wrongs which arise independent of contract. chicago: callaghan & co., 1880.couch, j.b., ed. health care quality management for the 21st century. tampa, fl.: hillsboro, 1991.darby, m. minnesota guideline project hinges on local networks. report on medical guidelinesand outcomes research 3(4):89, 1992.darby, m. new hcfa chief reconsiders hospital mortality reports. report on medicalguidelines and outcomes research, 4(13):12, 5, 1993.densen, p.m., fielding, j.e., getson, j., et al. the collection of data on hospital patientsšthemassachusetts health data consortium approach. new england journal of medicine302:171173, 1980.department of justice. report of the federal advisory committee on false identification: criminaluse of false identification. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of justice, 1976.references216health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.des harnais, s. current uses of large data sets to assess the quality of providers. construction ofriskadjusted indexes of hospital performance. international journal of technologyassessment in health care 6:229238, 1990.donabedian, a. evaluating the quality of medical care. milbank memorial fund quarterly44:166203, 1966.donabedian, a. explorations in quality assessment and monitoring.  volumes 13. ann arbor,mich.: health administration, 1980, 1982, 1985.doyle, e. physicians worried by requests to turn over data bank reports. acp observer 12(9):6,1992.dubois, r.w. inherent limitations of hospital death rates to assess quality. international journalof technology assessment in health care 6:220228, 1990.dubois, r.w., brook, r.h., and rogers, w.h. adjusted hospital death rates: a potential screenfor quality of medical care. american journal of public health 77:11621166, 1987a.dubois, r.w., moxley, j.h., draper, d., et al. interpreting hospital mortality: is it a predictor ofquality? new england journal of medicine 317:16741680, 1987b.dva (department of veterans affairs). va databases resource guide. m.c. beattie, r.m.swindle, and l.a. tomko, eds. palo alto, calif.: hsr&d center for healthcareevaluation, department of veterans affairs medical center, 1992.dva. decentralized hospital computer program. veterans health administration, medicalinformation resources management office, august 1993.dworkin, r. taking rights seriously. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press, 1977.eaton, j.w. cardcarrying americans: privacy, security and the national i.d. card debate.totowa, n.j.: rowman and littlefield, 1986.eddy, d.m. variations in physician practice: the role of uncertainty. health affairs 3(summer):7489, 1984.elison, l.m., and nettiksimmons, d. the right of privacy. montana law review 48:152, 1987.equifax. harrisequifax consumer privacy survey, 1992. atlanta: equifax, 1992.faden, r. maintaining the balance between the privacy of private sector health records and theneed for information: an overview. address given at a conference, ''health records:social needs and personal privacy," sponsored by the task force on privacy, thedepartment of health and human services, washington, d.c., february 1112, 1993.federal register. federal policy for the protection of human subjects: notices and rules.56:2800228032, june 18, 1991. (for fda policy, see federal register 56:2802528029,june 18, 1991a.)federal register. health care financing administration. privacy act of 1974; system of records(proposing the uniform clinical data set). 56:6707867080, december 27, 1991b.fleming, c., wasson, j.h., albertsen, p.c., et al. a decision analysis of alternative treatmentstrategies for clinically localized prostate cancer. journal of the american medicalassociation 269:26502658, 1993.fried, c. privacy. yale law journal 77:475493, 1968.gable, c.b. a compendium of public health data sources. american journal of epidemiology131:381394, 1990.gallagher, s.s., finison, k., guyer, b., and goodenough, s. the incidence of injuries among87,000 massachusetts children and adolescents: results of the 198081 statewidechildhood injury prevention program surveillance system. american journal of publichealth 74:13401346, 1984.gao (general accounting office), information management and technology divison (imtec).references217health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical adp systems: automated medical records hold promise to improve patientcare. gao/imtec915. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office, 1991.gao, imtec. automated medical records. leadership needed to expedite standardsdevelopment. gao/imtec9317. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office,1993a.gao, imtec. health care information systems. national practitioner data bank continues toexperience problems. gao/imtec931. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice, 1993b.gardner, e. ub82 forms offer wealth of information, misinformation. modern healthcare 20(38):1829, 1990.gates, m. rochester pioneers new frontier with cost and quality reform model. report onmedical guidelines and outcomes research 4(18):1112, 1993a.gates, m. patient outcomes take on longterm implications at henry ford. report on medicalguidelines and outcomes research 4(20):67, 1993b.gavison, r. privacy and the limits of law. yale law journal 89:421471, 1980.gellman, r.m. prescribing privacy: the uncertain role of the physician in the protection of patientprivacy. north carolina law review 62:255294, 1984.gerety, t. redefining privacy. harvard civil rightscivil liberties law review 12:233296, 1977.goldfield, n., and nash, d.b., eds. providing quality care: the challenge to clinicians.philadelphia: american college of physicians, 1989.gosfield, a.g. psros: the law and the health consumer. cambridge, mass.: ballinger, 1975.gostin, l. consequences to the individual of data collection and information use and individualrights and expectations and societal needs. panel presentation at a conference, "healthrecords: social needs and personal privacy," sponsored by the task force on privacy, thedepartment of health and human services, washington, d.c., february 11, 12, 1993.gostin, l.o., brezina, j.t., powers, m., et al. privacy and security of personal information in anew health care system. journal of the american medical association 270:24822493,1993.greenfield, s. adjusting for severity: variations in outcomes. paper presented at a conference,"measuring, managing, and improving quality in the esrd treatment setting,"sponsored by the institute of medicine, washington, d.c., september 2122, 1993.greenfield, s., aronow, h.u., elashoff, r.m., and watanabe, d. flaws in mortality data. thehazards of ignoring comorbid disease. journal of the american medical association260:22532255, 1988.hand, r., sener, s., imperato, j., et al. hospital variables associated with quality of care forbreast cancer patients. journal of the american medical association 266:34293432, 1991.hannan, e.l., bernard, h.r., o'donnell, j.f., et al. a methodology for targeting hospital cases forquality of care record reviews. american journal of public health 79:430 436, 1989a.hannan, e.l., kilburn, h., bernard, h., et al. coronary artery bypass surgery: the relationshipbetween inhospital mortality rate and surgical volume after controlling for clinicalrisk factors. medical care 29:10941107, 1991a.hannan, e.l., kilburn, h., lindsey, m.l., et al. clinical versus administrative data bases forcabg surgery. does it matter? medical care 30:892907, 1992.hannan, e.l., kilburn, h., o'donnell, j.f., et al. adult open heart surgery in new york state: ananalysis of risk factors and hospital mortality rates . journal of the american medicalassociation 264:27682774, 1990.references218health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hannan, e.l., kilburn, h., o'donnell, j.f., et al. interracial access to selected cardiac proceduresfor patients hospitalized with coronary artery disease in new york state. medical care29:430441, 1991b.hannan, e.l., o'donnell, j.f., kilburn, h., et al. investigation of the relationship between volumeand mortality for surgical procedures performed in new york state hospitals. journal ofthe american medical association 262:503510, 1989b.harris/equifax. health care information privacy. a survey of the public and leaders. conductedfor equifax. new york: louis harris and associates, 1993.hcfa (health care financing administration), u.s. department of health and human services.medicare hospital mortality information, 1986. washington, d.c.: u.s. governmentprinting office, 1987.hcfa. medicare hospital mortality information, 1990. washington, d.c.: u.s. governmentprinting office, 1991.health affairs. special issue: variations in medical practice. 3(2):6148, 1984.health pages. green bay/madison/milwaukee edition. l(1):168, 1993.health pages. st. louis edition. 1(1):164, 1994.hendricks, e. hacker "manual" tells wannabes how to penetrate trw database. privacy times 12(15):12, 1992.herdrich, m.a. california v. greenwood: the trashing of privacy. the american university lawreview 38:993, 9991002, 1989.hibbert, c. what to do when they ask for your social security number. available at:hibbert@xanadu.com, 1992.hospital inpatient care. washington consumers' checkbook 8(3):2236, 1992.hsa (health security act). washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office, 1993.iezzoni, l.i. measuring the severity of illness and casemix. pp. 70105 in providing quality care:the challenge to clinicians. n. goldfield and d.b. nash, eds. philadelphia: americancollege of physicians, 1989.iezzoni, l.i., foley, s.m., saley, j., et al. comorbidities, complications, and coding bias. does thenumber of diagnosis codes matter in predicting inhospital mortality? journal of theamerican medical association 267:21972203, 1992.inquiry. special issue on quality of care. 25:423468, 1988.iom (institute of medicine). access to medical review data. washington, d.c.: national academypress, 1981.iom. medicare: a strategy for quality assurance. volumes i and ii k.n. lohr, ed. washington,d.c.: national academy press, 1990.iom. the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care. r.s. dickand e.b. steen, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1991a.iom. kidney failure and the federal government. r.a. rettig and n.g. levinsky, eds.washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1991b.iom. guidelines for clinical practice: from development to use. m.j. field and k.n. lohr, eds.washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1992a.iom. setting priorities for health technology assessment. a model process. m.s. donaldson andh.c. sox, jr., eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1992b.iom. access to health care in america. m.a. millman, ed. washington, d.c.: national academypress, 1993a.iom. assessing genetic risks: implications for health and social policy. l.b. andrews, j.e.fullarton, k.e. hanna, n.a. holtzman, and a.g. motulsky, eds. washington, d.c.:national academy press, 1993b. prepublication copy.iom. assessing health care reform. m.j. field, k.n. lohr, and k.d. yordy, eds. washington,d.c.: national academy press, 1993c.references219health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iom. emergency medical services for children. j.s. durch and k.n. lohr, eds. washington, d.c.:national academy press, 1993d.iom. employment and health benefits: a connection at risk. m.j. field and h.t. shapiro, eds.washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1993e.iom/cbasse (commission on behavioral and social sciences and education). toward a nationalhealth care survey. a data system for the 21st century. g.s. wunderlich, ed.washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1992.isikoff, m. theft of u.s. data seen as growing threat to privacy. washington post, december 28,1991, p. al.kahn, k.l., draper, d., keeler, e.b., et al. the effects of the drgbased prospective paymentsystem on quality of care for hospitalized medicare patientsšfinal report. r3931hcfa. santa monica, calif.: the rand corporation, 1992.kaiser permanente. 1993 quality report card. oakland, calif.: kaiser permanente, 1993a.kaiser permanente. 1993 quality report card supplement. performance measure methodologies. oakland, calif.: kaiser permanente, 1993b.kane, r.l., and lurie, n. appropriate effectiveness: a tale of carts and horses. quality reviewbulletin 18:322326, 1992.keeler, e.b., kahn, k.l., draper, d., et al. changes in sickness at admission following theintroduction of pps. pp. 2443 in the effects of the drgbased prospective paymentsystem on quality of care for hospitalized medicare patients. final report. k.l. kahn, etal., eds. r3931hcfa. santa monica, calif.: the rand corporation, 1992a.keeler, e.b., rubenstein, l.v., kahn, k.l., et al. hospital characteristics and quality of care.journal of the american medical association 268:17091714, 1992b.keller, j. the vermont program for quality health care (mimeo handout). burlington, vt.,national health policy forum, june 7, 1993.krakauer, h., and jacoby, i. predicting the course of disease. inquiry 30:115127, 1993.kratka, j. for their eyes only. the insurance industry and consumer privacy. boston:massachusetts public interest research group, 1990.lasovich, d., white, e., thomas, d.b., et al. underutilization of breastconserving surgery andradiation therapy among women with stage i or ii breast cancer. journal of theamerican medical association 266:34333438, 1991.leape, l.l., hilborne, l.h., kahan, j.p., et al. coronary artery bypass graft. a literature reviewand ratings of appropriateness and necessity. rand/jra02. santa monica, calif.: therand corporation, 1991.lohr, k.n. commentary: professional peer review in a "competitive" medical market. casewestern reserve law review. the legal implications of health care cost containment: asymposium 36(4):11751189, 198586.lohr, k.n., grossman, j.h., and cassel, c.k. from the iom. issues in measuring and assuringquality of care for health care reform. journal of the american medical association270:1911, 1993.longo, d.r., bohr, d.a., miller, l., and miller, j. inventory of external data demands placed onhospitals. a report of the quality measurement and management project. chicago: thehospital research and educational trust, 1990.luft, h.s., and romano, p.s. chance, continuity, and change in hospital mortality rates:coronary artery bypass graft patients in california hospitals, 1983 to 1989. journal ofthe american medical association 270:331337, 1993.luyao, g.l., mclerran, d., wasson, j., et al. an assessment of radical prostatectomy. timetrends, geographic variation, and outcomes. journal of the american medicalassociation 269:26332636, 1993.mccloskey, h.j. privacy and the right to privacy. philosophy 55:1738, 1980.mcneil, b.j., pederson, s.h., and gatsonis, c. current issues in profiling quality of care. inquiry29:298307, 1992.references220health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mcpherson, k., strong, p.m., epstein, a., et al. regional variations in the use of common surgicalprocedures: within and between england and wales, canada and the united states ofamerica. social science and medicine 15a:273288, 1981.marquis, m.s. consumers' knowledge about their health insurance coverage. r2753hhs. santamonica, calif.: the rand corporation, 1981.marquis, m.s., kanouse, d.e., and brodsley, l. informing consumers about health care costs. areview and research agenda. r3262hcfa. santa monica, calif.: the randcorporation, 1985.martin, j. managing the database environment. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prentice hall, 1983.mayo foundation. index to medical records access policy. internal document, may 1991.merrick, n.l., brook, r.h., fink, a., et al. use of carotid endarterectomy in five californiaveterans administration medical centers. journal of the american medical association258:25312535, 1986.mib (medical information bureau). mib fact sheet. boston: mib, 1989.miller, m. patients' records are treasure trove for budding industry. wall street journal, february 27, 1992.moses, l.e. framework for considering the role of data bases in technology assessment.international journal of technology assessment in health care 6:183193, 1990.nahdo (national association of health data organizations). nahdo resource manual. fallschurch, va.: nahdo, 1988.nahdo. the state health data resource manual: hospital discharge data systems. fallschurch, va.: nahdo, 1993.nash, d.b. is the quality cart before the horse? [editorial]. journal of the american medicalassociation 268:917918, 1992.national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws. uniform laws annual 9(1):475. st.paul, minn.: west publishing co., 1988.nchs (national center for health statistics). national health interview survey, 1991. public usedata tape. ntis order no. pb93500700. springfield, va.: national technicalinformation service, 1993.newhouse, j.p., and insurance experiment group. free for all? lessons from the rand healthinsurance experiment. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press, 1993.nrc (national research council). private lives and public policies: confidentiality andaccessibility of government statistics. g.t. duncan , t.b. jabine, and v.a. de wolf, eds.washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1993.ota (office of technology assessment). federal government information technology: electronicrecord systems and individual privacy. otacit296. washington, d.c.: u.s.government printing office, 1986, p. 15.ota. the quality of medical care: information for consumers. otah386. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office, 1988.ota. protecting privacy in computerized medical information. otatct576. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office, 1993.palmer, r.h. ambulatory health care evaluation: principles and practice. chicago: americanhospital association, 1983.palmer, r.h., and adams, m.m.e. (commissioned paper). quality improvement/quality assurancetaxonomy: a framework. rockville, md.: agency for health care policy and research,1993.parent, w.a. privacy, morality, and the law. philosophy and public affairs 12:269288, 1983.patrick, d.c., madden, c.w., diehr, p., et al. health status and use of services among familieswith and without health insurance. medical care 30:941949, 1992.paul, j.e., weis, k.a., and epstein, r.a. data bases for variations research. medical care 31:s96s102, 1993.references221health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.phcccc (pennsylvania health care cost containment council). hospital effectiveness report: amodel report. he 5volume i. harrisburg: phcccc, 1989.phcccc. a consumer's guide to coronary artery bypass graft surgery, harrisburg: phcccc,1992.piller, c. privacy in peril. how computers are making private life a thing of the past. macworld10(7):124130, 1993.pipko, s., and pucciarelli, a.j. the soviet internal passport system. international lawyer19:915919, 1985.powers, m. legal protections of confidential medical information and the need forantidiscrimination laws. pp. 221255 in aids, women and the next generation. r.faden, g. geller, and m. powers, eds. new york: oxford university press, 1991.powers, m. privacy and the control of genetic information. in the genetic frontier: ethics, law,and policy . m.s. frankel and a.h. teich, eds. washington, d.c.: american associationfor the advancement of science press, 1993.pprc (physician payment review commission). annual report to congress. washington, d.c.:pprc, 1992.pprc. annual report to congress. washington, d.c.: pprc, 1993.ppsc (privacy protection study commission). personal privacy in an information society. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office, 1977a.ppsc. appendix 4. the privacy act of 1974: an assessment. washington, d.c.: u.s. governmentprinting office, 1977b.rachels, j. why privacy is important. philosophy and public affairs 4:323333, 1975.raskin, i.e., and maklan, c.w. medical treatment effectiveness research. a view from inside theagency for health care policy and research. evaluation & the health professions june:161186, 1991.raz, j. the morality of freedom. oxford, england: oxford university press, 1986.reiman, j.h. privacy, intimacy, and personhood. philosophy and public affairs 6:2644, 1976.roos, l.l., cageorge, s.m., austen, e., et al. using computers to identify complications aftersurgery. american journal of public health 75:12891295, 1985.roos, l.l., roos, n.p., cageorge, s.m., et al. how good are the data? reliability of one healthcare data bank. medical care 20:266276, 1982.roos, l.l., sharp, s.m., cohen, m.m., and wajda, a. risk adjustment in claimsbased research:the search for efficient approaches. journal of clinical epidemiology 42:11931206,1989.roos, n.p. hysterectomy: variations in rates across small areas and across physicians' practices.american journal of public health 74:327335, 1984.roos, n.p., black, c., frolich, n., et al. assessing the relationship between health care use andthe health of a population: seeking levers for policy makers. daedalus 1993, in press.roos, n.p., and roos, l.l. high and low surgical rates: risk factors for area residents.american journal of public health 71:591600, 1981.roper, w.l., winkenwerder, w., hackbarth, g.m., et al. effectiveness in health care: an initiativeto evaluate and improve medical practice. new england journal of medicine319:11971202, 1988.rothfeder, j. privacy for sale. new york: simon and schuster, 1992.schoeman, f.d. privacy: philosophical dimensions of the literature. in philosophical dimensionsof privacy: an anthology. f.d. schoeman, ed. new york: cambridge university press,1984.shattuck, j. in the shadow of 1984: national identification systems, computermatching andprivacy in the united states. hastings law journal 35:9911005, 1984.references222health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shils, e. privacy: its constitution and vicissitudes. law and contemporary problems 31:281, 282,1966.smith, s. nhis electronic data products. public health reports 108:409, 1993.stern, r.s. record linkage. a powerful tool for epidemiological analysis [editorial]. archives ofdermatology 122:13831384, 1986.steven, c. good medicine. washingtonian 29:90114, 1993.tanouye, e. merck will exploit medco's database. wall street journal, august 4, 1993, p. b1.thomson, j.j. the right to privacy. philosophy and public affairs 4:295314, 1975.tillmann, i.a., and sullivan, s. quality and the future of american health care. in building blocksfor change: how health care reform affects our future. j.a. meyer and s. silowcarroll, eds. washington, d.c.: the economic and social research institute, 1993.tribe, l. american constitutional law. mineola, minn.: foundation, 1978.trubow, g.b. (ed.) privacy law and practice. new york: bender, 1991.turkington, r.c. legal protection for the confidentiality of health care information inpennsylvania: patient and client access; testimonial privileges; damage recovery forunauthorized extralegal disclosure. villanova law review 32:259, 269, 1987.usdhew (u.s. department of health, education and welfare). secretary's advisory committeereport on automated personal data systems. records, computers and the rights ofcitizens. dhew pub. no. (os)7397. 1973.usdhhs. report to congress: the feasibility of linking researchrelated data bases to federaland nonfederal medical administrative data bases. ahcpr pub. no. 910003.rockville, md.: agency for health care policy and research, 1991.usdhhs. literature review. automated data sources for ambulatory care effectivenessresearch. m.l. grady and h.a. schwartz, eds. ahcpr pub. no. 930042. rockville,md.: agency for health care policy and research, 1993a.usdhhs. protecting human research subjects. institutional review board guidebook. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office, 1993b.u.s. news & world report. 1991 survey on america's best hospitals. august 5, 1991.u.s. news & world report 1992 annual guide on america's best hospitals. june 15, 1992.u.s. news & world report 1993 annual guide on america's best hospitals. 115(2):6894, 1993.u.s. senate, subcommittee on courts, senate committee on the judiciary. federal identificationsystems: hearings on s. 1706 before the subcommittee on courts, senate committee onthe judiciary. 98th congress, 1st session 5, july 19, october 5, 21, 1983, p. 169.vanamringe, m., and shannon, t.e. commentary: awareness, assimilation, and adoption: thechallenge of effective dissemination and the first ahcprsponsored guidelines.quality review bulletin 18:397404, 1992.waller, a.a. appendix b. legal aspects of computerbased patient records and record systems.in the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care. r.s.dick and e.b. steen, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1991.waller, a.a. confidentiality issues in electronic data interchange. conference on electronic datainterchange: if you are a health care provider, it applies to you! bloomington, minn.,november 20, 1992.ware, w. the new faces of privacy. the information society 9:195211, 1993.warren, s.d., and brandeis, l.d. the right to privacy. harvard law review 4:193220, 1890. (seefurther, katz v. united states 389 u.s. 347; 1967.)webster's new world dictionary of the american language. 2nd ed. d.b. guralnik, ed. new york:simon and schuster, 1980.wedi (workgroup for electronic data interchange). report to secretary of u.s. department ofhealth and human services, 1992.references223health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.weissman, j.s., gatsonis, c., and epstein, a.m. rates of avoidable hospitalization by insurancestates in massachusetts and maryland. journal of the american medical association268:24262427, 1992.welch, w.p., miller, m.e., welch, h.g., et al. geographic variation in expenditures for physicians'services in the united states. new england journal of medicine 328:621627, 1993.wennberg, j.e. dealing with medical practice variations: a proposal for action. health affairs3:632, 1984.wennberg, j.e. small area analysis and the medical care outcome problem. pp. 17206 inahcpr conference proceedings: research methodology: strengthening causalinterpretations of nonexperimental data. l. sechrest, e. perrin, and j. bunker, eds.dhhs pub. no. (phs) 903454, rockville, md.: department of health and humanservices, 1990.wennberg, j.e., and gittelsohn, a. variations in medical care among small areas. scientificamerican 246:120134, 1982.wennberg, j.e., barnes, b.a., and zubkoff, m. professional uncertainty and the problem ofsupplierinduced demand. social science and medicine 16:811824, 1982.wennberg, j.e., mcpherson, k., and caper, p. will payment based on diagnosisrelated groupscontrol hospital costs? new england journal of medicine 311:295300, 1984.wenneker, m.b., and epstein, a.m. racial inequalities in the use of procedures for patients withischemic heart disease in massachusetts. journal of the american medical association261:253257, 1989.wenneker, m.b., weissman, j.s., and epstein, a.m. the association of payer with utilization ofcardiac procedures in massachusetts. journal of the american medical association264:12551260, 1990.westin, a.f. privacy and freedom. new york: atheneum, 1967, p. 39.westin, a.f. databanks in a free society. computers, recordkeeping and privacy. (report of theproject on computer databanks of the computer science and engineering board, nationalacademy of sciences.) new york: quadrangle, 1972.westin, a.f. computers, health records, and citizen rights. washington, d.c.: u.s. nationalbureau of standards, 1976.whittle, j., conigliaro, j., good, c.b., and lofgren, r.p. racial differences in the use of invasivecardiovascular procedures in the department of veterans affairs medical system. newengland journal of medicine 329:621627, 1993.wilensky, g., and jencks, s. the health care quality improvement initiative: a new approach toquality assurance in medicare. journal of the american medical association268:900903, 1992.william m. mercer, inc. chmis information repository. hartford foundation grant. initialanalytic framework deliverable for task 7. seattle: william m. mercer, inc., 1993.williamson, j.w. assessing and improving outcomes in health care: the theory and practice ofhealth accounting. cambridge, mass.: ballinger, 1978.winslow, c.m., kosecoff, j.b., chassin, m., et al. the appropriateness of performing coronaryartery bypass surgery. journal of the american medical association 260:505509, 1988a.winslow, c.m., solomon, d.h., chassin, m.r., et al. the appropriateness of carotidendarterectomy. new england journal of medicine 318:721727, 1988b.work group on computerization of patient records. toward a national health informationinfrastructure. report of the workgroup to the secretary of the u.s. department of healthand human services, april 1993.zinman, d. heart surgeons rated. state reveals patientmortality records. newsday, december18, 1991, p. 3.references224health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes225health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes226health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.afactfinding for the committee onregional health data networksthis appendix briefly documents the organizations and individuals whocontributed to the committee's efforts at data collection and factfinding duringthe first parts of the project.listed below are participants and guests atcommittee meetings, including experts who gave special briefings to thecommittee. following that is material on the committee's site visits.participants and guests at committee meetingsexpert presentations and briefingsjohn a. baker, senior vice president, equifax, inc.robert belair, j.d., formerly kirkpatrick and lockhart; currentlymullenholz and brimsekjohn p. fanning, ll.b., ohpe/oash/department of health and humanservicesmarilyn j. field, ph.d., senior program officer, institute of medicinejane fullarton, senior program officer, institute of medicinewilliam goss, health care management program, general electricedward j. hinman, m.d., lincoln nationalh. jefferson smith, ph.d., georgetown university school of businessadministrationrobin stults, r.r.a., university of maryland medical systembert tobin, benton internationalfactfinding for the committee on regional health data networks227health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.invited guests and observerslois alexander, special assistant to the commissioner, social securityadministrationleslie alexandre, government affairs representative for health policy,office of government affairs, electronic data systemsmarjory blumenthal, ph.d., staff director, computer science andtelecommunications board, committee on physical sciences, mathematics,and applications, national research councilmoses boyd, committee on commerce, science, and transportation, u.s.senatepaula bruening, j.d., office of technology assessmentmark epstein, executive director, national association of health dataorganizationsj. michael fitzmaurice, ph.d., director, office of science and datadevelopment, agency for health care policy and researchkathleen frawley, r.r.a., j.d., director, washington, d.c., office, americanhealth information management associationrobert gellman, j.d., chief counsel, subcommittee on governmentinformation, justice, and agriculture, committee on government operations,u.s. house of representativesmichael hash, subcommittee on health and the environment, committee onenergy and commerce, u.s. house of representativesstephen jencks, m.d., health standards and quality bureau, health carefinancing administrationjudith miller jones, director, national health policy forum, georgewashington universitycharles n. kahn iii, j.d., committee on ways and means, u.s. house ofrepresentativesrene c. kosloff, ph.d., vice president, kunitz and associates, inc.selma kunitz, ph.d., president, kunitz and associates, inc.donald a. b. lindberg, m.d., director, national library of medicine,national institutes of healthrichard s. sharpe, program officer, the john a. hartford foundationnicole simmons, office of legislation and policy, health care financingadministrationjoan turekbrezina, ph.d., director of technical and computer support,office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation, department ofhealth and human servicesinstitute of medicine staffenriqueta bond, ph.d., executive officerjane durch, staff officerfactfinding for the committee on regional health data networks228health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kenneth i. shine, m.d., presidentkarl d. yordy, m.p.a., director, division of health care servicessite visitsthis section gives the location and dates of the committee's site visits andlists the organizations or groups of individuals with whom the committee met.memphis, tennessee: july 2628, 1992baptist memorial hospitalblue cross and blue shield of memphisinternational paper companymemphis and shelby county medical societymemphis business group on health, confidentiality task forcememphis business group on health, inc.methodist health systemsregional medical center (county medical center)sharpe manufacturing company, personnel departmentcleveland, ohio: august 24, 1992academy of medicineblue cross/blue shield of clevelandboard of county commissionerscenterior energythe cleveland clinic foundationcleveland health quality choicecouncil on small enterprisesgreater cleveland hospital associationhealth action councillubrizol corporationuniversity hospitals of clevelanddes moines, iowa: august 2628, 1992blue cross and blue shield of iowahealth policy corporation of iowaiowa bankers insurance serviceiowa hospital associationiowa medical societyiowa methodist medical centeriowa state education associationfactfinding for the committee on regional health data networks229health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pioneer hibred, human resources departmentprincipal financial grouppracticing physiciansseattle, washington: september 911, 1992the exchange systemfoundation for health care quality (fhcq)health care purchasers associationgroup health of puget soundoverlake hospital medical center, employeesstate of washington, department of healthstate of washington, office of the governoruniversity of washington, facultywashington state health care authoritywashington state hospital association and task force on administrativereformwashington state medical associationweyerhaeuser company, health management servicesrochester and albany, new york: september 2123, 1992albanyalbany medical societyhospital association of new york statenew york state department of health (nydoh)rochesterconsumer representativesintegrated mental health servicesphysicians networkrochester health information groupbasic findings of site visitsduring the site visits, iom committee members and staff were able tolearn in some detail about current and planned initiatives under the auspices ofnumerous groups as well as about a great variety of issues, concerns, andsuggestions from these groups and a broad crosssection of people in urban andrural areas.the site visits included three sites where chmiss were being develfactfinding for the committee on regional health data networks230health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.oped (both statemandate and business coalition models in washington state,des moines, and memphis) and three where they are not (rochester, albany,and cleveland). questions raised frequently by hosts were as follows:1. who would run and administer such a database, and who wouldown the data?2. what would this effort cost and who would finance it, in terms ofboth fixed costs (for example, for computer equipment) andvariable costs (over the short and long run, such as staff/personnelcosts for data entry)?3. what is in it for me or what will this do to me (particularly fromphysicians in private practice and from employers with nationalinterests whose health policies were set at a corporate levelsomewhere else)?4. who would have access to patientidentified and providerspecificdata? interestingly, not everyone was worried about privacy ofpatient data, believing either that such information could beprotected (so the question was moot) or that not much harm wouldcome from judicious release to, for example, employers).consumers understood the potential value of such databases, butthey were also worried about access to patientlevel data, especiallyconcerning insurability.5. could analyses about quality of care realistically be done (incontrast to analyses of cost or charges data or analyses ofutilization patterns)?the visiting committee members, in turn, tried to learn as much as possibleabout waysšin practice or in theoryšgroups in these various areas meant torealize the benefits of such databases, to minimize or prevent the exacerbationof current risks to the confidentiality of patientlevel data, to improve databasesecurity, and to promote appropriate data collection, valid analyses, and usefuldissemination of data.factfinding for the committee on regional health data networks231health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bcommittee on regional healthdatanetworks biographical sketchesrobert h. brook, m.d., sc.d., f.a.c.p., is a corporate fellow atrand and the director of rand's health sciences program. he led thehealth and quality group on the $80 million. rand health insuranceexperiment, and he was coprincipal investigator on the health servicesutilization study, which developed a method to assess appropriateness of careand applied it to carotid endarterectomy, coronary angiography, and endoscopy.he was the coprincipal investigator on a joint activity of 12 academic medicalcenters, the ama, and rand, the purpose of which was to developappropriateness criteria and parameters for the use of procedures. at ucla, dr.brook is the director of the robert wood johnson clinical scholars program.he is also professor of medicine and health services, ucla center for healthsciences. his special research interests include quality assessment andassurance, the development and use of health status measurements in healthpolicy, the efficiency and effectiveness of medical care, and the variation in useof selected services by geographic area. he is a member of the institute ofmedicine, the american society for clinical investigation, and the americanassociation of physicians. he was awarded the baxter foundation prize forexcellence in health services research, the rosenthal foundation award of theamerican college of physicians for contributions to improving the health of thenation, and the distinguished health services research award of theassociation of health services research. dr. brook is the author of over 250articles on quality of care.committee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches232health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.roger j. bulger, m.d., is currently president and chief executiveofficer of the association of academic health centers. before his appointmentin 1988, dr. bulger served for 10 years as president of the university of texashealth science center at houston, professor of medicine at the university oftexas health medical school at houston, and professor of public health at theuniversity of texas school of public health at houston. earlier he served asthe second dean of the university of massachusetts school of medicine andchancellor of the university of massachusetts medical center campus atworcester. he was the first executive officer of the institute of medicine,serving that organization during its first formative years. dr. bulger has servedon numerous government and private advisory committees on issues related tohealth policy and higher education, including the board of directors ofgeorgetown university, the board of the association for health servicesresearch (of which association he was president in 19921993), the advisorycommittee on scientific integrity of the assistant secretary of health, and thespecial medical advisory group of the department of veterans affairs. dr.bulger also chaired the institute of medicine's committee to study medicalprofessional liability and the delivery of obstetrical care. he has writtennumerous articles in the fields of infectious diseases, internal medicine, andhuman values and public policy related to health and medicine. the two mostrecent of his books on health policy are in search of the modern hippocratesand technology, bureaucracy and healing in america: a post modernparadigm. dr. bulger is a member of the institute of medicine, a fellow in theamerican college of physicians, a fellow of the infectious diseases society ofamerica, a member of the society of medical administrators, and a fellow inthe royal society of medicine, london.elliott s. fisher, m.d., m.p.h., is associate professor of medicineand community and family medicine in the center for the evaluative clinicalsciences (cecs) at dartmouth medical school and the department of veteransaffairs medical center in white river junction, vermont. he directs the vaoutcomes group, which conducts policyrelated research for the department ofveterans affairs and is codirector of the va general medicine facultydevelopment fellowship. he is also codirector of the health policy curriculumin dartmouth's newly established postgraduate program in the evaluativeclinical sciences. he received his undergraduate and md degrees fromharvard and his masters of public health from the university of washington,where he was a robert wood johnson clinical scholar. his primary researchinterests are in the measurement of health system performance, the developmentof methods for resource allocation, and the use of administrative databases forhealth care research.spencer foreman, m.d., is president of montefiore medical centerin the bronx, new york. as chairman of the association of americancommittee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches233health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical colleges (aamc), dr. foreman is committed to broadening the socialcommitment of academic medical centers, enabling them to use theirconsiderable resources to help alleviate problems of poverty, isolation, andcommunity disintegration. dr. foreman was chairman of the administrativeboard of the aamc council of teaching hospitals and served on its taskforce on graduate medical education. he served on the task force ongraduate medical education of the hospital association of new york state; onthe accreditation council on graduate medical education, the accrediting bodyfor residency training in the united states; and on the liaison committee onmedical education, which accredits united states and canadian medicalschools. he is board chairman of the league of voluntary hospitals, chairmanof the board of governors of the greater new york hospital association, andis a member of the board of directors of the hospital association of new yorkstate. before assuming leadership of montefiore in 1986, dr. foreman waspresident of sinai hospital in baltimore. he received his doctor of medicinedegree in 1961 from the university of pennsylvania. dr. foreman's medicaltraining included internship at the henry ford hospital in detroit, residency ininternal medicine at the u.s. public health service hospital in new orleans,and a fellowship in pulmonary disease at tulane university. he is certified bythe american board of internal medicine and subspecialty board of pulmonarydiseases, and is a fellow of the american college of physicians and the newyork academy of medicine. he is professor of medicine and professor ofepidemiology and social medicine at the albert einstein college of medicine.for 11 years dr. foreman served as a commissioned officer in the united statespublic health service, achieving a rank equivalent to the united states navyrank of captain.janlori goldman is director of the project on privacy andtechnology of the american civil liberties union. her work on the projectinvolves researching the ways technology impacts on access to information andindividual privacy. she has testified before congress and appeared on panels onnumerous privacy issues, including the federal privacy act,telecommunications, video and library lists, credit records, criminal justicesystems, and drug testing. prior to her work with the project on privacy andtechnology, ms. goldman was legal counsel to the minnesota affiliate of theaclu. the priority for the project on privacy and technology for the 103rdcongress has been passage of legislation to create a privacy right in personalhealth care records.clark e. kerr is vice president, government relations, at the bankof america, where he manages corporate policy development and advocacy forstate and federal health care reform legislation. he is president of the californiabusiness group on health, and chairs the california health policy and dataadvisory commission. mr. kerr is a commissionercommittee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches234health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the prospective payment assessment commission, and a member of theboard of directors of the washington business group on health, the nationalcommittee for quality assurance, and the bay area business group on health.john w. kirklin, m.d., has been professor of surgery at theuniversity of alabama at birmingham since 1966. earlier he occupied thatsame position at the mayo clinic. he is a member of the institute of medicineand has previously served on institute committees. dr. kirklin had a 38yearcareer in academic cardiac surgery, to which he made many contributions.since his retirement from active cardiac surgery in 1989, he continues to workin a number of areas, including outcomes research, multiinstitutional studies,the chairmanship of the cardiac advisory committee of the state of new york,and most recently the development and installation of a paperless computerbased medical record concomitantly with the application of a unique computerarchitecture at the university of alabama at birmingham medical center.anthony m. kotin, m.d., is currently the national medical directorfor marketing and specialty products at the travelers companies. he alsoserves as the travelers' national medical quality officer. dr. kotin receivedhis bachelor of science, magna cum laude, from the university of illinois in1975. he attended rush medical college and graduated, alpha omega alpha,in 1977. after completing an internal medicine internship and residency atrushpresbyterian st. luke's medical center he entered private practice. in1983, he cofounded the highland health care ipa and served as its medicaldirector until 1988, at which time he left to become the medical director formetlife hmo of illinois and wisconsin. in 1990, he joined the travelers asmidwest regional medical director.robert m. krughoff, j.d., is founder and president of the centerfor the study of services in washington, d.c. the center is a nonprofitorganization studying local services and publishing two local consumerreportslike magazines entitled washington consumers' checkbook and bayarea consumers' checkbook, which rate washington and san francisco areaservices firms. prior to that position, he was the director of the office ofresearch and evaluation planning in the office of the secretary of thedepartment of health and human services. mr. krughoff received his b.a.from amherst college and his j.d. from the university of chicago law school.he has published numerous articles and reports. mr. krughoff served as amember of the earlier institute of medicine committee on professionalstandards review organization disclosure policy from 1980 to 1981, and as amember of the advisory panel for the study of medical technology undercompetitive proposals for the office of technology assessment.committee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches235health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rene lerer, m.d., is senior vice president for corporatedevelopment at value health sciences. dr. lerer received his undergraduatedegree from oberlin college and his medical degree from the state universityof new york at buffalo. dr. lerer is boardcertified in internal medicine andpracticed in the hartford area for approximately five years. prior to joiningvalue health sciences, dr. lerer was chief medical officer for the travelersmanaged care and employee benefits operations. he had responsibility for thedevelopment and implementation of the travelers managed care strategy aswell as its medical management strategy in the indemnity environment. atvhs, dr. lerer is responsible for the introduction of all new products, forsupport of large accounts, and for all marketing and sales operations.elena o. nightingale, m.d., ph.d., is special advisor to thepresident and senior program officer of the carnegie corporation of newyork, adjunct professor of pediatrics at georgetown university, and a lecturerin social medicine at harvard university. she received an a.b. degree inzoology, summa cum laude, from barnard college of columbia university(1954), a ph.d. in microbial genetics from the rockefeller university (1961),and an m.d. from new york university school of medicine (1964). dr.nightingale is a member of the institute of medicine and is a fellow of both theamerican association for the advancement of science and the new yorkacademy of sciences. she is the coauthor of before birth: prenatal testing forgenetic disease, coeditor of prenatal screening, policies and values: theexample of neural tube defects, the breaking of bodies and minds: torture,psychiatric abuse and the health professions, and promoting the health ofadolescents: new directions for the twentyfirst century, and author ofnumerous articles on health, health policy, and human rights.madison powers, j.d., d.phil., has written on legal, ethical, andpublic policy aspects of informational privacy, and has made numerouspresentations and participated in panel discussions of privacy and health care.he is coeditor of aids, women and the next generation, and has written onprivacy, discrimination, and reproductive decision making in legal, medical,and philosophical journals. he is the author of several forthcoming papers ongenetic privacy, and has completed commissioned papers for the department ofhealth and human services and the department of energy on both conceptualand policy aspects of genetic privacy. in addition, dr. powers has served as aconsultant to the president's health care reform task force, and is coauthor ofthe task force policy position paper on privacy.edward h. shortliffe, m.d., ph.d., is professor of medicine andof computer science at stanford university. after attending harvard college(1970), he earned a ph.d. in medical information sciences (1975)committee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches236health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and an m.d. at stanford (1976). during the early 1970s, he was principaldeveloper of the medical expert system known as mycin. he then servedmedical residencies at harvard and stanford. as a member of stanford'sinternalmedicine faculty since 1979, he has directed an active researchprogram in medical expert systems and has spearheaded the formation of adegree program in medical informatics. he is currently chief of the division ofgeneral internal medicine and associate chair of medicine for primary care.dr. shortliffe is a member of the institute of medicine, the american societyfor clinical investigation, the american association of physicians, theamerican clinical and climatological association, the american college ofmedical informatics, and is a fellow of the american association for artificialintelligence. he has served on the computer science and telecommunicationsboard (national research council), the federal networking advisorycommittee (national science foundation), the biomedical library reviewcommittee (national library of medicine), and was recipient of a researchcareer development award from the last named agency. in addition, he receivedthe grace murray hopper award of the association for computing machineryin 1976 and has been a henry j. kaiser family foundation faculty scholar ingeneral internal medicine.elliot m. stone has been executive director of the massachusettshealth data consortium since it was established in 1978 as a private, nonprofitcorporation and a politically neutral setting for the collection and analysis of thestate's large health care databases. the consortium publishes annual reports to abroad constituency of health care organizations and business coalitions.previously, mr. stone served as director of the state's center for healthstatistics in the massachusetts department of public health. massachusettsprovided data to the federal government through the cooperative healthstatistics system (chss) of the national center for health statistics (nchs).mr. stone has been an advisor to the ahcpr, nchs, hcfa, and the robertwood johnson foundation on state health statistics issues. mr. stone is a boardmember of the massachusetts peer review organization and chairman of itsdata committee. he is an active member of the national association of healthdata organizations (nahdo) and the association for health servicesresearch (ahsr). mr. stone received his bachelors and masters degrees atboston university. he attended an executive program in health caremanagement at yale university.adele a. waller, j.d., is a partner who practices health law with thechicago law firm of gardner, carton & douglas. a substantial portion of herlaw practice involves advising clients on issues related to health informationand the use of information technology in health care. ms. waller has spokenextensively on health information issues for organizations such as the americanmedical association, the national health lawyers association, the americanacademy of hospital attorneys, the americommittee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches237health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can health information management association, and the national managedhealth care congress. she has published numerous articles and book chapterson health information topics. she cochairs the workgroup on confidentiality,privacy, and legislation of the computerbased patient record institute and isa member of the advisory board of computers in healthcare. ms. waller hasbeen an adjunct faculty member for the health law institute at chicago'sschool of law, loyola university, and is a frequent guest lecturer in thegraduate health information management program of the university of illinoisat chicago.willis h. ware is a senior computer scientist with rand in santamonica, california. his academic degrees include ph.d. (princeton university),s.m. (mit), and b.s. (university of pennsylvania)šall in electricalengineering. he joined rand in 1952 and has held several staff andmanagerial positions. his career has been devoted to all aspects of computersciencešhardware, software, architectures, software development, federalagency and military applications, management of computerintensive projects,public policy, and legislation. in the late 1960s he developed a research interestin the security of computer systems, and shortly thereafter, a correspondinginterest in the personal privacy consequences of recordkeeping systems. he haswritten extensively on both topics, testified to congress, and been activeprofessionally as speaker and conferee. in the early 1970s, he chaired the ''hewcommittee" whose report was the foundation for the federal privacy act of1974. president ford appointed him to the subsequent privacy protection studycommission, whose report remains the most extensive examination of privatesector recordkeeping practices. dr. ware is a member of the national academyof engineering, a fellow of the institute of electronic and electrical engineers,and a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science.committee on regional health datanetworks biographicalsketches238health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossaryaccess controlinformation use policy to determine who can have access to what data (bothorganization personnel and persons external to the organization) andpolicies and procedures preventing access by those who are not authorizedto have it.accuracymagnitude of errors in data resulting from miscoding or misrepresentingfacts, maintaining outofdate findings, or commingling of data from morethan one person.comprehensivenesscompleteness of records in patient care events. amount of information onehas on an individual in the population both for each patient encounter withthe health care system and for all of a patient's encounters over time.computerbased patient record see patient record, computerbased.connectivitythe potential of the (computerbased) record or record system to establishlinks to or interact effectively with any sort of provider or database (iom,1991a).databasea collection of data in a computer, organized so that it can be expanded,updated, and retrieved rapidly for various uses.data confidentialitystatus accorded to data or information indicating that it must be protected.protection includes maintaining the integrity of the data and access control.dataexchangestandardsstandards that govern the collection, aggregation,glossary239health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. transmission, dissemination, and exchange of health data (across disparatesystems) and that foster the use of more consistent medical vocabulary(iom, 1991a).data integrityquality or state of being unimpaired such that data are not altered ordestroyed accidentally or intentionally.data linkagebringing together two separately recorded pieces of information concerninga particular individual, family, provider, facility, or other record subject.data network see network, data.data reliabilitya measure of the consistency of data items based on their reproducibilityand an estimation of their error of measurement.data reuseuse of data that have been gathered for another purpose (such as patientcare, billing, or research) and that are employed for purposes for which theywere not necessarily intended but which may generate new knowledge.data securityprotection of data, especially sensitive data, from accidental or intentionaldisclosure to unauthorized persons and from unauthorized alteration bytechniques such as software and hardware protections, physical measures,and informed, alert staff. (see also data confidentiality.)disclosure,publiccommunication, or publication and dissemination, of certain kinds ofinformation to the public at large.feedbackmaking available to providers and practitioners the data for or results ofevaluative studies about themselves and their peers.generalizabilitythe proposition that information on one dimension of health care deliveryand performance will in some fashion predict or otherwise relate to otherdimensions of performance.global indexa composite score intended to represent the performance of an entirehospital, plan, or individual provider.healthdatabaseorganizationthe administrative and operational structure for regional health databases.a data organization that has as its mission the public release of data andresults of analyses done on the databases under its control. it (1) operatesunder a common authority; (2) obtains healthrelated information from awide variety of sources and puts databases to multiple uses; (3) containspersonidentifiable data; (4) serves a specific, defined geographic area; (5)has inclusive population files; (6) has comprehensive data; (7) manipulatesdata electronically; and (8) supports electronic access.health statusinformation typically from individuals themselves, on domains of healthsuch as physical functioning, mental and emotionalglossary240health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. wellbeing, cognitive functioning, social and role functioning, andperceptions of one's health in the past, now, and for the future and/orcompared with that of one's peers (also called healthrelated quality of life).inclusivenessthe extent to which entire populations or defined groups are intentionallyincluded in a database.longitudinal recordof careall the care provided for a discrete course of illness or injury, regardless ofsite or setting.network,dataa set of databases that are hosted on several computer systemsinterconnected with one another and to terminals and that serve somecommunity of users. such a network will typically have the followingattributes: (1) the databases are dispersed over several machines; each oneor group resides on one or more computer systems. (2) the computersystems are often, but not necessarily, physically distant from one another.(3) all the machines in the network are linked by some means so thatinformation can be transmitted from one machine to another. (4) eachmachine has software to permit exchange of information among individualsystems in the network, and in turn to allow individual users of the networkto query the many databases and to receive, analyze, and aggregate datafrom them.outcomeswhat happens to a person as a result of health care. outcomes includemeasures of the individual's health status and quality of life (or healthrelated quality of life), as well as numerous other measures such aspresence or absence of disease, readmission to hospital, repeat surgery, anddeath (usdhhs, 1991).patientrecord,computerbasedan electronic patient record that resides in a system specifically designed tosupport users by providing accessibility to complete and accurate data,alerts, reminders, clinical decision support systems, links to medicalknowledge, and other aids (iom, 1991a).patientrecord,primarythat health care/medical record used by health care professionals whileproviding patient care services to review patient data or document theirown observations, actions, or instructions (ball and collen, 1992).patientrecord, secondarypatientidentifiable data taken from the primary patient record to satisfy theneeds of specific users (ball and collen, 1992).personidentifiableany information that could be uniquely associatedglossary241health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. with the individual to whom it pertains; such inferential identification isgreatly enhanced by computer crossmatching. person is not intended toinclude physicians or other individual caregivers in their caregiver roles.(see also personidentified.)personidentifiedinformation that definitely or probably refers to specific persons. personidentified information is associated with names, social security numbers,alphanumeric codes, or other unique (or nearly unique) informationassigned to an individual. person is not intended to include physicians orother individual caregivers in their caregiver roles. (see also personidentifiable.)personalidentification codea short code entered by a patient, probably on a keypad, at the time ofhealth care services that permits access to his or her database.primarydatasee under data, primary.primarypatientrecordsee under patient record, primary.privacythe right of the individual to be left alone, to withdraw from the influenceof his environment, to be secluded, not annoyed, and not intruded upon byextension of the right to be protected against physical or psychologicalinvasion or against the misuse or abuse of something legally owned by anindividual or normally considered by society to be his or her property(westin, 1976). (see also privacy, information.)privacy,informationthe interest of an individual to control the dissemination and use ofinformation that relates to himself or herself or to have information aboutoneself be inaccessible to others.qualityassessmentmeasurement of technical and interpersonal aspects of health care,including access to and outcomes of that care.qualityassurancea cycle of activities and systems for maintaining the quality of patient care.programs of quality assurance can be internal or external to an organization.qualityimprovementefforts to improve the level of performance of a key process, whichinvolves measuring the level of current performance, finding ways toimprove that performance, and implementing new and better methods.reliabilitysee data reliability.secondarydatasee data, secondary.secondarypatientrecordsee patient record, secondary.securitysee data security, system security.system securityprotection from unauthorized access, including provisions for hardware,software, communications, and system users, and use determinations basedon organizational computer security programsglossary242health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. (martin, 1983). also, the measures taken to keep computerbasedinformation systems safe from unauthorized access and other harm (iom,1991a).thirdparty payerscompanies that administer health benefit plans, maintain records ofeligibility and payment, adjudicate, and pay claims. the first and secondparties are the patient and the provider (clinician or institution). (when thehealth plan is administered by the company, they are called thirdpartyadministrators.)uniqueidentifiera code (usually numeric or alphanumeric) that refers to one, and only one,person at any one time, does not change for that person over time, andpermits positive (or probable) identification of that individual. the termmay apply to codes assigned to data subjects and to practitioners. (see alsouniversal identifier.)universalidentifiera single code used in all health databases to refer to an individual. such acode would allow linkage among health databases. (see data linkage.)validitythe extent to which data correspond to the actual state of affairs or aninstrument that measures what it purports to measure.internalvaliditythe degree to which one can support a causal relationship betweentreatment and outcome, given the way they are measured by the data.constructvaliditythe degree to which one can generalize from one analysis to broadertheories or models.externalvaliditythe degree to which one can generalize from a finding (of causalrelationship) to alternative measures of the treatment and outcome andacross different types of individuals, sites of care, and times. (see alsogeneralizability.)glossary243health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acronymsadaamericans with disabilities actahcpragency for health care policy and researchahimaamerican health information management associationaidsacquired immunodeficiency syndromeamaamerican medical associationansiamerican national standards instituteastmamerican society for testing and materialsatmautomated teller machinebcbsablue cross and blue shield associationcabgcoronary artery bypass graftchmiscommunity health management information systemcprcomputerbased patient recorddrgdiagnosisrelated groupdvadepartment of veterans affairsedselectronic data systemseftelectronic funds transfererisaemployment retirement insurance security actesrdendstage renal diseaseacronyms244health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fcrafair credit reporting actfoiafreedom of information actfoilfreedom of information lawhcfahealth care financing administrationhdohealth database organizationhichealth insurance claim (number, for medicare beneficiaries)hivhuman immunodeficiency virushmohealth maintenance organizationhsahealth security acticd9cminternational classification of diseases, ninth revision,clinical modifications (for use in the united states)idpersonal identifieriominstitute of medicineipaindependent practice associationirbinstitutional review boardirsinternal revenue servicemedtepmedical treatment effectiveness program (of ahcpr)nahdonational association of health data organizationsnaicnational association of insurance commissionersnchsnational center for health statisticsnrcnational research councilotaoffice of technology assessmentphccccpennsylvania health care cost containment councilpicpersonal identification codepinpersonal identification numberportpatient outcomes research team (in medtep program)ppopreferred provider organizationpprcphysician payment review commissionppscprivacy protection study commissionpro(medicare) peer review organizationqa/qiquality assurance/quality improvementrhigrochester health information groupsparcsstatewide planning and research cooperative systemssasocial security administrationssnsocial security numberacronyms245health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tpathirdparty administratortppthirdparty payerub82uniform bill (1982) (a hcfamandated claim form forinpatient care)ub92uniform bill (1992)ucdsuniform clinical data setuhddsuniform hospital discharge data setupinuniversal physician identification numberusdhewu.s. department of health, education, and welfareusdhhsu.s. department of health and human servicesvhcavermont health care authoritywediworkgroup for electronic data interchangeacronyms246health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indexaacademic organizations, 64, 81, 98access control (to data), 3, 36, 37, 152,153, 154155, 162, 239access to health care, 61, 65, 70, 80account numbers, 52accuracy of data, 56, 7, 8, 11, 1213, 31,36, 50, 8590 passim, 95, 107108,161, 239acquired immunodeficiency syndromeaids), 149administration on aging, 64administration on children and families,64administrative information, 3, 33, 44, 45,54, 7576, 88data sets, 29, 54, 70, 87nadopted children, 75age and date of birth, 44, 51agency for health care policy andresearch (ahcpr), 43, 87n.see also national center for health services researchallergies, 46, 74alliances, see networks and alliances(provider)ambulatory care, 30, 63, 73, 86, 99american college of surgeons nationaltrauma registry, 68, 80american health information management association, 34namerican national standards institute, 89americans with disabilities act (ada),79, 159analysis consultants, 115nanalytic methods, 7, 8, 1213, 36, 113ancillary facilities, 78antitrust issues, 31, 78, 111112appropriate health services, 1, 62, 72, 88,114artificial intelligence, 77assessment, see comparative data;needsassessment; quality assessment;technology assessmentsassociations, see business coalitions;consumer interest groups; professional associationsattorneys, 37, 65, 82, 141, 207bbehavioral risks, 44, 80benefits, 76n.see also insurance coverage and termsbenton international (bi), 59bill collectors, 65, 82billing, 59, 70, 76index247health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biometric identifiers, 6, 51, 52, 165, 206blood banking, 80breast cancer, 7980business coalitions, 6, 32, 35, 50, 60, 64ccalifornia, 7374, 9697, 147, 149canadian provincial databases, 30, 62, 70cancer registries, 42, 7980capitation payments and systems, 12, 30,60, 106cardiac surgery, 7172, 74, 79, 96, 123135case management, 7475, 7677, 141employerbased plans, 79, 159160,207, 208209casemix analyses, 46, 113, 127cdrom releases, 104centers for disease control and prevention, 64certainty, 127129charges for services, 44, 70, 78, 91, 98charitable groups, 65, 81check digits, 166nchild abuse, 82, 141chronic illness, 7475, 79claims, see insurance claimsclearinghouses, 59, 62ncleveland health quality choice(chqc), 67, 97, 103n, 109clinical evaluative sciences, 7273clinical information, 3, 33, 50, 54, 62limitations of, 31, 88clinical practice norms and guidelines,62, 71, 78, 100clinton administration health plan, seehealth security actcode of fair health information practices, 9, 20, 21, 190, 192, 196 ,197198, 211code of fair information practices,176178, 192cognitive functioning, 46commercial applications, 65, 82,137138, 141142, 144145, 210communitybased information systems,40n, 81.see also health database organizationscommunity health management information systems (chmiss), 34, 5960, 64community health needs, see needsassessmentcommunity interest groups, 37, 6465, 81comparative data, 13, 30, 73, 78, 92, 97,108, 127129competition and competitor information,31, 37, 70, 78, 100managed competition, 71, 73completeness of data, 56, 7, 8, 8589, 90,107108comprehensiveness of databases, 3, 5, 33,35, 36, 4447, 48n, 49, 54, 61, 85,89, 239limitations to, 3031, 4647, 84research projects, 31compulsory process, 9, 16, 20, 21, 151,185, 186, 191, 193194, 207computerbased media, 91, 104105public use data tapes, 30, 112, 114computerbased patient records (cprs),7, 30, 32, 41, 43, 50, 51, 83n, 241development of, 8889, 90privacy issues, 141142computer matching and privacy protection act, 178179, 189190computer systems, see computerbasedmedia; computerbased patientrecords; networks (data); systemsecurityconfidentiality, 3, 16, 29, 33, 36, 46, 83,92, 147155, 156161, 239and data release, 7, 8, 1618, 110, 111,112, 149151, 157161, 198 199protection measures, 4, 8, 114, 136,151152, 154156, 157, 171public education on, 9, 39, 195see also privacyconnectivity, 239consent, see informed consentconstruct validity, 243consultants, 98, 15nconsumer information, 71, 75, 81, 92,9394, 101, 115n, 129guides, 96, 9798see also public disclosureconsumer interest groups, 35, 37, 6465,81, 115, 211consumer reporting agencies, 172, 173174control of databases, 50copayments, 44index248health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.coronary artery bypass graft (cabg)surgery, 7172, 74, 96, 123135costs of databases, 31, 87and education and outreach activities,47, 106, 107relation to expansiveness, 36costs of health care analyses and controlof, 1, 2, 11, 32, 41, 6162, 65, 70, 73public disclosure, 11, 12, 91, 9394, 98,106counseling, 46court orders, 16, 150, 151, 193covert data acquisition, 160161, 162cpr institute, 88, 89credit institutions, 65, 82, 138, 160current medical management, 45, 46ddatabases, 13, 45, 2932, 4243, 239characteristics of, 56, 4353limitations of, 2, 3031, 84, 8586national identification, 18, 163165see also administrative information,data sets;comprehensiveness of databases;health database organizations;inclusiveness of databases;insurance claims;medicare, administrative data files;networks (data);public use data tapes;registries;research databases;statewide databases;surveys and questionnaires;uses of databasesdata confidentiality, 148, 154155, 156,239dataexchange standards, 89, 239240for computerbased patient records, 43nobstacles to setting of, 31data integrity, 154155, 200201, 240data integrity boards, 189190, 195, 200data linkage, 45, 32, 42, 49, 87n,165166, 200, 240of computerbased patient records, 43nand multiple providers, 53, 167and networks, 6, 5354see also universal identifiersdata networks, see networks (data);regional data centers and networksdata protection units, 910, 2122,189190, 194201data reliability, 6, 36, 70, 85, 86, 240of clinical information, 31and public disclosure, 11, 9293, 95, 98,99, 101, 112data reuse, 42, 240data security, 1415, 18, 139140n,152153, 154155, 156, 240in hdos, 2122, 36, 189190, 192n,200201, 210decisional privacy, 143deductibles, 44definitions of patient record data elements, 6, 31, 87, 89demographic characteristics, 44, 45adjustments for, 2, 30, 113dentists, 12, 106department of defense, 167department of health and human services (dhhs), 43, 64, 139department of veterans affairs, 66diagnosisrelated group prospective payment system (drgbased pps), 72,8586diagnosisspecific analyses, 71, 8586, 98diagnostic procedures, 46, 119, 153direct marketing firms, 65, 82, 138disadvantaged populations, 65, 70, 71, 81discharges, see hospitals, dischargedatabasesdisclosure, see confidentiality; informedconsent; privacy; public disclosure;redisclosure; statistical disclosurelimitationdisease incidence, 62, 65, 79disease registries, 41, 42, 7980dna identification act, 138dna patterns, 6, 51dossiers, 144in national identification systems, 18,163165drugs and medications, 46, 141142reactions and allergies to, 46, 74, 75tracking of, 75, 146147dual coverage, 44duty to warn, 151, 159eeconomics, see costs of health care;socioeconomic statuseducation, see public education and outreachindex249health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.effectiveness research, 7273, 85, 87, 88,114elderly population, 72electronic data interchange (edi), 50, 76electronic data systems corporation(eds), 34nelectronic funds transfer (eft), 142electronic transmission, see electronicdata interchange; transmission of dataemergency information, 44emergency medical services, 30, 80emotional wellbeing, 46, 99employee agreements, 189employersinformation on, 44, 54, 99selfinsured health plans, 37, 64, 75,7879, 152, 159160use of personidentifiable data, 10, 2425, 79n, 139n, 140, 159160, 207,208209, 210211employment retirement income securityact (erisa), 1718, 7879n. 152employment status, 44encounter forms, 30, 31, 42, 46end results, see outcomes of careendstage renal disease (esrd) data systems, 74epidemiological data and applications, 36,41, 72, 77, 7980, 81, 99, 170equifax, see harris/equifax surveyerror control, 166esrd program management and medicalinformation system, 74ethnic groups, see race and ethnicityevaluative studies, 8, 7174public disclosure of, 4, 11, 1214, 91 92,95, 98, 101103, 105, 106107,108110, 114116, 122, 123, 127129retraction and correction of. 115116staff capabilities, 114115exclusive provider organization (epo)arrangements , 79executive order 12356, 191192expenditures, see costs ofdatabases;costs of health careffair credit reporting act (fcra), 138,173174fairness doctrine, 13, 109110, 178fairness issues, 2, 11, 3132, 39, 9293,121, 123, 127129see also code of fair health information practices;code of fair information practices;potential for harmfamily medical history, 44, 46, 7475, 140of adopted children, 75family members, 44, 7475, 159160feedbackfrom providers, 13, 110to providers, 14, 80, 116117, 121, 240financial institutions, 65, 82, 138fingerprints, 6, 51, 52food and drug administration, 64fraud, 82, 141freedom of information act (foia), 101,111n, 120121, 148, 175176freestanding surgery centers, 63fundraising campaigns, 81ggender, 44, 65generalizability, 101, 102, 240general releases, 183184genetic information, 44, 75, 82, 140privacy issues, 138, 149, 158159geographic variation, 65, 70, 77germany, 164global index, 101, 102103, 240good information practices, 192193government employees, 75group practices, 106hharm, see potential for harmharris/equifax survey, 137, 156, 159,164, 171172, 211hartford, john a., foundation, 3334,5960, 62nhealth care financing administration(hcfa), 43, 51, 53, 64, 70, 74hospital mortality studies, 7172, 9698,109health care policy corporation, 50health care purchasing coalitions, 60, 64health care reform, 2, 32, 50, 61, 62, 65,87, 88and antitrust rules, 31index250health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and insurance benefits, 76nand quality assessment, 71see also health security acthealth database organizations (hdos), 1,29, 3537, 41, 5460, 89 90data protection units, 910, 2122,189190, 194201definition of, 3, 3233, 5455, 240governance of, 3, 33, 35, 50, 54, 55,9596, 156, 186189, 196197legal status, 172179, 188189privacy and confidentiality issues, 910,2026, 36, 145146, 151, 154156,161, 162163, 170210quality assurance, 67, 8589, 90, 95see also evaluative studies;public disclosure;research applications;uses of databaseshealth information system standards(proposed), 139nhealth information technologies, inc., 142health maintenance organizations(hmos), 12, 30, 47, 52, 53, 60, 63,98, 106health pages, 97health promotion, see public educationand outreachhealth reform task force on privacy andsecurity of health care information,139health risk factors, 44, 45, 74, 140141health security act (hsa), 3, 25, 34n,40n, 92n, 139140nhealth services and resources administration, 64health status, 2, 3, 30, 33, 45, 46, 47, 54,60, 99, 140, 154, 240 241heart surgery, see cardiac surgeryhenry ford health system, 5758hightechnology therapies, 79hippocratic oath, 148home health agencies, 53, 63, 78, 99homeless population, 81hospital consortium of greater rochester(hcgr), 5657hospitals, 30, 52, 63, 78, 94admissions, 46, 51discharge databases, 2930, 42, 50, 51,7374mortality rate studies, 7172, 9698quality assessments, 12, 9698, 105, 106human genome privacy act, 138human immunodeficiency virus (hiv),149iidentification, see biometric identifiers;national identification system ordossier; personal identificationcodes; personidentifiable information; personidentified information;unique identifiers; universal identifiersillegal data acquisition, 160161, 162illinois, 79immunization records, 74, 80inadvertent release, 157inappropriate health services, see appropriate health servicesinclusiveness of databases, 3, 5, 33, 36,4749, 50, 52, 54, 61, 84, 89, 241independent practice associations (ipas),52, 63, 98industrial health and safety, 99informational privacy, 15, 29, 143147,155156, 242information brokers, 160161informationuse policy, 155156informed consent, 10, 17, 2324,139140n, 148, 150, 152, 158, 173182186, 202203, 206injuries, see traumainsider threat, 160, 189institute for health care assessment, 62ninstitutional review boards, 10, 24, 114,115n, 202, 205insurance claims, 30, 32, 41, 43, 44, 51,54, 60automated processing, 2, 59, 7576, 139,141142, 202limitations as data source, 30, 31, 47,86, 171privacy issues, 139, 141142, 150, 158,161, 174insurance coverage and terms, 65, 70, 75,76, 77documentation in patient records, 44, 154public knowledge, 93ninsurance premiums, 30, 77insurance support organizations, 172173insurers, 31, 37, 50, 63, 64, 70, 77, 92identifiers, 52, 89index251health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and quality assessment, 71, 73see also insurance claims;insurance coverage and terms;insurance premiums;thirdparty payersintegrated medical systems, inc., 69integrity, see data integrityintelligent adjudication, 7677interactive access, 33, 55internal revenue service (irs), 167, 168,192, 193internal validity, 243interpersonal performance, 62invasive procedures. 70, 119iowa, 50kkaiser permanente, 98llaboratories and laboratory testing, 46, 63law enforcement agencies, 37, 65, 82,141, 185, 186, 193, 194, 207laws, see legislation and statuteslawyers, see attorneyslegal guardians, 10, 23, 202, 204legal cases, 141improper disclosure, 149, 152, 157, 196,213libel lawsuits, 109, 115116malpractice lawsuits, 37, 71, 82, 141privacy rights, 146147, 148, 175, 191legislation and statutes, 19, 37, 50, 106insurance regulation, 7879npreemptive, 9, 2021, 111n, 152,180182, 190194on privacy and confidentiality, 9, 136,138140, 144, 146147, 148, 149,151152, 155, 159, 168, 172179,180182, 190194, 212213of states, 6, 32, 35, 37, 50, 51, 60, 79n,107, 140, 147, 182legislative charters, 175level of aggregation, 101, 106libel and defamation lawsuits, 109,115116lifestyle, 44, 140, 153linkage, see data linkagelocal areas, 9798logic programs, 7677longitudinal records, 2, 30, 49, 52, 241mmalpractice suits, 37, 71, 82, 141managed care, 63, 64, 75, 7677, 100, 141see also health maintenance organizations;independent practice associations;preferred provider organizationsmanaged competition, 71, 73mandatory reporting requirements, 16,150151, 159, 193194manitoba provincial health database, 67manual abstraction of records, 7, 31, 88marital status, 44, 154market research, 73, 7778, 82, 98massachusetts health data consortium,50, 97maternal and child health block grants, 64medco containment services, 142medicaid, 29, 43, 52, 149medical devices, 82, 99medical histories, 2, 32, 45, 46, 7475, 153of adopted children, 75family, 44, 46, 7475, 140medical information bureau, 152, 158medicareadministrative data files, 29, 42, 43, 51,70, 72, 74, 96assignment of identifiers, 52, 53, 167168beneficiary health status registry, 69confidentiality regulations, 149current beneficiary survey, 51diagnosisrelated group prospectivepayment system, 72, 8586national claims history, 29, 69peer review organizations (pros),117n, 119n, 120121medication, see drugs and medicationsmemphis business group on health, 60mental health status, 46merck & company, 142metropolitan areas, 55, 9798minnesota clinical comparison andassessment project, 67minorities, see race and ethnicitymissing and miscoded data, 4647, 49, 50,86, 161missouri, 98misuse of information, 39, 51, 108, 112,158by employers, 79, 159, 208209providers' concerns, 3, 33, 120index252health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mortality rate studies, 7172, 9698multivariate analyses, 8, 12, 113, 127nnational association of health data organizations, 43national association of insurance commissioners (naic) information andprivacy protection model act (naicmodel act), 172173national center for health servicesresearch, 72see also agency for health care policyand researchnational center for health statistics(nchs), 43, 84national committee on quality assurance, 98national health and nutrition examination survey, 30national health board (proposed), 40n, 139140nnational health care survey, 84national identification system or dossier,18, 163165national information infrastructure, 8889national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases, 74national medical expenditures surveys,30, 43national quality management council(proposed), 92nnational trauma registry of the american college of surgeons, 68, 80needs assessment, 1, 2, 31, 32, 41, 65, 70,8081networks and alliances (provider), 6, 71,78, 79, 92n, 119networks (data), 32, 5354, 153, 155156,163, 200201, 241see also health database organizations;regional data centers and networksnewsletters, 91news media, 91, 96, 101, 115new yorkcardiac surgery reporting system, 68,71, 96, 123135singlepayer demonstration program, 58statewide planning and research cooperative system (sparcs), 30, 51notification procedures, 183nurses, 12, 99, 106nursing homes, 63, 98oobservational data, 84office of technology assessment (ota),94orange county, california, 97organ and tissue banking, 80, 97outcomes of care, 2, 45, 46, 54, 62,7173, 79data limitations, 31, 41, 47definition, 241prediction of, 92, 127129outofarea care, 24, 4647, 204outofrange values, 86outpatient care, 30, 63, 73, 86, 99outreach, see public education and outreachppaperbased medical records, 31, 42, 42n,88parents, 10, 23, 202, 204participation rights, 184patient outcome research teams(ports), 43, 72patient records, 30, 60, 76commercial uses, 141142, 210data elements in, 4446, 8586longitudinal, 2, 30, 49, 52, 241primary, 42, 42n, 55, 140141, 171, 241privacy and confidentiality issues,140142, 145152, 153154, 156161, 199200redisclosure, 17, 151152, 156, 158160,171172, 196, 198199secondary, 5, 37, 42, 42n, 141, 241see also computerbased patient recordspayers, see thirdparty payerspeer review, 108, 119121, 122peer review organizations (pros), medicare programs, 117n, 119n, 120121pennsylvania health care cost containment council (phcccc), 7172, 96,105npersonal identification (id) codes (pics),19, 52, 59, 164, 165170, 242personidentifiable information, 3, 6,1415, 33n, 39, 5152, 136, 241242index253health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employer use of, 10, 2425, 79n, 139n,140, 159160, 207, 208209, 210211in hdo files, 3, 5, 20, 33, 36, 54, 65,89, 185186protection of, 910, 20, 114, 139140n, 175179, 190201personidentified information, 3, 6, 33n,51, 136, 242commercial uses, 82, 137138, 141142,144145, 210in hdo files, 5, 10, 2325, 33, 36, 54,185, 201208personnel actions, 79pharmacies, 52, 63, 99identifiers, 53physical functioning, 46, 99physician payment review commission(pprc), 48physicians, 36, 63, 74, 98, 118119and confidentiality, 148149, 151, 159consumer information on, 75, 94, 9899,100, 105, 106identifiers, 5253quality assessment, 12, 71, 94, 9899,100, 105, 119120planning applications, 2, 32, 37, 61, 62,65, 71, 8081longrange strategic, 73, 7778patient care, 7475podiatry, 12, 106pointofservice transactions, 59policy analysis, 30, 70populations, see demographic characteristics;disadvantaged populations;inclusiveness of databasespostmarketing surveillance, 64potential for harm, 2, 3132, 36, 39, 90,156161of common disclosures, 157160of covert and illegal data acquisition,160161, 162of data inaccuracies, 50, 86, 95, 161of public disclosure, 8, 1112, 13, 100,105, 108110, 121, 122practitioners, 8, 12, 30, 36, 44, 63, 78,118119and data release, 10, 23, 24, 202, 206duty to warn, 151, 159identifiers, 52and public disclosure, 37, 99, 100, 105,106precertification, 7677, 141preemptive legislationand confidentiality, 9, 2021, 152,180182, 190194and foia, 111npreferred provider organizations (ppos),63, 98identifiers, 5253pregnancy, 46, 65prescriptions and prescription drugs, 46,141142tracking of, 75, 146147preventive care, 80price regulation, 73primary care, 30, 99primary patient records, 42, 42n, 55,140141, 171, 241primetime live, 104privacy, 3, 15, 1819, 33, 39, 46, 92,136138, 142143, 154, 162172,210213, 242ethical issues, 148149, 210212informational, 15, 29, 143147,155156, 242institutional safeguards, 36, 83,139140n, 162163, 165167,176180, 189190, 194208legislation on, 9, 136, 138140, 144,146147, 148, 149, 151152, 155,159, 168, 172179, 180182,190194, 212213opinion surveys, 137, 156, 159, 164,171172, 211and research uses, 10, 23, 24, 114,170172, 202, 205206right of, 1516, 143, 145147see also confidentialityprivacy act of 1974, 15, 136, 144, 168,176, 177179, 197privacy protection study commission(ppsc), 136137, 142, 178private sectordatabases, 6, 12, 32, 35, 50, 106107,187188social security number use, 168169see also competition and competitorinformationprivileging, 118119product safety litigation, 82professional associations, 35, 107professional standards review organizations (psros), 119n, 120index254health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proprietary information, 31, 107prospective payment system, 72, 8586prostatectomy, 7273providers, 63competition issues, 31, 37, 100concerns about hdos, 31, 33, 35, 37,9293and confidentiality, 148151data on, 36, 37, 44harm from public disclosure, 1112, 13,100, 105, 108110, 120, 122identifiers, 52, 89quality assessment, 12, 71, 7374,103104, 106107, 116121staff management, 73, 74, 79strategic planning, 78public disclosure, 3, 4, 89, 2024, 37,3839, 89, 90, 91129, 240advocacy of, 89, 110113content and format, 91, 103105methodological and technical issues, 8,1213, 93, 101103, 104, 105,107108, 113, 122, 123, 127129and population subgroups, 37potential for harm, 8, 1112, 13, 100,105, 108110, 121, 122prerelease review, 8, 11, 13, 109110, 122and providers, 8, 11, 37, 91107 passim, 116121topics, 9698, 121public education and outreach, 11, 39, 74,75, 80, 81, 8384, 95, 129, 195public health agencies and programs, 9,64, 8081, 148, 191public health service (phs), 43, 64public use data tapes, 30, 112, 114qquality assessment, 1, 2, 32, 41, 61, 62,71, 74, 88, 242comparative data, 13, 30, 73, 78, 92, 97,108, 127129mortality rate studies, 7172, 9698public disclosure of, 12, 9192, 93, 94,98, 106107quality assurance and quality improvement (qa/qi), 71, 242and hdos, 12, 14, 36, 61, 7374, 95,105, 113, 116118, 121122quality of data, 67, 36, 84, 8589, 90and public disclosure, 9293, 95, 98,101, 107108quality of life, see health statusquestionnaires, see surveys and questionnairesrrace and ethnicity, 37, 65rand health insurance experiment, 30,43, 93n, 127nrandom error, 86nrandomized trials, 72recordkeeping privacy, 144145redisclosure, 17, 151152, 156, 158160,171172, 196, 198199reform, see health care reform;healthsecurity actregional data centers and networks, 6,3435, 39, 138in clinton health plan, 40nsee also health database organizationsregistries, 41, 42, 68, 7980, 164regulation, 37, 97, 98, 190on confidentiality, 149, 172of insurance, 7879nand quality assessment, 71, 73see also health care reformrelease of data, see access control;publicdisclosurereliability, see data reliabilityreport cards, 98, 104repositories, 6, 29, 32, 5960.see also health database organizationsresearch applications, 2, 30, 36, 37, 55,60, 64, 65, 70and database comprehensiveness, 46, 47effectiveness and outcomes, 7273, 85,87, 88, 114mortality rate studies, 7172privacy issues, 10, 23, 24, 114, 170172,202, 205206quality of care, 7374research databases, 30, 31, 42, 43see also rand health insurance experiment;surveys and questionnairesresidential facilities, 52retinal prints, 6, 51, 52index255health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reuse, see data reuserisk adjustment, 2, 13, 113, 127rochester area hospital corporation(rahc), 5657rochester healthcare information (rhi)group, 56, 57sst. louis metropolitan area, 9798sampling frames, 72satisfaction with services, 3, 33, 46, 47,54, 60, 96n, 9798science applications international corporation, 34nscorecards, see report cardsscreening procedures, 46, 74secondary patient records, 5, 37, 42, 42n, 141, 241secondary use, 158160, 171security, see data security;system securityselective contracting, 77, 78, 79, 119selfinsured health plans, 37, 64, 75,7879, 152, 159160severity adjustment, 2, 46, 113sexual preference, 154side effects, 46smallarea variations, 65, 70social functioning, 46, 99social security numbers (ssn), 19, 25,52, 165, 167170, 209social service agencies, 65, 80, 141socioeconomic status, 37, 44, 65southeast organ procurement foundation,74soviet union, 164staff management, 73, 74, 79standards and standardizationof coding and definitions, 6, 7, 31, 76,87, 89data exchange, 31, 43n, 89, 239240obstacles to, 31, 76privacy safeguards, 21, 139140nstate laws, 6, 32, 35, 37, 50, 51, 60, 79n,107, 182privacy, 17, 140, 147, 149, 151, 152,159, 186189, 191statewide databases. 2930, 32, 35, 43,50, 55, 70, 8081and mortality rate studies, 7172public disclosure, 9697, 98statistical disclosure limitation, 101102n,171stigmatization, 157, 161, 162strategic planning, 73, 7778substance abuse, 82, 149surgical procedures, 46, 7174, 79, 96, 98,99, 119, 123135surveys and questionnaires, 41, 51, 60,9798, 171national, 30, 42, 43, 47, 84on privacy concerns, 137, 156, 159, 164,171172, 211sweden, 164symbolic data presentation, 104, 105systematic error, 86nsystem security, 153, 154155, 242243of hdos, 22, 36, 189, 200201ttask force on privacy, 139tax reform act, 168, 192technology assessments, 32, 62, 7273ntelecommunications, and privacy, 138,152, 157, 200201telephone consumer protection act, 138terminology, 31, 89therapeutic procedures, 46, 119, 153therapists, 99thirdparty administrators (tpas), 37, 64,76, 77, 159, 243thirdparty payers (tpps), 64, 70, 77,141, 243precertification programs, 7677, 141see also insurance claims;insurance premiums;insurerstimeliness of data, 33, 4950, 54, 62limitations of databases, 31, 84in public release, 3, 8, 11, 12, 91, 92,106, 118training programs, 64transaction systems, 59, 60transmission of data, 59, 76medical histories, 2, 32privacy issues, 137138, 141, 142,151152, 157, 200201standardization, 31, 89see also networks (data)transplantation, 79, 80transportation barriers, 65traumaidentification of victims, 52registries, 42, 68, 7980index256health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uunderuse of health care, 48, 62, 7980uniform health care information act,149, 203unique identifiers, 25, 49, 52, 139n,164165, 209, 243for providers, 5253see also universal identifiersunited network for organ sharing, 74united states renal data system, 74universal identifiers, 25, 52, 53, 164165,209, 243unnecessary health services, 62updating of data, 50, 54u.s. congress, 138139uses of databases, 3, 4, 29, 32, 41, 6165,7084limitations on, 3031, 84, 107108u.s. news & world report, 97utilization management, see case managementutilization patterns, 30, 54, 65, 70, 98vvalidity, 6, 31, 70, 85, 86, 8788, 90, 243of analytic techniques, 7, 8, 36, 113and public disclosure, 11, 9293, 95, 98,99, 101, 108, 112, 113vermont health care authority (vhca),5859, 60voluntary database participation, 6, 60wwallet incident, 170washington checkbook, 97washingtonian, 97washington state, 50, 60, 79, 185nwisconsin, 97work group on computerization ofpatient records, 89workgroup on electronic data interchange (wedi), 76, 139, 181182workplace health and safety, 80, 99index257