detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/23439the promises and perils of digital strategies in achievinghealth equity: workshop summary82 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309438919 | doi 10.17226/23439karen m. anderson and steve olson, rapporteurs; roundtable on the promotion ofhealth equity and the elimination of health disparities; board on populationhealth and public health practice; health and medicine division; nationalacademies of sciences, engineering, and medicinethe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.karen m. anderson and steve olson, rapporteursroundtable on the promotion of health equityand the elimination of health disparitiesboard on population health and public health practicehealth and medicine divisionworkshop summarythe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equitythe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press  500 fifth street, nw  washington, dc 20001this activity was supported by contracts between the national academy of sciences and the aetna foundation, the kresge foundation (245367), merck & co., inc. (apa20131223), the u.s. department of health and human services [centers for disease control and prevention] (200201138807, to#34), and the u.s. department of health and human services [health resources and services administration] (hhsh25034010t). any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309438919international standard book number10: 0309438918digit object identier: 10.17226/23439additional copies of this report are available for sale from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2016 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americasuggested citation: national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. 2016. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summary. washington, dc: the national academies press. doi: 10.17226/23439.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences was established in 1863 by an act of congress, signed by president lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise the nation on issues related to science and  technology. members are elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964 under the  charter of the national academy of sciences to bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to engineering. dr. c. d. mote, jr., is president.the national academy of medicine (formerly the institute of medicine) was established in 1970 under the charter of the national academy of  sciences to advise the nation on medical and health issues. members are elected by their peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. dr. victor j. dzau is president.the three academies work together as the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. the academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. learn more about the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine at www.nationalacademies.org. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vplanning committee on the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity1gillian barclay (cochair), aetna foundationantonia m. villarruel (cochair), university of pennsylvaniacaroline mckay, u.s. outcomes research, merckmelissa simon, northwestern universityrohit varma, university of southern california1 the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine™s planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the workshop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. the responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiroundtable on the promotion of health equity and the elimination of health disparities1mildred thompson (cochair), policylinkantonia m. villarruel (cochair), university of pennsylvaniapatricia baker, connecticut health foundationgillian barclay, aetna foundationanne c. beal, patientcentered outcomes research institutened calonge, the colorado trustirene dankwamullan, national institutes of healthjamila davison, acm medical transition carefrancisco garcia, pima county department of healthallan goldberg, merck & co., inc.j. nadine gracia, u.s. department of health and human servicesjeffrey a. henderson, black hills center for american indian healtheve j. higginbotham, university of pennsylvaniacara v. james, centers for medicare & medicaid servicesoctavio martinez, hogg foundation for mental healthnewell mcelwee, merck & co., inc.phyllis w. meadows, the kresge foundationamelie g. ramirez, university of texas health science centermelissa simon, northwestern university feinberg school of medicinechristine torbert, health resources and services administrationpattie tucker, centers for disease control and preventionrohit varma, university of illinoisœchicagowinston f. wong, kaiser permanenteterri d. wright, american public health associationhmd staffkaren m. anderson, senior program ofcercolin fink, senior program assistantrose marie martinez, senior board directoranna martin, senior program assistant1 the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine™s forums and roundtables do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. the responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixthis workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published workshop summary as sound as possible and to ensure that the workshop summary meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this workshop summary:gillian christie, the vitality institutechazeman s. jackson, u.s. department of health and human serviceselizabeth oli, morehouse school of medicinepattie tucker, centers for disease control and preventionalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they did not see the nal draft of the workshop summary before its release. the review of this workshop summary was overseen by derek yach, the vitality group. he was responsible for  making certain that an independent examination of this workshop summary was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this workshop summary rests entirely with the rapporteurs and the institution.reviewersthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacronyms and abbreviations xiii1 introduction of the workshop 1 highlights of the workshop, 3 organization of the report, 42 technology and health disparities 5 equity at the henry ford health system, 6 the potential of technology, 7 the perils of technology, 8 engaging communities, 9 the diversity of hope, 11 realizing the promise of mobile technologies, 11 mobile technologies and health disparities, 12 using mobile technologies to change behavior, 133 engaging providers and racial/ethnic  minority patients in digital strategies 15 creating a movement for change, 16 the value of theories, 18 a health literacy perspective on health disparities, 19 designing systems for health literacy and equity, 22contentsthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii contents4 examples of engaging racial/ethnic minority communities in digital health strategies 27 reducing digital and health inequities in latina immigrant communities, 28 a tailored webbased intervention for young msm in  southeast michigan, 305 policy and technology perspectives 35 topdown and bottomup approaches to policy, 36 the policy perspective from an integrated health care delivery  system, 38 observations from a technology developer, 416 synthesis of workshop messages 43 generating evidence of effectiveness, 43 privacy and sustainability, 44 the inperson component, 44 involving communities, 45 scalability and adaptability, 46 involving providers, 46references 47appendixesa examples of ehealth solutions featured  at the workshop 49b workshop agenda 57c speaker biographical sketches 61the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acronyms and abbreviationsaca affordable care actcbpr communitybased participatory researchchess community health engagement survey solutionsehr electronic health recordgis geographic information systemharc hiv/aids resource centerhipaa health insurance portability and accountability acthitech health information technology for economic and clinical healthhiv/sti human immunodeciency virus/sexually transmitted illnessicd international statistical classication of diseases and related health problemsiom institute of medicineipv interpersonal partner violencelgbtq lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queerm(dad) mobile dadxiiithe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv acronyms and abbreviationsmsm men who have sex with menmvp moderate to vigorous physical activity nih national institutes of healthnsf national science foundationphr personal health recordsnap supplemental nutrition assistant programwin womeninspired neighborhoodymsm young men who have sex with menthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introduction of the workshop1health care is in the midst of a dramatic transformation in the united states. spurred by technological advances, economic imperatives, and governmental policies, information technologies are rapidly being applied to health care in an effort to improve access, enhance quality, and decrease costs. at the same time, the use of technologies by the consumers of health care is changing how people interact with the health care system and with health information.these changes in health care have the potential both to exacerbate and to diminish the stark disparities in health and wellbeing that exist among population groups in the united states. if the benets of technology ˚ow disproportionately to those who already enjoy better coverage, use, and outcomes than disadvantaged groups, health disparities could increase. but if technologies can be developed and implemented in such a way as to improve access and enhance quality for the members of all groups, the ongoing transformation of health care could reduce the gaps among groups while improving health care for all. as a recent report from the institute of medicine (iom) stated, ﬁfacilitating patient and population contribution to, and control of, their health information has the potential to provide fur1 the planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop summary has been prepared by the rapporteurs as a factual account of what occurred at the workshop. statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those of the individual presenters and participants and are not necessarily endorsed or veried by the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. they should not be construed as re˚ecting any group consensus.1the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 digital strategies in achieving health equityther insights into, and opportunities to address, disparities in underserved populationsﬂ (iom, 2011, p. 38).to explore this potential, the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine™s roundtable on the promotion of health equity and the elimination of health disparities held a workshop at wayne state university on october 2, 2014. the focus of the workshop was on (1) how communities are using digital health technologies2 to improve health outcomes for racial and ethnic minority populations, (2) how community engagement can improve access to highquality health information for members of these groups, and (3) models of successful technologybased strategies to reduce health disparities. box 11 lists the goals of the workshop.the workshop was held in detroit, michigan, on the campus of wayne state university, to emphasize both the promises and the perils cited in the workshop™s title. detroit has some of the worst health disparities in the nation, yet it is also at the center of work on reducing these disparities, noted m. roy wilson, the president of wayne state university and a former ofcial at the national institutes of health (nih) in charge of the nih health disparities research agenda. wayne state university has the only nih perinatal research branch outside of the nih campus in bethesda, maryland, partly because of the high infant mortality rate in the city (discussed in more detail in chapter 2). wayne state also has been a leader in other areas related to health disparities. the barbara ann karmanos cancer institute has been looking at the determinants of health among survivors of cancer who have access to the internet and those who do not. a research project in the medical school is looking at the effect of text message reminders about adherence to blood pressure medication. an interdisciplinary team has developed a sensor that includes a heart monitor and a bluetooth connection to a smartphone to identify potentially dangerous heart rate increases. ﬁwe are very proud of everything that is going on here,ﬂ said wilson.this report provides a summary of the presentations at the workshop and the discussions that occurred among workshop participants. (comments made by presenters during the discussion sessions generally are included in the summaries of their talks.) the observations made in the report are of the workshop as a whole and should not be seen as the conclusions of the workshop participants, the roundtable on the promotion of health equity and the elimination of health disparities, or the academies. however, they provide many valuable insights into future steps that could be taken to reduce health disparities in the united states. 2 for the purposes of this workshop, ﬁdigital health technologiesﬂ encompasses all types of personal technology. however, the majority of the technologies described in this summary are cell phone based or interactive websites.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction of the workshop 3highlights of the workshopin the nal session of the workshop, gillian barclay, vice president of the aetna foundation, summarized some of the main messages that she heard during the presentations and discussions. the following draws on barclay™s remarks and on comments made over the course of the day to identify the major ideas that arose during the workshop:ł the main point gleaned from the workshop, said barclay, is that technology ﬁis really all about people.ﬂ addressing racial and ethnic health disparities and increasing health equity in the united states ﬁgoes back to the foundation of placing people rst and not technology rst,ﬂ she said.ł community engagement is essential in designing, evaluating, and adapting technologybased interventions aimed at improving health in racial and ethnic minority groups.ł reducing health disparities requires going beyond both the use of technology and health care in general to a ﬁhealthinallpoliciesﬂ approach. education, transportation, and other sectors can all contribute to the reduction of disparities.ł systems and patterns are major determinants of health disparities. looking at the potential of technology to reduce health disparities requires consideration of these systems and patterns, not just particular events.box 11 goals of the workshop discuss the opportunities to use digital health technologies as a population health strategy to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states.  explore how racial and ethnic minority populations and communities in the united states can be engaged in efforts that use digital health strategies to reduce racial and ethnic health disparities.  develop effective strategies that engage racial and ethnic minority populations and communities in using digital health strategies to reduce health disparities.  explore the different types of digital health technologies used in efforts to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states.  highlight examples of digital health strategies designed to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 digital strategies in achieving health equityorganization of the reportfollowing this introduction to the report, chapter 2 summarizes the remarks of the two keynote presenters at the workshop, both of whom provided overarching views of health disparities and technology issues on local, regional, and national levels.chapter 3 examines a wide range of issues associated with the use of technology to reduce health disparities, including health literacy, community engagement, and the role of theory in program development. chapter 4 looks in greater detail at two specic programs as a way of exploring how these issues play out in practice.chapter 5 considers the broader policy and technology issues that shape health equity initiatives. in chapter 6, two respondents identied the key messages emerging from the presentations and discussions at the workshop.appendix a provides descriptions of nine programs that workshop participants learned about during a ﬁvirtual poster sessionﬂ at lunch. appendix b contains the workshop agenda and appendix c gives biographies of the speakers at the workshop.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2technology and health disparitiesimportant points highlighted by the speakersł the tremendous expansion in the use of technology provides many opportunities to work with communities to reduce health disparities. (nilsen, wisdom)ł in particular, mobile technologies have a unique potential to reduce disparities because of their extensive use in racial and ethnic minority communities. (nilsen, wisdom)ł as just one example, a community online campaign in the city of detroit has substantially reduced the infant mortality rate in targeted communities. (wisdom)ł the use of technology can be resisted if it does not produce benets that outweigh the time and efforts its use entails. (nilsen)ł community engagement can help shape interventions that effectively address the needs of the community. (nilsen, wisdom)globally, more people own a mobile phone than own a toothbrush, noted kimberlydawn wisdom, senior vice president of community health and equity and chief wellness and diversity ofcer in the henry ford health system, in her opening keynote address at the conference. seventyseven percent of u.s. seniors own a cell phone or smartphone. by 2020, a projected 200 billion smart devices will communicate through wireless technologiesšthe equivalent of 26 devices for every person on the planet (cisco, 2015). already, 42 percent of u.s. hospitals are using digital health 5the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 digital strategies in achieving health equitytechnology to treat patients, and technology use is growing ﬁat an exponential pace,ﬂ said wisdom.equity at the henry ford health systemthe henry ford health system, which was founded by henry ford in 1915 and has ve hospitals in southeastern michigan, has a major focus on the elimination of health and health care disparities, said wisdom. its vision statement is ﬁtransforming lives and communities through health and wellnessšone person at a time,ﬂ and one of the seven pillars upholding that mission is community. the system has pursued its goal of health and health care equity through grant funding and system support, but support for the mission also has been personal. wisdom recounted an episode when she wanted to publish a paper showing that african americans were having poorer outcomes related to diabetes care than their caucasian counterparts in the health plan. she received the full support of the system™s chief executive ofcer to do so. ﬁi cannot underscore that enough, because having individuals like that who will say, ‚do the thing that is right, even though it may not re˚ect perfectly favorably on the organization,™ shows that we are paying attention to these things,ﬂ wisdom said.she also described an initiative from the 1990s in which the detroit piston™s basketball player joe dumars participated in what was called the african american initiative for male health improvement. ﬁas we talk about eliminating disparities, you need to somehow nd the route that is going to be most culturally appropriate to get the change that you need,ﬂ wisdom explained.the institute of medicine report unequal treatment: confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care (iom, 2002) provided tremendous momentum by demonstrating ﬁthat the work we were doing was absolutely important and that those disparities were profound and persistent,ﬂ said wisdom. the national healthcare disparities report 2012 (ahrq, 2013) likewise drew attention to what wisdom was seeing in the clinic: vast differences in care and in outcomes for people of color versus the white population.when wisdom returned to the henry ford health system after serving as surgeon general for the state of michigan, she inserted into her terms for returning that health disparities be integrated into the results presented to the board. that led to the launch in 2009 of a health care equity campaign with the goal of increasing ﬁknowledge, awareness, and opportunities to ensure that health care equity is understood and practiced by henry ford providers and other staff, the research community, and the community at large.ﬂ11 more information about the campaign is available at http://www.henryford.com/healthcare equitycampaign (accessed may 18, 2016). the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and health disparities 7the potential of technologythe henry ford health system has been working directly with communities to eliminate the causes of disparities. for example, it launched a livewell center of excellence, which involved the development of a strategic plan, the launch of a new website (henryfordlivewell.com), and the convening of a childhood obesity prevention initiative. it also has worked with thousands of young people in the community to drive environmental and behavioral change.technology has played a greater and greater role in these efforts,  wisdom observed. for example, young people use technology extensively, so the task with them has been to use technology as a tool to advance the system™s messagešincluding working with a local rapper to develop a healthpromoting song that was posted on youtube.the henry ford health system also has been using a variety of technologies to communicate with and monitor patients remotely to improve health outcomes. electronic medicinedispensing systems can reduce the risk of medication mismanagement. telehealth systems can help patients with chronic disease manage their own care and help prevent visits to emergency rooms and hospitalizations.with the partnership for a healthier america led by first lady michelle obama, the system has joined in the healthy hospital food commitment, which includes a thirdparty vendor that audits compliance.2 the commitment includes a smartphone app that builds menus, provides complete nutrition information, offers other healthy living tools, and supports the 5210 message (targeted at children), which stands for consumption of 5 or more fruits and vegetables per day, 2 hours or less of recreational screen time, 1 hour of physical activity, and 0 sugarsweetened beverages. ﬁwe know that many disparities exist around diabetes related to weight,ﬂ said wisdom, adding ﬁwe are trying to nd ways to use technology to engage young people and their families.ﬂthe henry ford health system also has been working with three other major health systems in the area to address the infant mortality challenge. as wisdom noted, in the city of detroit, an average of about 200 babies die per year. ﬁit is astounding that you could be here with these four megahealthsystems, [and] with the nih perinatal branch right here, and yet we see these appallingly high infant mortality rates,ﬂ she said. in a collaborative effort, the four health systems have come together as leaders, funders, strategists, communicators, and implementers to address these and other disparities.2 the thirdparty audit is conducted by the altarum institute, center for active design, food & nutrition policy consultants llc, rti international, and the rudd center for food policy and obesity.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 digital strategies in achieving health equityas part of its effort to eliminate infant mortality, the system has received a grant from the w.k. kellogg foundation to use social media to inspire change through the womeninspired neighborhood (win) network. a recently launched website (www.winnetworkdetroit.org) seeks to empower not just lowincome pregnant women but women of reproductive age,  mothers, and caregiversšﬁthe grandmothers and the aunts and the sisters,ﬂ said wisdom. the network is active on facebook, instagram, twitter, and blogs. ﬁif we are going to address disparities, we are going to have to reach people in the model and medium in which they are most comfortable.ﬂin three neighborhoods with high infant mortality where the network is active, more than 200 women have delivered without an infant death. ﬁ[we have] driven the infant mortality rate to zero. we are really pleased with that,ﬂ wisdom explained.3one interesting observation has been that a major contributor to infant mortality is social isolation. ﬁyou would think, with all this technology, how could people experience social isolation? but there is a tremendous amount of people feeling disconnected,ﬂ she said. in response, the network has been developing ways to hold virtual sessions with women to teach and reassure them even when it is difcult for them to travel.the perils of technologytechnology is a ﬁtremendous tool,ﬂ said wisdom, but it also has potential perils. as an example, wisdom cited the recent effort to collect data about race, ethnicity, and primary language at a detailed level. to develop a common platform, the system borrowed a tool developed by the robert wood johnson foundation called we ask because we care. however, collecting race, ethnicity, and primary language data ﬁis a heavy lift at the point of service,ﬂ which led to resistance from the frontline staff, she explained.the use of the electronic health record (ehr) to reduce disparities is another example of potential difculties. ﬁmany individuals, whether it is meaningful use or in other arenas, have access to the technology, but using it in a way that can truly improve outcomes and close the health disparities gap is a major issue,ﬂ said wisdom. with ehrs, providers can have their ﬁfaces glued to a screen,ﬂ giving them less time to interact personally with patients, adding that ﬁit is great to have this technology, but if it limits that facetoface time, if it limits the ability to really understand and communicate well to patients, it could have an unintended consequence.ﬂin addition, the henry ford health system uses a tool known as mychart to give patients access to their medical record. but surveys have 3 the previous infant mortality rate was 15 deaths per 1,000 births.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and health disparities 9shown that only about 12 percent of adults in the system have procient health literacyšdened as a patient™s ability to obtain, understand, and act on health informationšwhich has consequences in terms of patient use of health information. (health literacy is discussed in more detail in the next chapter.) wisdom noted, ﬁone of the things that worries me is that, as we try to close the digital divide, unintended consequences of widening the divide in terms of outcomes could be an issue.ﬂadditional challenges include ł evaluating tools like mychart to ensure that different racial/ethnic population subgroups are using it at the same rate,ł the potential loss of personal interactions as technology becomes more prominent in health care, andł making the data accessible in communities.realtime data are important to eliminate disparities, because much of the public health data related to disparities are dated, said wisdom, adding, ﬁwe need to be able to understand, in real time, what the data show, as well as communicate that to the community, so they can become partners in helping us eliminate health and health care disparities.ﬂengaging communitiesas was discussed throughout the workshop, community engagement has been a key component of the henry ford health system™s efforts. for example, the system has used communitybased participatory research to bring audiences to the table, where their voices can be heard while initiatives are being planned. focus groups are another way to involve communities, although wisdom said that communities need to be involved in meetings in an ongoing way. on our evaluation team for our win network detroit, we had a community health worker at every single meeting [who provided] invaluable information. for instance, we were saying how do we incentivize our target women to do certain things. she said a lot of the women are having case workers come to their home because they want child protective services and people coming to review their home setting, what they are doing, and how they are evolving as mothers and caretakers. they said having them go through a class and giving them a certicate to show their caseworker would be of tremendous value. that is better than a $5 or $10 gift certicate to go buy something at target. give them a certicate to show that they are meeting the requirements in order to protect their children and keep their families. that kind of informationši would have never come up with that.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 digital strategies in achieving health equitymany of the community health workers are from the neighborhoods they (the community health workers) are serving. the women with whom they work see them as best friends. ﬁthey are my aunt. they are my  condante. . . . for the medical community, we want the data. we want all the hard stuff. [but] those relationships are key. they share information that they ordinarily would not share with their provider,ﬂ wisdom explained.community health workers are directly involved in the research and outreach being done by the system. they have been included in abstracts presented at national meetings. one community health worker spoke at the american public health association meeting and ﬁhad the room in tears,ﬂ according to wisdom, adding, ﬁshe did a much better job than i did in terms of engaging the audience.ﬂpeople who are not traditional health care professionals also need to be empowered, she said. for example, when students learn about healthy eating, they can be ambassadors to their peers. ﬁin many ways, they are our secret weapon, because . . . other students in their class will listen a lot better to them, particularly when they are in the lunch line, than they will to somebody coming in with a white coat saying you ought to do this,ﬂ she said. the system also has been examining technology that can help people learn through games, and it is very interested in mobile applications that are patient centered and easily accessible, even for patients who are not highly health literate.a researcher at the henry ford health system recently received a patientcentered outcomes research institute grant to pursue patient engagement and patientdriven research in an effort to increase dissemination and implementation. the objectives are to understand the choices patients face, to align research questions and methods with patient needs, and to provide patients and clinicians with information for better processes and decisions. ﬁwe are going to learn a lot in that process,ﬂ said wisdom.the henry ford health system is collaborating with more than 40 leading nonprot health care organizations to create a menu of proven community health practices that work ﬁfrom the top of the mission statement to the bottom line,ﬂ wisdom observed. the objective is to show that there is an economic case around eliminating health and health care disparities. another objective is to make technology the servant and not the master of the vision, in part by developing specications and a framework for the development and acquisition of information technology that forms a single integrated system for clinical and community settings.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and health disparities 11the diversity of hopethe world will look much different in 5 years as technologies develop and as policies and laws such as the affordable care act continue to be implemented, wisdom said. health care will be much more patient and community centered, with health care professionals supporting the efforts of individuals. ﬁit is going to become very exciting,ﬂ she noted.individual habits also can change. for example, wisdom pointed to the spreading idea that sitting is the new smoking, adding that ﬁi envision a future where at meetings like this people will be standing and walking even 2 miles an hour on some kind of device. . . . if you have gone to your meetings for the day, you will have gotten your 10,000 or 20,000 steps in because you have been in meetings all day.ﬂ at henry ford health system, for example, some meetings are done while walking around the building.winston closed by showing a mural that is composed of many hundreds of individual drawings submitted by people in the community. each small tile in the mural represents the artwork of someone who was asked to envision the future, and contributors can zoom in to their drawings on a special website. the mural4 is being put on buildings in three neighborhoods in detroit ﬁas a way to show that we are there and you have a voice and we want together to bring hope to the community,ﬂ she concluded.realizing the promise of mobile technologiesfor much of the history of the computer age, computers have been tied to plugs, whether for power or for internet access, which meant that some people could access and use computers while others could not, observed wendy nilsen, health scientist administrator at the ofce of behavioral and social sciences research and program director for the smart and connected health program at the national science foundation (nsf), in the second keynote address of the workshop. but now the world has gone mobile, and ﬁmobile is where we can nally reduce the digital divide,ﬂ she began.at the national institutes of health, mhealth refers to any wireless device carried by or on a person that accepts or transmits health data and information. such devices include sensors, such as implantable miniature sensors and nanosensors, monitors such as wireless accelerometers and blood pressure and glucose monitors, and mobile phones and tablets.mobile technologies ﬁcan expand the things we care about in health to the real world instead of having it stay only in raried academic centers,ﬂ 4 an image of the mural is available in the speaker presentation by kimberlydawn wisdom, posted on the roundtable website at: http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/activities/ selectpops/healthdisparities/2014oct02.aspx (accessed may 18, 2016) and on the project s.n.a.p. webpage: http://projectsnap.org/mural/winnetworkdetroit (accessed may 18, 2016). the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 digital strategies in achieving health equitysaid nilsen. these technologies can generate userfriendly tools for enhancing health. they can change the questions people ask about their own health and about the information available to them. these technologies can scale up to entire populations, and they can facilitate more efcient and representative clinical trials. nilsen discussed each of these topics in turn.mobile technologies and health disparitiesmhealth technologies can help reduce disparities in a variety of ways, nilsen observed. first, they are used very widely. african americans lead whites in their use of mobile phones, with latinos only a few percentage points behind, and african americans and latinos lead whites in their use of mobile data applications. those with less education and lower incomes use cell phones almost as much as others. not everyone has access to mobile technologies all the time. some people might lose coverage for a while, but they tend to get it back, nilsen acknowledged.according to national surveys, about twothirds of cell phone owners nd themselves checking their phone for messages, alerts, or calls even when they do not notice the phone vibrating or ringing. nilsen cited a recent newspaper article saying that many people begin to panic when they cannot check their cell phone for 4 hours or more. ﬁif you walk out the door this morning without your laptop, without your id badge, you are going to keep going. you are going to gure out a way around it. if you walked out the door without your phone, are you going back?ﬂ she wondered.young adults are leading the way in the use of mobile data applications. they also are pioneering new ways of using mobile technologiesšfor example, by taking pictures of visible health problems and sending them to their health care providers. older americans still lag in their use of cell phones but increasing numbers are discovering the value of these technologies.one great advantage of mobile technologies is the degree to which they can be customized by languages, applications, ringtones, and other features, including how they are decorated. these technologies are ﬁintimate in a way that we have never had technology intimate before,ﬂ said nilsen.mobile technologies can centralize communication. they can be a health hub, transferring photos, todo or toask lists, and messages among patients and a care team. they can provide patients with interventions and information programs alongside selftracked information. patients can ask questions when those questions occur to them, not in a rushed clinical encounter. mobile technologies also could allow patients to respond to short and brief questionnaires rather than long forms. ﬁwhy can™t we the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and health disparities 13think the way industry has been thinkingšgetting a lot of information, constantly updated, but in the same way doing it simply?ﬂ nilsen asked.finally, mobile technologies can greatly increase the representativeness of clinical research. patientgenerated data can be combined with clinical information, assessment data, and treatment plans to make what nilsen called a ﬁfabulous health stew.ﬂ technology could gather the information that is routinely gathered in doctors™ ofces, such as weight and blood pressure information, and it can collect such information in an ongoing way and not at one point. very few patients ever go to academic medical centers, which tend to see only the most complex and hardest cases, yet this is where most research is carried out. technologies could make it possible to do such research remotely, she said, adding, ﬁwe can have high touch when we need, but can we have tech touch the rest of the time, so people do not have to come to an academic center?ﬂusing mobile technologies to change behaviormobile technologies are clearly changing behavior, said nilsen, though not always for the better. ﬁthink about what madison avenue is doing. they are using youtube. they are using twitter. they are using apps. they are using all of this to change behavior. let us change it back. let us get it the way we need it,ﬂ she commented.mobile technologies provide opportunities for engagement that rival unhealthy competition, nilsen said. mobile technologies provide the potential to make healthy behaviors enjoyable and desirable. they can get people moving and eating better. they provide realtime information when and where people need it, and they are integrated into people™s lives. ﬁthink of how we can capture all that glitzy world that we never could touch in health,ﬂ she said. for example, smartphones could tell when someone is at a fast food restaurant and suggest healthy options. another example nilsen mentioned is the iperiod app, which allows women to track their menstrual cycles, adding ﬁwhy aren™t we thinking about how you partner with iperiod to make sure not only are you tracking your period, so you are not getting pregnant, but what are you doing about your diabetes, too?ﬂsensors that collect information across populations and over time also can change behaviors. for example, body sensors being used by overweight young latinas are being embraced by those who use them, she explained, adding, ﬁthese girls love to show off their sensors. . . . the moms said, ‚we want to do it, too.™ﬂ text messages can be designed for people to manage chronic diseases. health care providers can intervene remotely with greater frequency than for traditional care, with realtime management and a reduction in acute care. people can use their technologies to have private or difcult questions answered, enabling a proactive, timely, the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 digital strategies in achieving health equitypersoncentered approach to health care. wireless sensors can connect with the electronic health record, providing information for predictive health assessment frameworks.to reduce disparities, people need actionable data, said nilsen, explaining, ﬁit has to be good for something. it cannot just cause a liability. it has to be able to provide information to everybody that works.ﬂ communities also need to be integral to the planning effort, said nilsen. ﬁwhat i think would work does not matter. i am not the one it is going to target,ﬂ she said. only by spending lots of time talking with people, from high users to nonusers, is it possible to gure out what will work. ﬁwhen they use their device, what kind of things would work for them? how would it work for them? that is when it is successful,ﬂ she said.one way to teach people about these approaches is to involve young people, who may not be formally trained but are intuitively good at using devices. in nilsen™s work, young people have become very involved. ﬁi work at nsf, and one of the things that we nd is [young people] are very interested in this area, even in high school, looking at how do you build an app, how do you build a program, how do you think about that,ﬂ she said.the missing link, said nielsen in response to a question, is usercentered designšcreating technologies, programs, and information that people want to use. industry has much to teach health care about this issue, as do the users of technologies and communities as a whole. technologies such as youtube have been successful in capturing huge audiences. if such technologies could be directed to reducing health disparities, great progress could be made. people are using technology to change behavior, nilsen concluded, adding, ﬁyou can too.ﬂthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important points highlighted by the speakersł digital technologies have attributes that distinguish them from other interventions to reduce health disparities, including high rates of use in racial and ethnic minority communities. (horn, parker)ł greater communication between the developers and users of technology could reduce the disconnection between where digital strategies are developed and where the needs are greatest. (horn, norman, parker)ł the optimal use of technologies requires having good theories about why and where they work. (norman, parker, pavel)ł as people are overwhelmed by the amount and complexity of information they receive, they can be expected to question some of the systems enabled by digital technologies. (parker)ł patients are the experts on their own health, which requires that health care systems nd ways to engage patients more effectively. (horn, parker)four presentations at the workshop examined the broad issues that affect any effort to use technology to reduce health disparities. these issues range widely, from health literacy to community engagement, from the role of theory in program development to the key role of design in technology development. the overall picture that emerged from the presentations is of a complex but navigable path toward greater health equity.3engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients in digital strategies15the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 digital strategies in achieving health equitycreating a movement for changeﬁwhy do we think digital strategies will make a difference in addressing health disparities?ﬂ asked ivor horn, medical director of the center for diversity and health equity and professor of pediatrics at the university of washington school of medicine. ﬁthere are so many interventions that have been developed over the years, and yet health disparities persist in racial and ethnic minority communities across the country. how is this different from the behavioral interventions that we have done?ﬂ she asked.first, she said, mobile technologies are different than other innovations in health care. as observed in the keynote addresses (see chapter 2), racial and ethnic minorities have been early adopters of mobile technologies. with smartphones in particular, racial and ethnic minorities have overtaken whites in their use of the technology.second, racial and ethnic minorities are leaders in the online community. for example, african americans spend more than twice as much time per person on webhosting sites compared with the average of all con sumers. ﬁracial and ethnic minorities are not just consumers,ﬂ said horn, ﬁthey are actually producers of information,ﬂ which translates into an ability to in˚uence the content of the discussion in mainstream media.third, racial and ethnic minorities have a clear interest in using digital health. in a recent survey done by horn and her colleagues of african american parents in an urban clinic, 90 percent said that they want to receive health information online. other studies have shown that solid majorities of parents in urban pediatric clinics use smartphones as their primary way of getting online, horn said, explaining, ﬁnot only are they there, not only are they making a difference, but they are really interested in having a health discussion.ﬂdespite the tremendous opportunity to use digital strategies to address health disparities, progress has been slow. one major problem, horn observed, is that there is a disconnection between where digital strategies are developed and where the needs are. ﬁthe motivation for the development of digital strategies is primarily driven by nancial gain rather than improving health outcomes. as a result, there is very little motivation to commit to the sometimes lengthy process . . . of developing an evidence base to determine which tools move the needle. without evidence, providers are not going to adopt them,ﬂ she explained.another barrier to progress is that the effort to reduce health disparities does not present a common enemy against which multiple stakeholders can rally. action against climate change faces a similar obstacle, horn noted. people can take many different approaches to address climate change, from driving an electric car to recycling and composting, but the policy framework and infrastructure do not exist to focus and magnify these efforts.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients 17new technologies are driving a shift in communication, said horn. in health care, providers are trained to communicate with each other. now, technology is forcing providers to learn how to communicate with patients and with the community in ways they have not done before. she explained:to do this, we have to go to the patient and to the community to understand what the need is, because now they are communicating back to us. we have not necessarily been trained to listen. we have been trained to hear, but we do not listen. we hear what we want to hear through our lens of what we are trained to do and to put it into our differential diagnosis, but then we do not hear the relevant thing that we need to hear because we have already moved on while they are still communicating. we need to start guring out how to make that paradigm shift.digital health strategies need to be grounded in the appropriate infrastructure and policies if they are to be effective, horn said. also, to be sustainable, these strategies need to be connected to grassroots efforts, organizations, and infrastructure. ﬁrosa parks was not just a seamstress who sat down on the bus and decided she did not want to get up,ﬂ said horn. ﬁshe was part of a strategic grassroots movement connected to a plan to in˚uence policy and make changes.ﬂdigital health strategies present a unique opportunity to address health disparities, but ﬁwe need to leverage the trusted leadership of online racial and ethnic minority communities to draw attention to the injustice of health inequities,ﬂ horn stated. doing so would create a call to action and enable people to become learners in the context of a community where leaders already exist.as an example, horn described a series of focus groups on technology use done with sickle cell patients who were transitioning out of pediatric care facilities into adult care facilities. when asked how they already were using technology in their daytoday lives, focus group members said they were, for example, texting their parents to get lists of medications, or using games to distract themselves when they were having a pain crisis. ﬁwhatever you create needs to be hackable,ﬂ said horn, ﬁmeaning that the patient who has it needs to be able to make it their own.ﬂ horn also works with children as young as 2 years old who are creating digital narratives using a tablet. ﬁthey are teaching us how to utilize that tool if we listen, if we look, if we pay attention,ﬂ she said.in taking on this kind of work, several important questions need to be answered, horn noted. where are the communities online? who are the leaders in those communities? how can the health care community work with those leaders to ensure the information people receive is the right information?partnering with racial and ethnic minority developers needs to be the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 digital strategies in achieving health equitypaired with outreach to of˚ine organizations and systems, such as churches and community organizations that can push for better access to health care, horn said. the affordable care act has increased coverage in particular communities, such as the hispanic community and states that are offering increased coverage. ﬁwe need to encourage patients and communities to drive and push for that and ght for that. without these tangible, sustainable movements for change, we will just be wearing more stylish google glasses and quantifying ourselves while people continue to prematurely die all around us,ﬂ she concluded.the value of theoriesﬁevidence, as important as it is, is not enough,ﬂ said misha pavel, professor of practice jointly appointed between the college of computer and information sciences and the bouvé college of health sciences at northeastern university. ﬁit is not enough to know that something worked or it did not work. we need to know why, because if we don™t, we don™t know what to change,ﬂ he said.technology has the potential to create important changes in behavior over the next decade, and, as pavel said, ﬁbehaviors are killing us.ﬂ at least 40 percent of premature mortality is the result of people™s behaviors. the problem is that behaviors are hard to change. sexual behaviors, alcohol and drug use, smoking, a sedentary lifestyle, and even sleeping patternsšwhich are closely related to stress and its negative consequencesšare deeply engrained behaviors.human behaviors produce health states and biological indicators that can be measured. however, a connection needs to be drawn between what is being measured and what is of concern, pavel stated. for example, blood pressure is of interest for what it signies about the health of the cardiovascular system. ﬁwe need to have some way of transforming what we measure to what we want to know,ﬂ said pavel, ﬁthen we can close the loop and intervene in an optimal way.ﬂthe proliferation of mobile technologies can help greatly both with the measures of health indicators and with interventions. indicators that can be measured range all the way from glucose levels to a person™s mood. mobile technologies also can sense the context a person is in and initiate questions or interventions at the appropriate time. for example, they can remind someone to take a medicine or make a measurement when that person is in the right circumstance.however, the optimal use of technologies requires having a good theory about why and where they work. a good theory ﬁis going to not only drive your design, but also the questions that you ask,ﬂ said pavel. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients 19even when a theory is wrong, demonstrating that it is wrong can result in progress.mobile technologies can be used to do much more than has been done to date, pavel observed. for example, he described a randomized controlled trial on the use of mobile technologies to change people™s weight. one group got a traditional weight control intervention, while another group received an intervention that used mobile technologies. ﬁwhat we do is build these two process models to characterize outreach performance. once you have a model, then you can develop the most optimal intervention that maintains the weight,ﬂ he explained.a major conclusion was that the use of mobile technologies worked for some people and not for others. the challenge thus has evolved from understanding the behavior of groups to modeling the behaviors of individuals to be able to predict which individuals will benet from an intervention. pavel explained, ﬁwhat we need to do is model [the behavior of] individuals and be able to predict what they will do.ﬂolder people can pose unique problems, pavel noted in response to a question, because many of them ﬁapproach technology with suspicion.ﬂ for example, one of older patients™ highest concerns is cognitive decline. in response, ﬁwe use games and cognitive games that enable them to practice various cognitive skills,ﬂ he noted. also, using skype, older patients can nd each other and build communities, adding ﬁwe would have never been able to anticipate that.ﬂin response to another comment, pavel pointed to the difculty of keeping up with technology. a study done of a technology, like personal digital assistants, can be obsolete by the time the study is published because the technology is no longer being used. at the same time, mobile technology provides very rapid access to information and data. ﬁwe can collect data in a way we have never been able to do before. as a result, we are beginning to think about randomized controlled trials and evidence gathering as a much more dynamic process. . . . but there is also always going to be a bit of a gap,ﬂ he noted.a fundamental need, pavel concluded, is for a vision of what health care will look like in 20 years. then steps can be taken to help the system evolve toward that vision. developing the basic principles that will drive progress entails making difcult social and economic decisions, but ﬁwe have to face it,ﬂ he concluded.a health literacy perspective on health disparitiesﬁhow do you engage providers and patients in digital strategies to promote health equity and reduce disparities?ﬂ asked ruth parker, professor of medicine, pediatrics, and public health at the emory university school of the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 digital strategies in achieving health equitymedicine. the research on this question is nascent, parker noted, and many questions need to be answered, including the following:ł which digital strategies would do this?ł what are patientcentered, healthliterate digital strategies?ł what is known about the value of strategies, in terms of both quality and cost, as the affordability of health care delivery is addressed?ł how do trust, civility, and social impactšfor example, the effects of digital technologies on the environmentšcome into play?parker focused mostly on issues of health literacy during her talk, since, as the institute of medicine has observed, ﬁefforts to improve quality, to reduce costs, and to reduce disparities cannot proceed without simultaneous improvements in health literacyﬂ (iom, 2004, p. xiv). in an effort to dene health literacy, a group of authors in the discussion paper ten attributes of health literate health care organizations identied the following qualities (brach et al., 2012): 1. has leadership that makes health literacy integral to its mission, structure, and operations. 2. integrates health literacy into planning, evaluation measures, patient safety, and quality improvement. 3. prepares the workforce to be health literate and monitors progress. 4. includes populations served in the design, implementation, and evaluation of health information and services. 5. meets the needs of populations with a range of health literacy skills while avoiding stigmatization. 6. uses health literacy strategies in interpersonal communications, and conrms understanding at all points of contact. 7. provides easy access to health information and services and navigation assistance. 8. designs and distributes print, audiovisual, and social media content that is easy to understand and act on. 9. addresses health literacy in highrisk situations, including care transitions and communications about medicines.10. communicates clearly what health plans cover and what individuals will have to pay for services.many of these attributes have direct parallels with the health literacy of individuals. as an example, parker cited the nal attribute on coverage and cost. ﬁa lot of the transformation of health care organizations will the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients 21come with cost transparency,ﬂ she said, because people do not want to waste money.the main lesson that parker drew from this list is that patients are the real experts. as one of parker™s patients once told her, ﬁi know what i know. i also know more than i think i do.ﬂ therefore, to work effectively with patients, the health care system will need to partner with them, parker explained. health care systems also need to nd ways to engage patients more effectively, she said later in response to a question. ﬁi have never heard anybody say, ‚i get to go to the doctor today.™ it™s ‚i have to go.™ anything we can do to try to make it engaging, to try to make it more fun, that is a good thing,ﬂ she said.she described several projects in which partnerships and engagement led to important advances. during the surge of h1n1 cases in the united states, she and her colleagues worked with the centers for disease control and prevention to develop an online selftriaging ˚u website. with input from experts and from interviews with potential users, the developers put together a list of questions that would help someone know whether to go to an emergency room or stay home and treat their aches and fever. ﬁeverybody on my team got the ˚u, by the way, [but] i feel that you really do have to work with the target population to gure out what is going on,ﬂ she explained. these conversations require learning to listen. listening to people ﬁis the hardest part of communication,ﬂ parker said, ﬁbecause we do not always hear what we want to hear.ﬂanother example was text4baby, in which the major mobile carriers in the united states waived the fees for text messages sent to pregnant women and mothers with babies in the rst year of life. about 650,000 women signed up to use the system, which is still ongoing. to develop the messages, parker and her colleagues went into the eld and tested the messages with potential users. for example, the original message, ﬁthe ˚u can be dangerous for pregnant women & their babies. talk to your doctor about seasonal ˚u & h1n1 ˚u shots,ﬂ was changed on the basis of this input to ﬁif you get the ˚u while you are pregnant, you and your baby can get very sick. ask your doc if you need a ˚u shot.ﬂ besides changing the message from passive to active voice, the new message provided a more specic action step by asking about getting a ˚u shot. ﬁwe tested all these early messages to get input from the ground before they were launched,ﬂ said parker.evaluations of the text4baby project have found that text messaging is more common among the highrisk population than among other populations (gazmararian et al., 2012, 2014; poorman et al., 2014). in addition, successful enrollment was more likely with higher health literacy.however, these evaluations also identied several major issues that need to be addressed, including a lack of good theories of behavior change, small sample sizes, high dropoff rates, missing control groups, reliance the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 digital strategies in achieving health equityon selfreports, and a failure to tie outcomes to content. future research, said parker, needs to look at such issues as navigating mhealth initiatives despite lower health literacy, the use of prepaid phone cards, the delivery of supplemental information (such as videos, icons, or verbal narratives), better enrollment strategies, the effect on behaviors, and the relative effect of the program at different literacy levels.parker also discussed a study of internet and mobile phone use among older americans. in a study of about 430 subjects drawn from an academic medical center and four community primary care clinics, a signicantly larger fraction of those patients with adequate health literacy had internet access in their home compared to those with limited health literacy. the same is true for access to the internet anywhere other than the home. these ndings provide many opportunities for continued exploration, parker noted.summing up, parker pointed to several new directions for research and interventions that could help reduce health disparities. both hightech and lowtech solutions need to be evaluated, she said. patient input and engagement need to be maximized to re˚ect patients™ needs, she added, while more practical metrics of technology use and its impact are developed. health care providers also need to be educated about patientcentered, healthliterate digital strategies, she emphasized, with identication of best practices and the competencies that providers should have. ﬁi have never found a health ofcer or a medical student who regularly advises patients on where to go for good evidencebased and useful information on the internet or on their phone,ﬂ she said.during the discussion session, parker pointed brie˚y to some of the privacy issues associated with digital technologies. for example, her elderly patients often tell her that they would like to send and receive photographs of their medications to know what they should be taking. but health systems are concerned that doing so will raise privacy concerns. photographing medications and taking pictures of clinical wounds or conditions such as wounds or rashes is ﬁa hot zone for action,ﬂ she said, ﬁbecause patients like it and it is user friendly. but systems do not know what to do with that.ﬂshe concluded by quoting kelly johnson™s advice to ﬁkeep it simple, stupid.ﬂ ﬁthis is still the hallmark of great design,ﬂ she said. ﬁsimplicity should be the key goal.ﬂdesigning systems for health literacy and equitywhen the world wide web rst became widely available in the 1990s, cameron norman, principal of cense research + design and an adjunct professor in the dalla lana school of public health at the university of toronto, began working on ehealth literacy, which he dened as ﬁthe ability to seek, nd, understand, and appraise health information from the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients 23electronic sources and apply the knowledge gained to addressing or solving a health problemﬂ (norman and skinner, 2006, p. e9). but this was early in the history of the web, he added. since then, his views have evolved. in a 2011 paper, he wrote:just as the eld of ehealth is dynamic and evolving, so too is the context where ehealth literacy is applied and understood. the original [model] of ehealth literacy and the scale used to assess it were developed at a time when the rst generation of web tools gained prominence before the rise of social media. the rapid shifts in the informational landscape created by web 2.0 tools and environments suggests it might be time to revisit the concept of ehealth literacy and consider what a second release might look like. (norman, 2011, p. e125)the web originally was designed to communicate information to the world. in the health context, the idea was that framing and delivering information the right way would get people to change their behavior. but technologies and platforms such as mobile computing, interactive video, facebook, and twitter have changed the web, norman said. ﬁnow we realize that it is much more about being able to create part of the conversation and lead the conversation.ﬂ many interesting conversations happening today are not being led by experts but by members of the public. the oneway push of information remains part of the picture, but it is just a small part of a much more complicated world.in an earlier era, communicating was about knowing an audience and addressing it directly. the problem with that view is that addressing an audience requires accepting at the outset the basic premises that unite the audience. ﬁartists do not address themselves to audiences,ﬂ norman said, citing the work of the anthropologist edmund snow carpenter. ﬁthey create audiences. the artist talks to himself out loud. if what he has to say is signicant, others hear and are affected,ﬂ he explained.in the context of health disparities, norman said that digital media now provide the ability for people to ﬁtake ownership of the issues and say, ‚if others are not going to do it for us, we will do it for ourselves. we will create our own audiences.™ﬂ this is a powerful possibility, said norman, but it also presents challenges.first, the volume of content that these technologies can provide is overwhelming. ﬁdoes anybody in the room here think that they do not have enough email?ﬂ he asked. and email is just one channel. text messages, facebook posts, tweets, and other electronic intrusions all compete for one™s time.second, the systems created around information technologies frame the context of information. norman quoted the historian of technology melvin the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 digital strategies in achieving health equitykranzberg, who established as his rst law of technology that ﬁtechnology is neither good nor bad; nor is it neutralﬂ (kranzberg, 1995, p. 5). people are expected to make complex health decisions using sophisticated information that is coming at them at light speed. as people are overwhelmed by the amount and complexity of information they receive, they can be expected to question some of the systems enabled by digital technologies. people need to think about what they are gaining and what they are giving up through their use of technology, norman observed. ﬁwhat are we hiring this technology to do?ﬂ he asked.the systems created around technologies also have distinct drawbacks. an example is the ad content and other distractions, such as click bait, transmitted with electronic information to support those communications. norman explained that ﬁyour life is time. the more time you are spending on this, [the more] it is part of your life. but is that the life you want?ﬂfinally, technology is inserting itself into parts of people™s lives that were once technology free, ﬁlike walking a dog, or walking across the street with a friend, or spending time with your friends or loved ones, or having lunch, or going on a trip and visiting the sites, or exercising,ﬂ he noted. new technologies can lock people into systems, norman stated, and people can no longer think about systemic structures when they are locked into those systems. health disparities originate in systemic structures and patterns of behaviors, said norman. these structures include how workplaces, communities, and social systems are set up. technology has the potential to change these structures and patterns of behavior, he said, ﬁbut only if we are thinking about it in those terms.ﬂthe only way to change systemic problems is to think and act systemically, norman explained. that requires individuals making individual choices collectively in collaboration with one another. ﬁwe need to be thinking about what are individuals doing, but we cannot do that divorced from the idea of what happens within the networks in which people interact,ﬂ he noted. what is important is to pay attention to what is adding value, norman said. people may use a technology in a way that was not planned but that nevertheless adds value to their lives. also, technologies need to t into the fabric of everyday life and not be simply an addon if their use is to be sustainable.systemic change also involves the concept of design, said norman, which he views as a way of creating new things. as nobel laureate herbert simon once observed, ﬁa designer is anyone who devises a course of action that seeks to change current situations into preferred onesﬂ (simon, 1981, p. 129). technologies can be designed for the collective wellbeing, or they can continue to focus people on events. ﬁwe need to be clear about our intentions,ﬂ said norman, because design is about ﬁmaking intent come alive.ﬂthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engaging providers and racial/ethnic minority patients 25he closed with an observation that is attributed to paul batalden, professor emeritus of the geisel school of medicine at dartmouth: ﬁevery system is perfectly designed to get the results it gets.ﬂ to change the system, he said, ﬁwe have to listen, and then we have to lead.ﬂthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important points highlighted by the speakers ł culturally appropriate interventions delivered through online technologies can meet the information needs of racial and  ethnic minority communities. (ginossar)ł challenges include the lack of continuous funding, the fact that local heroes move, and continually changing models and technology. (ginossar)ł communitybased participatory research can be a way of connecting technology and community so long as the community is integral to the process. (baumeister, ginossar, loveluck)two presentations at the workshop looked in more detail at specic examples of successful efforts to engage racial and ethnic minority communities in digital health strategies. one considered the use of technologies in a latina immigrant community in new mexico; the other focused on men who have sex with men (msm) in the detroit metropolitan area. though the targeted populations were quite different, both demonstrated how technologybased interventions can reach communities in ways that more traditional interventions cannot.4examples of engaging racial/ethnic minority communities in digital health strategies27the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 digital strategies in achieving health equityreducing digital and health inequities in latina immigrant communitiestamar ginossar, who teaches courses in health communication at the university of new mexico, offered a specic example of how partnerships between universities and local communities can reduce health disparities. she works with a community group called la comunidad habla, spanish for ﬁthe community speaks.ﬂ the goal of the partnership is to reduce disparities in a latina immigrant community, but the same model can be applied to similar collaborations in many different community settings, ginossar said.new mexico is a majority minority state, with latinos comprising 47 percent of the population, followed by nonhispanic whites and native americans. the state has one of the highest poverty rates in the nation, which in turn leads to health disparities. it also has the lowest rate of broadband access at home.la comunidad habla works predominantly in southeast albuquerque, which is close to the university of new mexico. known as the international district in recognition of its diversity, it is the most ethnically diverse area in the state, in part because of its central location and relatively affordable housing. up to 80 percent of the properties are rentals, ﬁwhich makes building social capital difcult,ﬂ said ginossar, ﬁbecause people do not own their homes, and they move in and out of the area.ﬂdespite increases in online access, the digital divide persists, she continued. latinos in particular are digitally marginalized in access to information technologies, in having a lower representation in the information technology workforce, and in their lack of culturally relevant content on the web. this digital divide has marginalizing social and economic effects. ﬁto make informed decision making, we need access to credible information,ﬂ ginossar said, adding, ﬁwe know from the general population that people with access to health information online report much better health outcomes. whom are we leaving out?ﬂproviding online access to digitally marginalized communities is necessary but not sufcient to bridge the digital divide, she said. culturally appropriate interventions are needed as well to meet the information needs of these communities, said ginossar, and these interventions need to provide support and culturally appropriate, lowliteracylevel content.created in 2002 as a community outreach project of the young children™s health center, a university of new mexico pediatric clinic, la  comunidad habla was founded as a community digital media group to provide women with technological and health advocacy leadership in the community (ginossar and nelson, 2010a,b). it began with evening computer classes in spanish for women, with child care provided, ﬁwhich is a crucial component,ﬂ ginossar emphasized. the project provided opportunithe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of engaging racial/ethnic minority communities 29ties for community members to access health information and technology, in part through a bilingual online health care resource directory (http://www.mycommunitynm.org). with relatively few nancial resources, it reached and trained more than 1,000 community members and providers.when ginossar began working with the group, she was very interested in how people were using the internet for health information seeking. she found that community members were particularly interested in the behavioral health of children. ﬁa lot of parents have questions about the development and behavior of children in all communities. there is still a lot of stigma attached to it and not enough services to access,ﬂ she explained. a literature review revealed that most children who need evaluation and treatment for behavioral health and developmental disorders do not receive it. children are typically diagnosed after they enter school, but interventions are often most effective in younger children. ﬁwe are missing the crucial years of early intervention,ﬂ ginossar said.the scientic literature also showed that the less stigma parents feel about accessing mental health care for their children and the more knowledge they have about early childhood development and behavior, the more likely they are to access services. to reduce stigma and build knowledge, ginossar and her colleagues created a collaboration with mental health experts that had two objectives: rst, to examine lowincome latina community members™ information needs and information sources regarding early childhood behavior and development; second, to develop educational outreach to community members and key stakeholders. drawing on the results of focus groups conducted both in english and in spanish, the collaboration created educational materials, including an illustrated story, or historieta, that combined education and entertainment.ginossar ended by listing some of the future research goals for the collaboration. one is to create a larger intervention to meet parental information needs and decrease the digital divide. this larger intervention could be systematically examinedšfor example, ginossar said that she was particularly interested in the differences and similarities between digital and print media, because the community organizations were using both.the collaboration wants to build additional collaborations with health care providers in the community. it also wants to work with day care centers in the community to reach parents and caretakers. ﬁday care in this community can be a great place to have interventions, and they are very interested in that because of their needs for accreditation,ﬂ ginossaur added.challenges include the lack of continuous funding, the fact that local heroes move, and continually changing models and technology. also, community leaders continue to face various barriers, including a lack of broadband access at home.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 digital strategies in achieving health equitytensions can arise between the different requirements of community organizations and academia, ginossar acknowledged. a lot of what goes on in academia is not relevant to communities or can take a long time to explain. communitybased participatory research involves two cultures coming together, which requires communication about expectations. for example, academics often move from project to project, which is inconsistent with the cultures of communities. but for academics to avoid what has been called ﬁhelicopter research,ﬂ they need the policy and institutional support to remain involved with communities even after the funding is gone. ginossar said that she has been fortunate to work for an institution that appreciates communitybased participatory research and the time it takes.finally, ginossar laid out a potential model for communityœacademic collaborations:ł identify content area with the community.ł review the literature to support the need.ł cocreate research questions with the community.ł build on community models.ł create multidisciplinary collaborations with health care providers and additional stakeholders.ł identify funding sources.ł write grant proposals.ł write additional grant proposals.ł hope that your community partners can wait.a tailored webbased intervention for young msm in southeast michiganthreequarters of michigan™s hiv/aids cases are in southeast  michigan, with more than 60 percent of the hiv cases in the detroit metro area accounted for by msm. furthermore, six of the nine counties in southeast michigan account for the majority of the new cases of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and primary and secondary syphilis. jimena loveluck, president/ceo of the hiv/aids resource center (harc), and jose bauermeister, associate professor of health behavior and health education and the director of the center for sexuality and health disparities (sexlab) at the university of michigan school of public health, described the tailored webbased technology they have developed to attack these problems by encouraging hiv and sexually transmitted infection (sti) testing among young msm between the ages of 15 and 24 years.get connected (bauermeister et al., 2015a) is an adaptation of the project connect health systems intervention (dittus et al., 2014) developed the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of engaging racial/ethnic minority communities 31for adolescent heterosexual populations. the adaptation acknowledged the need to address structural barriers affecting service efforts aimed toward hiv/sti prevention and care among young men who have sex with men (ymsm), and the importance of using technology to reach this population. the intervention was developed through a communitybased participatory research approach and was informed by existing mixedmethods data focused on ymsm in southeast michigan.loveluck brie˚y laid out some of the principles on which communitybased participatory research (cbpr) is based (israel et al., 1998). cbpr recognizes the community as a unit of identity, builds on strengths and resources within the community, facilitates collaborative and equitable involvement of all partners in all phases of the research, and integrates knowledge and intervention for mutual benet of all partners. speaking as a program director, loveluck said ﬁwe have been involved in everything from designing the intervention and study tools to helping to think about coding of data. we have learned a lot along the processšand not just me as the director of the organization but many staff.ﬂin the case of get connected, cbpr focuses on issues of concern to the community by addressing structural vulnerability among ymsm of color. it also enables the community to use data to advocate for change. in addition, the program has given harc an opportunity to showcase its work on a national and even an international scale. as loveluck said in response to a question, ﬁwe have to hold our academic institutions accountable for sharing the resources and providing some of the capacity building in communities. . . . academic institutions really want to work with community partners, but that has to be done in an equal manner.ﬂget connected has looked at both hiv vulnerability and protective factors. the barriers to accessing hiv services include cost, transportation to services, agerelated barriers, beliefs and risk perceptions, the perceived credibility and competence of providers, medical mistrust, the difculty of navigating services, and discrimination. to overcome these barriers, get connected brought together a variety of groups, including the sexlab at the university of michigan, the center for health and communications research at the university of michigan, a community advisory board made up of service providers, and a youth advisory board, which helped tailor the messages used in the program. another component of the program was ﬁsecret shoppersﬂ (bauermeister et al., 2015b)štwo men per site who went through the process of hiv and sti testing to rate or evaluate the sites based on a set of criteria. these criteria included structural characteristics, such as the hours a clinic was open, whether it was close to public transportation, how long testing would take, and information about insurance and fee scales. the evaluators also considered such questions as whether the site was youth the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 digital strategies in achieving health equityfriendly, whether it was lgbtq (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer) inclusive, whether it was sex positive in terms of its counseling and messages, and whether it had a focus on goal setting and diversity. ﬁnobody has stopped to ask what it is like for a young man to go get tested in these settings,ﬂ bauermeister pointed out, adding ﬁthe trust and respect of the users themselves, and making sure that they are also making decisions, are vital.ﬂbauermeister described the randomized controlled trial conducted as part of the research project that involved 130 young men in southeast michigan who had engaged in sex with a male partner in the past 6 months. one group (the tailored intervention condition) received content developed in the get connected project, which is tailored to re˚ect age, race/ethnicity, sexual identity, history of hiv and sti testing, barriers to testing (such as homelessness, residential instability, or discrimination), sources of support, and personal values. they then received information about the locations of test sites. the comparison condition only received the testing directory. ﬁwe thought it would be unethical to not give young men a chance to nd out where to get tested,ﬂ bauermeister said regarding the inclusion of a testing directory as the comparison group, adding ﬁeven though it makes it harder for us scientically to nd the difference between the arms, from a public health and practice perspective, it is the right thing to do.ﬂboth the tailored site and the test locator conditions had very high satisfaction and acceptability by young men. in addition, 30 days after they had received the intervention, more than 30 percent of the men who received the tailored content had been tested for hiv and/or stis, ﬁwhich is huge,ﬂ according to bauermeister.1 the testing identied one previously unknown hiv case and two previously unknown sti cases that were treated. in addition, four hivpositive participants reported visiting their care providers after participating in the intervention.a particularly interesting result was a reduction in the number of partners among men in the intervention in the following 30 days. even among those who did not get tested before the 30day followup, there were clinically meaningful reductions in perceived barriers to testing and fears about getting tested, along with increased urgency to get tested and to talk with partners about testing or delaying sex until each person™s status was known.at the time of the workshop, get connected was seeking funding for a demonstration project to expand the program to the atlanta metro and the minneapolisœst. paul regions. it also was planning to switch from secret shoppers to a yelplike review system, collect a greater number of time points postintervention, shift the site more toward videos and interactivity than text, and work to extend it from a mobilefriendly to a mobilebased system.bauermeister concluded with several lessons drawn from the experi1 in the control group, 28 percent of the men reported getting tested for hiv.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of engaging racial/ethnic minority communities 33ences with get connected. cbpr can be a way of connecting technology and community, but the community needs to be integral to the process. specic areas of hiv education can be targeted in outreach and testing efforts with providers and clients. and ymsm can be empowered to understand and navigate their testing and counseling sessions.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important points highlighted by the speakersł social media and mobile technologies generally do not intersect with the largescale data initiatives being promoted by government policies. (guillermo, ziv)ł barriers to ehealth adoption include a lack of access to technologies, little interoperability of tools across platforms, the linguistic or cultural competency of tools, limitations caused by disability or technological literacy, patient and physician awareness and incentives, inadequate health literacy, and privacy concerns or distrust. (guillermo, raymond)ł ways to overcome these barriers include improving the digital literacy of consumers and safety net providers, supporting ehealth tools that feature usercentered design, and supporting technology capacity building for safety net providers. (guillermo)ł a registry of commercial products that have viability and reliability would enable patients and providers to nd good solutions to their problems. (guillermo)following the presentations of the la communidad habla and get connected programs, the workshop participants turned to the broader policy and technology issues that shape such initiatives. policy can either support or hinder the use of technology toward achieving and creating 5policy and technology perspectives35the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 digital strategies in achieving health equityhealth equity, which means that policy actions can be a critical factor in the success of interventions.topdown and bottomup approaches to policythe integration of health information technology and ehealth is being prompted in part by federal policy, observed tessie guillermo, president and ceo of zerodivide, which is a missiondriven consulting organization that helps communities transform themselves through the adoption and integration of technology. health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa) regulations, the health information technology for economic and clinical health (hitech) act, incentives for meaningful use of electronic health record (ehr) technologies, and revision of the international statistical classication of diseases and related health problems (icd) all have helped drive the digitization of health care.even apart from these policies, the health care industry has been rapidly changing. one new emphasis, as the industry moves away from a feeforservice model toward a feeforvalue world, is population health management, noted guillermo. in one formulation of that transition, information technology is at the core of population health management, with data driving a virtuous loop of continuous improvement. but a better way to view this transition is by placing the patient in the center of an integrated health care ecosystem, with technology feeding into the system, said guillermo. in either formulation, information ﬁis a constant.ﬂtoday, the pieces of the health ecosystem are not well connected, guillermo pointed out. very few community health centers or primary care medical homes have adopted a working ehr, and most will not achieve meaningful use anytime soon. to navigate the system to achieve good outcomes, reduce costs, and improve care management, patients and health care providers have to navigate around processes that today stand outside an integrated system.many of these processes involve technology. social media promote services to new consumers, enable the sharing of stories, and help build communities. mobile technologies also can promote services along with extending care and providing customer service. consumers want to take advantage of these technologies, as surveys have repeatedly documented. the problem, said guillermo, is that these technologies generally do not intersect with the largescale data initiatives being promoted by policies. the result is likely to be a ﬁlong, expensive, difcult, and complexﬂ process of building capacity and managing change to combine the two separate approaches, she explained.zerodivide has been doing research in recent years on the barriers to greater use of ehealth approaches by lowincome, immigrant, nonthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy and technology perspectives 37englishspeaking, disabled, rural, and other underserved populations. as part of this research, it has categorized ehealth tools into three categories of decreasing complexity: messaging tools, disease management tools, and tethered personal health records (phrs) and patient portals.the evidence shows that messaging and disease management applications are effective in reaching underserved patients and improving their engagement, guillermo observed. however, these solutions have yet to be brought to commercial scale by large health systems and insurers. also, applications tend not to be tied to existing hospital and health system records, which presents challenges. instead, they have been implemented primarily via pilot programs run by departments of health and academic medical centers. as a result, guillermo said, ﬁthings that work are not getting fast enough into the hands of people that can use them.ﬂphrs and patient portals hold signicant potential to engage and empower patients, guillermo said. however, they are generally tied to successful electronic medical record systems, which mean that safety net providers are less likely to offer them. also, they generally have poor usability and design when compared with web 2.0 tools and mobile apps. even within integrated health systems, there are signicant demographic disparities in their adoption. ﬁall of these problems are things that we have to address . . . on an industrywide and a populationwide health scale,ﬂ she added.guillermo cited a number of other barriers to ehealth adoption, including a lack of access to technologies, little interoperability of tools across platforms, the linguistic or cultural competency of tools, limitations caused by disability or technological literacy, patient and physician awareness and incentives, inadequate health literacy, and privacy concerns or distrust. she also pointed to the results of focus group research with racial and ethnic minority women, ages 30 to 64, who were making health decisions in their households and were themselves at risk for a chronic disease. they generally have access to the internet, ﬁmaybe not the highest speed or most affordable, but they have it,ﬂ she explained. but they are discouraged by what they see, she said, adding ﬁit doesn™t re˚ect them. they want personalized, culturally competent technology solutions.ﬂin response to a question about privacy concerns, guillermo pointed in particular to the need for a balance between the fear of data being used for the wrong purpose and the use of data for health equity objectives. everyone in the health care ecosystem has a responsibility for maintaining the condentiality of data, she said. also, technologies can help inform patients about how their data will be used so they can have more control over that use. in contrast, if data are written on paper, ﬁit could just be left on the table,ﬂ guillermo noted. education around privacy, condentiality, and the regulation of data uses is as important as the development of the the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 digital strategies in achieving health equitytools, she said. ﬁthe privacy and security barrier is a major obstacle to get past for certain segments of the population. we need to acknowledge the importance of protecting information and communicateﬂ the security steps being taken, she said.the focus groups resulted in a set of recommendations that guillermo cited. one is to improve the digital literacy of both consumers and safety net providers, who are interacting with patients around the use of these tools. another is to support ehealth tools that feature usercentered design. a third is to support technology capacity building for safety net providers. today, community health centers are being supported to adopt electronic medical records. however, they are not receiving much support for the testing and use of consumerfacing tools or the other infrastructure tools that support operational processes within their clinics.policy approaches can be both topdown and bottomup, guillermo noted in closing. topdown federally instigated policies include meaningful use requirements, innovation grants and funds for ehealth pilots, and a central database or registry of approved education resources and apps. for example, a registry of commercial products that have viability and reliability would enable patients and providers to nd good solutions to their problems.bottomup community programs also are important, said guillermo. these include communityled marketing and awareness campaigns, forums to bring patients and developers together, and community ehealth pilots. communities and academic institutions could form partnerships to develop these approaches, where funding, intellectual property, and revenue streams are shared.increasingly, ﬁthere is an attentiveness to the need to bring providers, patients, investors, and innovators together to begin to do deep dives into solving some of these barriers,ﬂ said guillermo, adding, people have to be open to that, to not stay in their enclaves, where we are comfortable. . . . the people in this room, you all know that. you are a big part of the solution. i would hope that, because of forums like this, there will be opportunities for more of this to happen in an accelerated way.the policy perspective from an integrated health care delivery systemkaiser permanente has ﬁa lot at stake with regards to ehealth equity,ﬂ said brian raymond, senior health policy consultant at the kaiser  permanente institute for health policy. kaiser permanente operates in seven regions, serving eight states and the district of columbia, and has more than 10 million members. the intersection of health information technolthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy and technology perspectives 39ogy, health care delivery, and the communities, individuals, and families that the system serves are directly linked to ehealth equity.kaiser permanente has made a very large investment in health information technology. its ehr system, known as healthconnect, is deployed in all of its facilities across the nation and is the largest health information technology system in use today in the united states. the system integrates appointments, registration, billing, and back ofce health care functions; supports inpatient care, outpatient care, and ancillary services; and includes a data repository and patient portal. the system provides patients with secure email to their providers, online access to test results, online appointment scheduling, prescription rells, and video appointments with primary care providers. today, onethird of kaiser permanente™s primary care visits are conducted by email, and 27 percent of the healthconnect transactions were conducted via mobile devices. healthconnect is ﬁtransforming care for our members,ﬂ said raymond.these changes are producing quality improvements in care, explained raymond. kaiser permanente™s care ratings for chronic conditions and cancer prevention have risen from the middle of the pack to above the 90th percentile since healthconnect was implemented. all seven of kaiser  permanente™s medicare plans are among the top 10 plans, as determined by the national committee for quality assurance, and the southern california plan has been the toprated plan for the past 3 years.1despite these quality improvements, ﬁhealth disparities persist among kaiser permanente members,ﬂ raymond observed. he showed a series of charts documenting differences in the occurrence of obesity, asthma, diabetes, and hypertension in the san francisco bay area, with areas of poor health corresponding largely with lowincome communities and communities of color. ﬁthat is a major concern for us,ﬂ he said.to ensure the benets of health information technologies accrue to all its members, not just those with access to technologies and the resources and skills to use them, kaiser permanente researchers have been studying potential disparities in the use of healthconnect by its members. for example, zhou et al. (2010) found that secure email use by patients was associated with a 2.0 to 6.5 percent improvement in performance on measures of the healthcare effectiveness data and information set, such as glycemic (hba1c), cholesterol, and blood pressure screening and control measures. this nding highlights outcome disparities between users and nonusers of secure email, raymond observed.research also has demonstrated that kaiser permanente members who are registered for access to their personal health records are more likely to 1 kaiser permanente, unlike other health systems, is not based on a feeforservice model; this may contribute to their innovations and investments to reduce disparities.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 digital strategies in achieving health equitybe nonhispanic whites than the nonusers of the system. similarly, african americans and latinos in northern california were more likely than nonhispanic whites to request a password for the patient portal but never log on. a study in georgia found that kaiser permanente members with a postgraduate education more frequently registered for access to the patient portal than adults with a high school education or less. ﬁtogether, these ndings document to us that there are potential ehealth disparities among our membership,ﬂ said raymond, adding ﬁthis is a concern that we need to keep on our radar and track and address.ﬂto reduce these disparities, kaiser permanente has identied and implemented actionable strategies to ensure that health information technology addresses the needs of atrisk and traditionally underserved populations. one approach has been to segment the atrisk population into three groups: ﬁhavesﬂ who currently have information technology access and want to use it for their health, ﬁwantsﬂ who want access to ehealth and could have it if they receive appropriate assistance, and ﬁdon™t wantsﬂ who do not want access to ehealth. for the ﬁhaves,ﬂ the strategy is to focus on content and functionalityšfor example, making sure that the patient portal has information that is accessible, useful, and relevant to that population. marketing is also important for these individuals, in that they may not be aware that a patient portal exists or that it may have content that is valuable to them.for the ﬁwants,ﬂ the strategy is to focus on increasing technology access and skill development, such as through a broadband or computer access program in an underserved area or a computer literacy program. a secondary strategy for this segment is to offer alternatives to technology by providing highquality care and services through lowtechnology communication channels.for the ﬁdon™t wants,ﬂ highquality alternatives to technology also are needed, raymond observed, including traditional inperson visits, phone calls, and print material. also for this segment, marketing could raise their awareness of the potential value of ehealth to them. ﬁmaybe if it is not to them, it is for a caregiver,ﬂ raymond said. ﬁmaybe they are not interested themselves, but they have a proxy who would be interested in using the system on their behalf,ﬂ he added.kaiser permanente does not have all the answers to ehealth equity, but it has ﬁskin in the game,ﬂ said raymond. ﬁwe recognize that we have a role to continue playing in terms of advancing research and better understanding both the benets of our health information technology system and the potential risk that it poses.ﬂthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy and technology perspectives 41observations from a technology developerat the technology conferences he attends, presenters sometimes ask for a show of hands to determine how many people use iphones, android phones, or windows phones, noted noam ziv, the founder and ceo of kesembe, inc. but if someone asked an audience to hold up their hands if they had ever been sick, every hand would be raised. for that reason, the integration of technology into health care is obviously of interest to technology developers.ziv offered several observations about technology and health based on his experiences and what he had heard at the workshop. he began by noting that communication is the most prevalent utility in the world. even in places where there is no electricity, people still use cell phones, adding that ﬁthey have solar chargers. they nd ways to share cell phones. it is absolutely amazing.ﬂtechnology developers tend to think in terms of scalability. if adding another person to a service requires hiring a person to support that service, ﬁit is not going to scale,ﬂ said ziv. today, ehealth applications tend to require a high level of expertise to use, which requires extensive support. the way to reach large populations and reduce costs is to have fewer people serving larger populations. this requires making technologies more accessible and usable at all education levels. ﬁliteracy can be improved, but also things can be simplied,ﬂ he said. ipads, for example, do not ship with manuals because they are designed to work as soon as they are turned on.the cost of technologies has been declining, ziv pointed out, but the cost of connectivity, especially in the united states, has not. the united states is not a lowcost wireless or internet provider; nor is it the world™s leader in speed or coverage. the environment that keeps connectivity costs high could be changed, ziv noted, but doing so requires changing regulations. for example, regulations about what people can store on their phones increases complexity and costs. new policies also could help in places where connectivity is slow or nonexistent.much more of health care can move online, ziv noted. he explained:think about what the banks have done for us. it used to be that whenever you wanted a transaction, you would go to the bank. there will be a teller, onetoone. you would stand in line. you would tell them, ﬁi would like to deposit a check, . . . what is the balance of my account?ﬂ today, people get their banking information online, deposit checks electronically, and use automated teller machines for cash. they go to their banks only on rare occasions.ﬁwe have to create similar analogies for health care systems,ﬂ said ziv. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 digital strategies in achieving health equityﬁwe need to be able to deposit our health data electronically. we need to be able to interact with our health information or health systems when and where and how it is convenient to us. to do that, we need to be able to automate more of these processes,ﬂ he added.technologies also can benet health care providers by helping them make medical recommendations and eliminating wrong answers. developing such applications poses challenging and complex problems, ziv acknowledged, pointing to regulatory hurdles that essentially say, ﬁyou can™t make a medical recommendation as a machineﬂ without going through a daunting approval process. but regulations could be changed to enable such advances. also, as ziv pointed out, not everything can be regulated. people need to learn about the perils as well as the promises of technology.finally, companies are interested in health technologies because of the business opportunities they provide. for example, companies are offering cloudbased web services partly because of the demand for those services but also to build markets for their products. ziv also mentioned the  qualcomm tricorder xprize, which is a $10 million global competition to stimulate innovation and integration of precision diagnostic technologies.2 the device has to be operable by a patient, not a trained physician, which will improve both usability and health literacy.2 more information is available at http://tricorder.xprize.org (accessed may 18, 2016).the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the nal session of the workshop, two respondents re˚ected on the main messages that they heard in the presentations and discussions over the course of the day. hayley thompson is associate professor in the department of oncology at the wayne state school of medicine and has done research on the use of digital technologies with cancer patients. andre blackman is a consultant with the rm pulse + signal and cofounder of the fastforward health film festival. several roundtable members also participated in the conversation, resulting in a wideranging summary and extension of the day™s discussions.generating evidence of effectivenessinterventions need evidence that demonstrates their effectiveness, said thompson. yet the time from ﬁdiscovery to disseminationﬂ can be an issue for interventions. creating an evidencebased program requires getting support for the program, implementing it, gathering and analyzing data, demonstrating efcacy, and moving toward dissemination. the length of this process can be daunting for academic researchers, who need to produce results to advance in their careers. yet academic researchers need to be involved in the process of generating evidence because of the expertise, theory, and methods that they can contribute, thompson said. institutions therefore may need to do more to support researchers who want to pursue this work.one way to involve institutions is to do more education about communitybased participatory research. for this research to succeed, said 6synthesis of workshop messages43the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 digital strategies in achieving health equitythompson, institutional review boards, reviewers, and other parts of the research ecosystem need to know more about the methods, practices, and processes of this research.at the same time, research could be sped up through innovative approaches. traditional randomized controlled trials are not always necessary to demonstrate efcacy, thompson observed. methods like pragmatic trials, comprehensive dynamic trials, or rapid learning cycles can produce valuable evidence and move the eld forward.privacy and sustainabilityblackman began by emphasizing the intersection of policy and privacy, which came up periodically during the workshop. ehealth applications generate data that are both medically and commercially valuable. companies such as apple are paying attention to how data from digital health applications are shared. but patients need to have control over the sharing of information, he said.he also pointed toward the importance of sustainability. people™s lives are so full, change is so rapid, and people are exposed to so much information that a shortterm campaign cannot be expected to have a lasting effect. instead, sustainability needs to be integrated into interventions, he said, so that change is built into the context of people™s lives. the design of an intervention can be a critical factor in its sustainability, he pointed out, and guides to humancentered design exist and could be used toward this end.the inperson componenttechnology is a valuable tool, said blackman, but it cannot replace persontoperson contact, especially in communities likely to experience health disparities. ﬁthere is no substitute for getting down and talking to people about how this is going to be useful, why this is important in your lives, why it is important for your family, and getting feedback from them.ﬂ the twoway exchange of information requires listening and nding out what is important in people™s lives. ﬁthat is where we can begin to tailor a lot of these initiatives and tools around what is actually important in people™s lives,ﬂ he explained.health is something that people tend not to think about when they are feeling ne, but people need to be engaged even when health is not forefront in their minds, said blackman. integrating health into the things that are forefront in their mind would be one way to pursue this goal. a single father with three children who is working multiple jobs does not have time to think about eating ve fruits and vegetables per day. but if healthy eating could be made part of the issues that concern such a father, progthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis of workshop messages 45ress could be made. also, the social determinants of health are extremely powerful, blackman reminded the workshop participants. thinking about how health interacts with transportation, family issues, or other things that are important in people™s lives could improve health while addressing nonhealth issues as well.focusing on the social determinants of health emphasizes the importance of multidisciplinary research, thompson added. she is a psychologist who partners with anthropologists so they can go into people™s homes and gure out how technology ts into their lives and can more effectively meet their needs. for this kind of research, a multidisciplinary perspective is critical, she said. the use of technology in health care also requires the use of people throughout a community, such as community health workers and community leaders, she said. this is particularly the case with the most marginalized communities, such as people involved with substance abuse, the criminal justice system, or the foster system.involving communitiesthompson returned to the need to fully engage community members and stakeholders in the process of tool development and tool evaluation. furthermore, communities are not just the people who live in specic neighborhoods. online communities, thought leaders, and content creators are examples of dispersed communities that can help build a movement for the use of technology to reduce health disparities. a useful guide, she added in response to a question, is critical race theory,1 especially in its application to public health.involving communities means arranging for feedback from community members at all stages of a project, blackman said, adding ﬁfrom the jump, we need to make sure that the people who we are looking to serve are a part of it . . . so that we are able to create things that matter.ﬂ such feedback can contribute to the rapid development of a program, even if it means that a program fails quickly so developers can pursue other ideas.blackman also cited several additional communities that should be involved, such as racial and ethnic minority technology entrepreneurs, educators, and workforce development organizers. ﬁintroduce yourself to these kinds of leaders; let them know what you are about,ﬂ and then let them help you, he said.winston wong, medical director for kaiser permanente community 1 critical race theory looks at the relationships among race, racism, and power. it is an activist approach that is based on the assumptions that racism is ordinary and acceptable, white privilege exists, and the belief that the concepts of race and racism are social constructs rather than a biological reality.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 digital strategies in achieving health equitybenet, commented on the need for technology companies to be more accountable to the diversity of american society. these rms can create opportunities for diverse groups to help create and use technologies. in this way, they can address some of the broader determinants of health that help generate disparities. the guiding principle, he said, should be ﬁno technology without me.ﬂscalability and adaptabilityan interesting discussion took place regarding the extent to which an intervention can be scaled up without losing the cultural competency that helped make the original intervention effective. thompson emphasized the importance of building feedback into an intervention so it can be adapted to new circumstances while it is being scaled up.mildred thompson asked if scalability is always possible: ﬁif i create a communitybased program here in the city of detroit, and i have worked with my community partners and members, and we have some effective outcomes in terms of healthšand we have worked closely for years on this initiativešwhy would i expect that to work in exactly the same way in chicago?ﬂ a better way to think about scalability may be in terms of the methods, ideas, and templates that people elsewhere can use to design their own intervention. in particular, added toni villarruel, dean of the university of pennsylvania school of nursing, there may be critical elements that need to be sustained while other elements can be changed. ﬁwe, as researchers, have the obligation to help people gure out what we have learned and how that can be used in their community,ﬂ she said.involving providersfinally, thompson pointed to an obstacle not much discussed at the workshop, which is the willingness of health care providers to accept and adopt technologies. ﬁsome of our research across institutions here in detroit shows that there is not always uniform acceptance of a new technologyﬂ by providers, she said. providers may see new technologies as taking valuable time to learn and to use, even when they are benecial to patients. at kaiser permanente, the use of technology is ﬁpart of the organizational culture, but that is not the case everywhere,ﬂ she concluded.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ahrq (agency for healthcare research and quality). 2013. national healthcare disparities report 2012 no 130003: washington, dc.bauermeister, j. a., e. s. pingel, l. jadwincakmak, g. w. harper, k. horvath, g. weiss, and p. dittus. 2015a. acceptability and preliminary efcacy of a tailored online hiv/sti testing intervention for young men who have sex with men. aids & behavior 19(10):18601874.bauermeister, j. a., e. s. pingel, l. jadwincakmak, s. meanley, d. alapati, m. moore, m. lowther, r. wade, and g. w. harper. 2015b. the use of mystery shopping for quality assurance evaluations of hiv/sti testing sites offering services to young gay and bisexual men. aids & behavior 19(10):19191927.brach, c., d. keller, l. m. hernandez, c. baur, r. parker, b. dreyer, p. schyve, a. j.  lemerise, and d. schillinger. 2012. ten attributes of health literate health care organizations. discussion paper. washington, dc: institute of medicine.cisco. 2015. cisco announces intent to acquire opendns. newsroom.cisco.com (accessed may 18, 2106).dittus, p. j., c. j. de rosa, r. a. jeffries, a. a. a, w. g. cumberland, e. q. chung, e. martinez, p. r. kerndt, and k. a. ethier. 2014. the project connect health systems intervention: linking sexually experienced youth to sexual and reproductive health care. journal of adolescent health 55(4):528534.gazmararian, j. a., b. yang, l. elon, m. graham, and r. parker. 2012. successful enrollment in text4baby more likely with higher health literacy. journal of health communication 17(suppl. 3):303311.gazmararian, j. a., l. elon, b. yang, m. graham, and r. parker. 2014. text4baby program: an opportunity to reach underserved pregnant and postpartum women? maternal and child health journal 18(1):223232.ginossar, t., and s. nelson. 2010a. la comunidad habla: using internet communitybased information interventions to increase empowerment and access to health care of low income latino/a immigrants. communication education 59(3):328343.references47the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 digital strategies in achieving health equityginossar, t., and s. nelson. 2010b. reducing the health and digital divides: a model for using communitybased participatory research approach to ehealth interventions in low income hispanic communities. journal of computer mediated communication 15(4):530551.iom (institute of medicine). 2002. unequal treatment: confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2004. health literacy: a prescription to end confusion. washington, dc: the national academies press.iom. 2011. digital infrastructure for the learning health system: the foundation for continuous improvement in health and health care: workshop series summary. washington, dc: the national academies press.israel, b. a., a. j. schulz, e. a. parker, and a. b. becker. 1998. review of communitybased research: assessing partnership approaches to improve public health. annual review of public health 19:173202.kranzberg, m. 1995. technology and history: ﬁkranzberg™s laws.ﬂ bulletin of science, technology, and society 15(1):513.norman, c. 2011. ehealth literacy 2.0: problems and opportunities with an evolving concept. journal of medical internet research 13(4):e125.norman, c. d., and h. a. skinner. 2006. ehealth literacy: essential skills for consumer health in a networked world. journal of medical internet research 8(2):e9.poorman, g., elon, r. parker. 2014. is health literacy related to health behaviors and cell phone usage patterns among the text4baby target population? archives of public health 72(1):13.simon, h. a. 1981. the sciences of the articial, 2nd ed. boston, ma: mit press.zhou, y. y., m. h. kanter, j. j. wang, and t. garrido. 2010. improved quality at kaiser permanente through email between physicians and patients. health affairs (millwood) 29(7):13701375.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.49community health engagement survey solutions (chess)denise stevens, matrix public health solutionscommunity health engagement survey solutions (chess) is a novel ﬁmhealthﬂ or mobile health strategy for addressing gaps in racial and ethnic health equity developed by matrix public health solutions in new haven, connecticut. chess partners with nonprot youth groups and community improvement organizations to collect data on the neighborhood environment using mobile technology. these data provide a starting point for dialogue and strategic planning to take action on health promotion and disease prevention in the neighborhood.chess™s mobile technology tools include surveys and geographic information system (gis) mapping to systematically assess four health risk factors in a neighborhood: food, physical activity, tobacco, and alcohol. participants such as a youth ﬁhealth explorerﬂ team in the williamsburg neighborhood of brooklyn, were trained to use a chess app on a digital tablet to survey the streets, food stores, restaurants, tness facilities, and parks, among other features, within a 400meter walking radius of their school. the work helped the youth to understand how the environments where they live encourage or discourage healthy eating, physical activity, and tobacco use, which in turn in˚uences their behavior and resulting health.chess analyzes and interprets the gathered data through visual maps and quantitative summaries and then, based on that evidence, applies public aexamples of ehealth solutions featured at the workshopthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 digital strategies in achieving health equityhealth expertise to identify potential strategies for intervention and community development to improve access to healthy food and opportunities for physical activity in the neighborhood. for more information, visit http://www.matrixphc.com/chess and watch a video at vimeo.com/104497828.double up food bucksliz kohn, fair food networkdouble up food bucks (http://doubleupfoodbucks.org) is a healthy food incentive project of the fair food network, a national nonprot based in ann arbor, michigan. launched in 2009, double up makes it easier for lowincome families in the federal food stamp programšthe supplemental nutrition assistance program (snap)što eat fresh fruits and vegetables while supporting local farmers and economies. when recipients spend snap dollars at farmers™ markets, they receive up to $20 of matching credit in double up food bucks that they can use to buy additional michigangrown produce. the project has been an innovator in developing new mobile payment processing technology for use at the markets.since its initial start in ve farmers™ markets in detroit, double up has spread to more than 150 sites across michigan and northern ohio with the help of funding from george soros™s open society foundations. in 5 years, the project tallied more than 200,000 snap/double up customer visits at participating sites and more than $5 million of income earned for michigan farmers and vendors. in 2013, double up began expanding into some grocery stores in a partnership with the u.s. department of agriculture.the double up model includes a uniform design and brand, centralized administration, and a comprehensive communications strategy, including dynamic social marketing. it depends on strong partnerships with local and statewide organizations and agencies. evaluation work shows that snap customers at farmers™ markets report eating more produce and buying fewer unhealthy snacks.eatfresh.orgadrienne markworth, leah™s pantryeatfresh.org is a healthy eating resource that offers multilingual information via its website, social media, and mobile technology to lowincome californians who receive food stamp assistance through calfresh and snap. funded with support from the aetna foundation, the website is a project of the human services agency of the city and county of san francisco, with nutrition and culinary content managed by leah™s pantry (http://leahspantrysf.org/whatwedo1). the eatfresh site launched in october the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 512013 with the goal of encouraging cooking at home with fresh foods and minimally processed, nonperishable ingredients. content can be viewed in chinese, english, and spanish.the website has more than 400 recipes for tasty and healthy yet affordable dishes as well as a ﬁdiscover foodsﬂ section that gives basic information on food ingredients. eatfresh hopes to help users better understand the link between lifestyle or diet choices and prevention of chronic diseases, and to show them that healthy change can happen even though barriers exist. the site also offers healthy lifestyle tips and an ﬁask the dietitianﬂ community forum.calfresh, county health departments, food banks, and other agencies around california have integrated eatfresh.org as a nutrition education tool. as of september 2014, nearly 45,000 unique visitors had frequented the eatfresh.org website, 25 percent of them through a smartphone. users may sign up to receive weekly eatfresh tips via email or text. the project™s educational materials are available at http://leahspantrysf.org/eatfreshtoolkit.find mi carehanna harp, greater detroit area health councilfind mi care is a free website and mobile application that simplies the task of nding local, lowcost health care in michigan. recognizing a need for patients to receive better coordinated health care treatment close to home, the nonprot greater detroit area health councilša coalition addressing health care quality, access, and cost in southeast michiganš created this search tool with a grant from the robert wood johnson foundation. visitors to the www.ndmicare.org website can select the health services they are looking for from a menu of options (ranging from primary care and specialty services to medication assistance), and then specify their zip code or region. a list of clinics in the area is generated, with a brief description of each facility and important notes, such as whether it provides care to uninsured individuals. hospitals, physicians, and community groups can use find mi care to help connect michigan residents to health care resources. the tool can be downloaded as a free smartphone app.get connectedjose bauermeister, university of michigan school of public health jimena loveluck, hiv/aids resource centerget connected is a tailored, webbased health intervention that aims to increase awareness about sexually transmitted illnesses (stis) among young men who have sex with men (ymsm), and to link them to health clinics the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 digital strategies in achieving health equitythat can provide testing for those diseases in a culturally sensitive manner. this work builds upon an existing communitybased participatory research project on hiv and stis at the university of michigan. researchers at the university™s center for health communications research and the center for sexuality & health disparities created the get connected website with support from the centers for disease control and prevention and the national association of county and city health ofcials.get connected seeks to reach young gay or bisexual men in southeast michigan who use etechnologies such as websites and smartphones to meet partners. the web intervention was developed with input from a youth advisory board, community provider advisors, and local hiv/aids organizations. the website provides information on stis, walks users through the thought process of why they would or would not wish to undergo testing, and uses tailored messaging on values and barriers to try to motivate them to get tested.get connected also offers an sti testingsite search tool that helps users nd highquality, local clinics with the services they need, and the website generates a list of questions, which users can print out or receive by email or text to ask the health provider during their appointment. the researchers have been studying whether get connected effectively increases sti testing among the website™s users (see http://chcr.umich.edu/project.php?id=1108), and the researchers are expanding their intervention to mobile devices.let™s get healthy! and 5210 kids!sharon milberger, henry ford livewelllet™s get healthy! is a healthy living education program developed for overweight children ages 9 to 13 by the henry ford health system™s livewell division. the 10week program partners each youngster with a parent to work with a multidisciplinary team that includes a pediatrician, behavioral therapist, registered dietitian, and athletic trainer. this team offers guidance and insight, with a goal of education and behavioral changes rather than weight loss. the dietitian helps each family to build healthy meal plans and realistic lifestyle changes. the team instructors try to convey engaging messages to reshape the way the child thinks about food, nutrition, and exercise.participants learn about mindful eating, portion sizes, label reading, fast food and snack choices, quick and healthy meals, smart grocery shopping, and maintaining a food journal. behavioral modications are encouraged through setting goals and maintaining and celebrating successes, and through conversations on topics such as staying motivated, stress, and time the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 53management. kids and families also learn fun and affordable ways to exercise and tips on maintaining an active lifestyle.let™s get healthy! recommends the ﬁ5210ﬂ guidelines for daily nutrition and tness: 5 fruits and vegetables, 2 hours or less of screen time, 1 hour or more of physical activity, and 0 sugaradded beverages. henry ford livewell has created a fun, interactive game app called ﬁ5210 kids!ﬂ with messages about eating right and staying active. families can download the game for free from the apple and android app stores. for more information about let™s get healthy! visit http://henryfordlivewell.com/body.cfm?id=991&fr=true.mobile dadshawna lee, university of michigan school of social workmobile dad (mdad) baby book is an interactive mobile technology application that enhances the engagement of fathers with their families. researchers at the university of michigan created this smartphone app at the request of the u.s. air force (usaf) to help military members who are fathers stay involved with their young children while deployed away from home, and to ease the transition when they come back.mobile dad is a cross between a digital baby book and a parent education resource, and fathers can use it independently or with spouses or partners. the app allows users to upload pictures, videos, and audio recordings of their child to track his or her growth. twice a week, fathers receive brief messages on their iphone, ipad, or ipod touch that are tailored to their child™s age and developmental milestones. if an infant turns 6 months old, for instance, the parent will receive a notication that the baby can soon start eating solid food. the app can provide more detailed information about that milestone, along with tips on parenting and fun activities to support the child™s healthy growth.the app is tailored for helping fathers balance military and family life, and users can benet from advice shared by other military dads. mdad was eld tested with 200 usaf mothers and fathers. for more information, visit http://chcr.umich.edu/project.php?id=1104.plan pilottessie guillermo, zerodivideplan pilot is a prototype mobile technology application that draws on health plan datasets to make shopping for health insurance an easier and the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 digital strategies in achieving health equityless confusing experience. it was developed by the san franciscoœbased consulting organization zerodivide, which seeks to transform underserved communities through technology, including ehealth or electronic health resources tools. the plan pilot app is a nalist in the plan choice challenge sponsored by the robert wood johnson foundation in summer 2014 to spark the development of new apps and tools that allow consumers to compare costs, features, and ratings of health insurance plans and choose the best plan to suit their needs in the new marketplaces created by the affordable care act (aca). app developers were given access to a set of data on costsharing features of plans offered in the health insurance market places in every state and washington, dc.zerodivide describes plan pilot as ﬁa responsive web application that helps consumers make wise decisions, live healthier lives, and save money on the true total cost of health care.ﬂ many americans who enrolled in health plans through the insurance marketplaces under the aca have reported dissatisfaction with their choice, and only 60 percent were condent they would be able to pay for a major illness or injury. zerodivide™s consumer research identied confusion, complexity of choices, and poor customer experiences as the major challenges in making good decisions about buying health insurance. the plan pilot app will help users ﬁnavigate their health care coverage with personalized recommendations about plan and provider quality as well as savings for prescription drugs.ﬂymvp teen fitness challengelori benson, ymca of greater new yorkthe ymvp teen fitness challenge is an 8week ymca training program that is innovatively integrated with a digital game to get teenagers engaging in moderate to vigorous physical (mvp) activity every day. the ymca of greater new york developed the challenge to incorporate online game design techniques that grab the interest of young people. what started as a pilot program in spring 2013 at the bedfordstuyvesant y in brooklyn and the harlem y in manhattan is expanding to all ymca sites across new york city by 2015.teens who register for ymvp meet once per week in small classes with a trained coach who takes them on a series of tness ﬁquestsﬂ or activities. at the end of each session, participants are assigned a tness ﬁmissionﬂ that they must complete before they meet next. an accompanying interactive digital app and a dynamic badge system tracks, motivates, and rewards the teens™ efforts. the youths access the ymvp app on a tablet at the gym to record their workouts and monitor their progress toward successfully reaching the activity goals set by their coach. along the way, they earn and the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 55accumulate digital badges that can ultimately be exchanged for incentives such as tshirts and water bottles. participants share their accomplishments on social media sites.ymvp is supported by aetna foundation, american express, the hive digital media learning fund, and the pepsico foundation. for more details, visit http://www.ymcanyc.org/association/pages/ymvp or watch a video at www.youtube.com/watch?v=9x7t2k4kdo&feature=youtu.be.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.57bworkshop agendadigital health strategies, health disparities, and health equity: the promises and perils of technology: a public workshopoctober 2, 2014the margherio family conference center 403 east caneld streetwayne state university detroit, miobjectives of the meetingł to discuss the opportunities to use digital health technologies as a population health strategy to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states. ł to explore how racial and ethnic minority populations/ communities in the united states can be engaged in efforts that use digital health strategies to reduce racial and ethnic health disparities. ł to develop effective strategies that engage racial and ethnic minority populations/communities in using digital health strategies to reduce health disparities and promote health equity. ł to explore the different types of digital health technologies used in efforts to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states. ł to highlight examples of digital health strategies designed to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the united states.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 digital strategies in achieving health equity8:00 am welcome and introduction toni villarruel, ph.d., faan, professor and margaret bond simon dean of nursing, university of pennsylvania school of nursing gillian barclay, d.d.s., dr.p.h., vice president, aetna foundation m. roy wilson, m.d., m.s., president, wayne state university8:30 am keynote: overarching views kimberlydawn wisdom, m.d., m.s., senior vice president of community health & equity and chief wellness ofcer, henry ford health system, chair, gail and lois warden endowment on multicultural health wendy nilsen, ph.d., health scientist administrator, ofce of behavioral and social sciences research, national institutes of health10:00 am  break10:15 am panel 1: how do we engage providers and racial and ethnic minority patients in digital strategies with the goal to reduce health disparities and promote health equity? moderators: rohit varma, m.d., m.p.h., university of southern california, and winston wong, m.d., m.s., kaiser permanente ivor horn, m.d., m.p.h., medical director of the center for diversity and health equity and professor of pediatrics, university of washington school of medicine misha pavel, ph.d., professor of practice, northeastern university  ruth parker, m.d., professor, emory university11:30 am discussion with panel 111:45 am panel 2: how do we engage racial and ethnic minority communities in digital health strategies with the goal to reduce health disparities and promote health equity? moderator: caroline mckay, ph.d., merck & co., inc. cameron norman, ph.d., m.a., m.des., adjunct lecturer, dalla lana school of public health, university of toronto tamar ginossar, ph.d., assistant professor, university of new mexicothe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 59 jose bauermeister, ph.d., m.p.h., director, center for sexuality & health disparities, university of michigan school of public health  jimena loveluck, president and chief executive ofcer, hiv/aids resource center12:45 pm discussion with panel 21:00 pm lunch and technology speed dating: virtual poster session elliman building (directly across the street) ł get connected!, jose bauermeister, ph.d., m.p.h., university of michigan, school of public health, and jimena loveluck, hiv/aids resource center ł eatfresh.org, adrienne markworth, leah™s pantry  ł planpilot, tessie guillermo, zerodivide ł ymvp teen fitness challenge, lori benson, ymca of greater new york ł 5210 kids!, sharon milberger, sc.d., henry ford livewell ł double up food bucks, liz cohn, fair food network ł find mi care, hanna harp, greater detroit area health council ł mdad (mobile device assisted dad), shawna lee, ph.d., m.s.w., m.p.p., university of michigan ł chess, denise stevens, ph.d., matrixphc2:45 pm panel 3: policy and technology perspectives moderator: terri wright, ph.d., m.p.h., american public health association noam ziv, founder, kesembe inc. brian raymond, m.p.h., senior policy consultant, kaiser permanente institute for health policy tessie guillermo, president and chief executive ofcer, zerodivide3:45 pm discussion with panel 34:00 pm synthesis and further discussion panel moderator: toni villarruel, ph.d., faan, professor and margaret bond simon dean of nursing, university of pennsylvania school of nursing andre blackman, founder and chief executive ofcer, pulse and signalthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 digital strategies in achieving health equity hayley thompson, ph.d., m.s., associate professor, wayne state university school of medicine4:45 pm concluding remarks gillian barclay, d.d.s., dr.p.h., vice president, aetna foundationroundtable informationł project website for the roundtable on the promotion of health equity and the elimination of health disparities: http://www. nationalacademies.org/hmd/activities/selectpops/ healthdisparities.aspxł the website provides listserv signup, information on upcoming meetings, meeting materials such as presentations and webcasts, and roundtable products.ł project email: healthequityrt@nas.eduthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.61jose bauermeister, m.p.h., ph.d., is the john g. searle assistant professor of health behavior and health education, and director of the center for sexuality & health disparities (sexlab) at the school of public health. locally, dr. bauermeister has led an academicœcommunity partnership focused on addressing the structural barriers fueling the hiv/sexually transmitted infection (sti) disparities faced by black and latino young men who have sex with men (ymsm) in the detroit metro area. dr. bauermeister is also principal investigator and coinvestigator of several projects examining hiv/sti prevention among ymsm, with a focus on how to integrate existing (e.g., condom use) and forthcoming (e.g., preexposure prophylaxis; rectal microbicides) prevention technologies into hiv/sti prevention for ymsm. in light of his expertise, he serves as a member of the behavioral science working group of the microbicides trials network. dr. bauermeister is also coinvestigator on several projects examining the social and behavioral correlates of young adult wellbeing, as measured by hiv/aids risk, substance use, and psychological wellbeing. he is co investigator of the pediatric hiv/aids cohort study, one of the largest prospective biomedical studies of perinatally infected adolescents in the united states. dr. bauermeister serves on the editorial boards of the journal of youth & adolescence, archives of sexual behavior, aids and behavior, and health education & behavior. he is chair of the american public health association™s hiv/aids section.andre blackman is a connected agent of change within the health community. he is very interested in the intersection of media, technology, and cspeaker biographical sketchesthe promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 digital strategies in achieving health equitydesign as it relates to the sustainable improvement of public health and health care, as well as the stories that result from these new ideas. through his consulting rm, pulse + signal, andre aims to empower a new generation of thought leaders to do great work through digital branding, effective coaching, and strategic digital public relations/communications. he is passionate about purposefully connecting the organizations and leaders changing the health landscape in our society with the resources to create sustainable change. andre has been involved in traditional and digital campaigns for the centers for disease control and prevention and the national institutes of health focused on areas such as disease informatics, hiv/aids, and diabetes. andre also serves on the following advisory boards: mayo clinic center for social media; sxsw interactive conference advisory board; center for health media & policy; national health communications, and marketing and media conference. he is the cofounder of the fastforward health film festivalšan event dedicated to highlighting the stories of forward thinking in health initiatives around the world.tamar ginossar, ph.d., teaches courses in health communication, including a class about health, culture, and diversity as part of the b.a./m.d. program at the university of new mexico. additional courses include advanced quantitative research methods, intercultural communication, and organizational communication. dr. ginossar has held two previous faculty appointments at the department of communication in tel aviv university and as research faculty with the university of new mexico school of medicine. her research interests focus on health communication and reducing health disparities. she is particularly interested in how communities and individuals are using new communication technologies for information exchange and advocacy. she lived and traveled internationally in the middle east, europe, asia, and latin america. her research focuses on health communication and reducing health disparities. more specically, dr. ginossar is interested in how communities and individuals are using new communication technologies for information exchange and advocacy, and in how they seek and share information, and in designing interventions using communitybased research approaches to reduce health disparities.tessie guillermo is the president and ceo of zerodivide, a consulting organization focusing on technology adoption and innovation to improve health, economic opportunity, and civic engagement of disadvantaged communities. ms. guillermo served for 15 years as ceo of the asian and pacic islander american health forum, a national health policy/ advocacy organization. she was appointed by president clinton in 1999 as an inaugural member of the president™s commission on asian americans and pacic islanders. ms. guillermo recently completed a 10year tenure as the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 63a member of the board of directors of the california endowment, serving for 3 years as chairwoman. she serves as an executive member of the board for dignity health, and is a board member of the nonprot finance fund and the california state university east bay education foundation, where she graduated with a b.a. in economics. she is a graduate of the gallup leadership institute and was a 1997 fellow of the asian pacic american women™s leadership institute.ivor horn, m.d., m.p.h., is medical director of the center for diversity and health equity at seattle children™s hospital, and professor of pediatrics at the university of washington school of medicine. dr. horn is a national institutes of healthœfunded researcher in the area of health communication with underrepresented racial and ethnic minority communities using mobile technology innovations. she is principal investigator on a study of a textmessagebased health communication intervention to improve asthma outcomes in an urban disadvantaged population. dr. horn was also the project director as part of the collaborative team funded by the agency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq) to develop technologyenabled tools to facilitate transitions in care for patients with sickle cell anemia at children™s national health systems. the project, a collaboration between children™s national health systems, cincinnati children™s hospital medical center, the lewin group, the national institute for children™s healthcare quality, and nemours, was part of ahrq™s accelerating change and transformation in organizations and networks (action) program. on a national level, dr. horn is a board member and communication director for the academic pediatric association (the leading professional organization for general academic pediatrician researchers). dr. horn has served as rst author on two seminal papers about the approach to child health disparities research. dr. horn is also a communitybased primary care pediatrician with more than a decade of experience providing care and conducting research in communities of color. jimena loveluck is president/ceo of the hiv/aids resource center (harc) in ypsilanti, michigan. she has a master™s degree in social work from boston college, specializing in community organization and social policy and planning. after completing her m.s.w. in 1990, ms. loveluck began working for the massachusetts department of public health aids bureau, where she conducted hiv counseling and testing services in hospital and clinic settings, and also staffed the massachusetts aids hotline. ms. loveluck left the state level after 2 years to become director of hiv services at whittier street neighborhood health center, a federally qualied health center in roxbury, massachusetts. she returned to michigan in 1999 and became the president/ceo of the harc in november 2000. she the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 digital strategies in achieving health equityhas been involved in communitybased participatory research in collaboration with the center for sexuality and health disparities at the university of michigan™s school of public health since 2009.wendy nilsen, ph.d., is a health scientist administrator at the national institutes of health (nih) ofce of behavioral and social sciences research and the program director for the smart and connected health program at the national science foundation (nsf). dr. nilsen™s scientic focus is on the science of human behavior and behavior change, including using technology to better understand and improve health, adherence, the mechanisms of behavior change, and behavioral interventions in complex patients in primary care. more specically, her efforts in mobile and wireless health (mhealth) research include serving as the nih lead for the nsf/nih smart and connected health announcement, convening meetings to address methodology in mobile technology research, serving on numerous federal mhealth initiatives, and leading the nih mhealth training institutes. dr. nilsen is also the chair of the adherence network, a transnih effort to enhance and develop the science of adherence. she is also a member of the science of behavior change, health economics, and hmo (health maintenance organization) collaboratory working groups. these projects are initiatives funded through the common fund that target behavioral and social sciences research to improve health across a wide range of domains. dr. nilsen also chairs the nih integrating health strategies workgroup that supports the science of behavioral treatments for patients with multiple chronic conditions in primary care. at nsf, she leads the smart health program, which targets science at the intersection between computer science, engineering, medicine, and health, broadly dened.cameron norman is the principal of cense research + design and an adjunct professor in the dalla lana school of public health at the university of toronto. cameron™s research interests focus on the intersection of systems science, design, and behavior science for health promotion and organizational change. the emphasis of his work is on program evaluation and modeling approaches to understanding complexity in social and health environments. dr. norman holds undergraduate and master™s degrees in psychology and a doctorate in public health sciences from the university of toronto, and completed a canadian institutes of health research postdoctoral fellowship in systems thinking and knowledge translation jointly at the university of british columbia in vancouver and the centre for global ehealth innovation in toronto. he recently completed a master of design in strategic foresight and innovation at ocad university. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 65ruth parker, m.d., is a professor of medicine at the emory university school of medicine. she is also associate director of the faculty development program in the division of general medicine, and holds a secondary appointment at emory™s rollins school of public health. over the past 15 years, dr. parker has focused extensively on health care issues of underserved populations, particularly health literacy. she helped create a widely used measurement tool to quantify patients™ ability to read and understand health information. dr. parker currently serves as consultant and advisor to numerous federal agencies, professional societies, and members of industry on their initiatives related to health literacy.misha pavel, ph.d., is a professor of practice jointly appointed between the college of computer and information sciences and the bouvé college of health sciences at northeastern university. dr. pavel came to boston from the position of program director of smart and connected health on a leave from oregon health and science university where he was a professor at the department of biomedical engineering, with a joint appointment in the department of medical informatics and clinical epidemiology. he is also a visiting professor at technical university of tampere. previously he served as chair of the department of biomedical engineering (he founded in 2001) and as director of the point of care laboratory, which focuses on unobtrusive monitoring, neurobehavioral assessment, and computational modeling in support of health care, with a particular focus on chronic disease and elder care. his earlier academic appointments included positions at new york university and stanford university. in addition to his academic career, professor pavel was a member of the technical staff at bell laboratories in the early 1970s, where his research included network analysis and modeling, and later at at&t laboratories with a focus on mobile and internetbased technologies. he taught a number of courses in statistics for behavioral research at stanford university and oregon health & science university. he was one of the founding members of oregon research center for aging and technology and is a member of the nascent consortium for technology for proactive care at northeastern university. he has a ph.d. in experimental psychology from new york university, an m.s. in electrical engineering from stanford university, and a b.s. in electrical engineering from the polytechnic institute of brooklyn. dr. pavel is a senior member of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee).brian raymond, m.p.h., is a senior health policy consultant at the kaiser permanente institute for health policy. mr. raymond analyzes emerging policy issues and supports the health policy decisionmaking process within  kaiser permanente. his current areas of focus include ehealth technology to address health disparities, obesity prevention, and health in all policies. the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 digital strategies in achieving health equityin addition to policy analysis, mr. raymond manages projects and roundtable discussions to produce suggestions for health policy improvement. mr. raymond received a bachelor™s degree in community health administration from the university of california, davis, and a master™s degree in public health from the university of california, berkeley.hayley thompson, ph.d., m.s., is currently an associate professor in the department of oncology at wayne state university school of medicine and a scientic member of the karmanos cancer institute, a national cancer instituteœdesignated comprehensive cancer center. dr. thompson and several investigators in our cancer center are interested in health interventions using mobile devices/social media to reduce disparities. she was just awarded a new r01 grant (r01 hs022955), enrolling a populationbased sample of approximately 1,230 african american and white breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer survivors to assess general ehealth activity and personal health history management to develop a software application prototype to facilitate access to digital cancer survivorship resources. dr. thompson also leads an american cancer society research scholar grant for testing an intervention to improve posttreatment resources using ehealth technologies to provide better support for latina breast cancer survivors in southwest detroit.kimberlydawn wisdom, m.d., m.s., is the senior vice president of community health & equity and chief wellness and diversity ofcer at henry ford health system. she is a boardcertied emergency medicine physician, the chair of the gail and lois warden endowment on multicultural health, and michigan™s and the nation™s rst statelevel surgeon general. in 2012 she was appointed by president obama to serve on the advisory group on prevention, health promotion and integrative and public health. since 1987 she has been on the faculty of the university of michigan (um) medical school™s department of medical education and adjunct professor in the um school of public health. dr. wisdom founded the award winning  african american initiative for male health improvement (aimœhi) and most recently, the women inspired neighborhood (win) network, which aims to improve access to health care and reduce infant mortality in neighborhoods in detroit. since 2008, she has chaired the detroit infant mortality reduction task force. in 2007, she founded a youth leadership development effortšgeneration with promise (gwp)šdesigned to equip youth to drive policy, environmental, and behavioral change in their school and community. gwp youth were featured on the cover of modern healthcare in june 2014. dr. wisdom is the recipient of numerous awards, has authored several peerreviewed publications and book chapters, and the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 67appeared on national television, including abc™s nightline, and has presented to audiences across the country and internationally.noam ziv is a recognized thought leader, experienced system architect, and advisor to numerous startups in wireless communication and mobile health care elds, and is the founder and ceo of kesembe inc. mr. ziv is serving as a judge in both nokia sensing xprize challenge competitions, and as a technical advisor to xprize in the qualcomm tricorder xprize competition. noam worked at qualcomm for 23 years. his leadership roles there included overall technical and system engineering lead for qualcomm™s cellular infrastructure development program, technical liaison to nortel, alcatel, and the electronic and telecommunications research institute (etri), south korea. mr. ziv was vice president of engineering leading qualcomm™s corporate research and development software organization for over a decade. he made signicant contributions to the design and implementation of software, hardware, systems, protocols, and custom silicon circuits (asics). mr. ziv is the inventor and architect of qualcomm™s 2net platform, and was an active contributor to multiple key technologies and products. mr. ziv was also a member of the original team that invented and implemented cdma (codedivision multiple access) cellular communication technology. mr. ziv earned a bachelor of science in computer engineering at the technion (israel institute of technology) and has been granted more than 20 patents.the promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: workshop summarycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.