detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/23686a 21st century cyberphysical systems education106 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309451635 | doi 10.17226/23686committee on 21st century cyberphysical systems education; computer science andtelecommunications board; division on engineering and physical sciences;national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicinea 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesa report ofa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001this activity was supported by award no. cns1341078 from the national science foundation. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309451635international standard book number10: 0309451639digital object identier: 10.17226/23686additional copies of this report are available for sale from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2016 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americasuggested citation: national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. 2016. a 21st century cyberphysical systems education. washington, dc: the national academies press. doi:10.17226/23686.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences was established in 1863 by an act of congress, signed by president lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise the nation on issues related to science and  technology. members are elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. dr. marcia mcnutt is president.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964 under the charter of the national academy of sciences to bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to engineering. dr. c. d. mote, jr., is president.the national academy of medicine (formerly the institute of medicine) was established in 1970 under the charter of the national academy of  sciences to advise the nation on medical and health issues. members are elected by their peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. dr. victor j. dzau is president.the three academies work together as the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. the national academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. learn more about the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine at www.nationalacademies.org. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reports document the evidencebased consensus of an authoring committee of based on information gathered by the committee and committee deliberations. reports are peer reviewed and are approved by the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine.proceedings chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or other convening event. the statements and opinions contained in proceedings are those of the participants and have not been endorsed by other participants, the planning committee, or the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine.for information about other products and activities of the national academies, please visit nationalacademies.org/whatwedo.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on 21st century  cyberphysical systems educationjohn a. (jack) stankovic, university of virginia, cochairjames (jim) sturges, lockheed martin corporation (retired), cochairalexandre bayen, university of california, berkeleycharles r. farrar, los alamos national laboratorymarye anne fox, nas,1 university of california, san diegosantiago grijalva, georgia institute of technologyhimanshu khurana, honeywell international, inc.p.r. kumar, nae,2 texas a&m university, college stationinsup lee, university of pennsylvaniawilliam milam, ford motor companysanjoy k. mitter, nae, massachusetts institute of technology josé m.f. moura, nae, carnegie mellon universitygeorge j. pappas, university of pennsylvaniapaulo tabuada, university of california, los angelesmanuela m. veloso, carnegie mellon universitystaffjon eisenberg, director, computer science and telecommunications board virginia bacon talati, program ofcershenae bradley, administrative assistantchristopher jones, associate program ofcer1 nas, national academy of sciences.2 nae, national academy of engineering.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science and telecommunications boardfarnam jahanian, carnegie mellon university, chairluiz andre barroso, google, inc. steven m. bellovin, nae, columbia universityrobert f. brammer, brammer technology, llcedward frank, cloud parity, inc.laura haas, nae, ibm corporationmark horowitz, nae, stanford universityeric horvitz, nae, microsoft researchvijay kumar, nae, university of pennsylvaniabeth mynatt, georgia institute of technologycraig partridge, raytheon bbn technologiesdaniela rus, nae, massachusetts institute of technologyfred b. schneider, nae, cornell universitymargo seltzer, harvard universityjohn stankovic, university of virginiamosche vardi, nas/nae, rice universitykatherine yelick, university of california, berkeleystaffjon eisenberg, director lynette i. millett, associate director virginia bacon talati, program ofcershenae bradley, administrative assistantjanel dear, senior program assistantemily grumbling, program ofcerrenee hawkins, financial and administrative manager christopher jones, associate program ofcerkatiria ortiz, research associatefor more information on cstb, see its website at http://www.cstb.org, write to cstb, national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, 500 fifth street, nw, washington, dc 20001, call (202) 3342605, or email the cstb at cstb@nas.edu.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacecyberphysical systems (cps) are ﬁengineered systems that are built from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algorithms and physical components.ﬂ1 cps are increasingly relied on to provide the functionality and value of products, systems, and infrastructure in sectors such as transportation (aviation, automotive, rail, and marine), health care, manufacturing, and energy networks. advances in cps could yield systems that can communicate and respond faster than humans (e.g., autonomous collision avoidance for automobiles) or more precisely (e.g., robotic surgery); enable better control and coordination of largescale systems, such as the electrical grid or trafc controls; improve the efciency of systems (e.g., smart buildings); and enable advances in many areas of science (e.g. autonomous telescopes that capture astronomical transients). cyberphysical systems have the potential to provide much richer functionalityšincluding efciency, ˚exibility, autonomy, and reliabilityšthan systems that are loosely coupled, discrete, or manually operated, but cps also can create vulnerability related to security and reliability.building on its research program in cps, the national science foundation (nsf) has begun to explore requirements for education and training for cps. as part of that exploration, nsf asked the national acad1 denition from national science foundation, 2016, ﬁcyberphysical systems,ﬂ program solicitation 16549, nsf document number nsf16549, march 4. https://www.nsf.gov/publications/pubsumm.jsp?odskey=nsf16549.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii prefaceemies of sciences, engineering, and medicine to study the topic, organize workshops, and prepare interim and nal reports examining the need for and content of a cps education (box p1). the results of this study are intended to inform those who might support efforts to develop curricula and materials (including but not limited to nsf); faculty and university administrators; industries with needs for cps workers; and current and potential students about intellectual foundations, workforce requirements, employment opportunities, and curricular needs.the report examines the intellectual content of the emerging eld of cps and its implications for engineering and computer science education. other national academies reports have examined broader related topics such as the future of engineering education more generally2 and how to overcome barriers to completing 2 and 4year science, technology, engineering, and mathematics degrees.3 to gather perspectives on these topics, the committee on 21st century cyberphysical systems education (committee biographical informa2 national academy of engineering, 2005, educating the engineer of 2020: adapting engineering education to the new century, the national academies press, washington, d.c.3 national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, barriers and opportunities for 2year and 4year stem degrees: systemic change to support diverse student pathways (s. malcom and m. feder, eds.), the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2016, doi: 10.17226/21739.box p.1 statement of taskan ad hoc committee will conduct a study on the current and future needs in education for cyberphysical systems (cps). two workshops would be convened early on to gather input and foster dialogue, and a brief interim report would be prepared to highlight emerging themes and summarize related discussions from century cpscapable u.s. workforce. it would explore the corresponding educational requirements, examine efforts already under way, and propose strategies and programs to develop faculty and teachers, materials, and curricula. it would the multiple disciplines that are relevant to cps and how to foster multidisciplinary study and work. in conducting the study, the committee would focus on undergraduate education and also consider implications for graduate education, engineering, and technical workforce but would also consider broader needs for cps survey courses.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface ixtion is provided in appendix a) convened two workshops and received briengs from additional experts (all presenters and briefers are listed in appendix b, and the workshop agendas are provided in appendix c). the committee™s interim report,4 released in 2015, summarizes many of those presentations and discussions. this nal report also draws on an additional set of briengs (listed in appendix b) obtained since the interim report was issued. informed by these inputs as well as a review of current cps courses, course materials, and curricula and other information compiled for this study, the committee™s ndings and recommendations are based on the committee™s collective judgment.the key messages of the reports and the committee™s ndings and recommendations are presented in the summary. chapter 1 of this report explores the need for cps education, and chapter 2 highlights the essential knowledge and skills needed by a person developing cps. chapter 3 provides examples of how these foundations in cps education might be integrated into various curricula, and chapter 4 discusses how such curricula might be developed and institutionalized. jack stankovic and jim sturges, cochairscommittee on 21st century cyberphysical systems education 4 national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, interim report on 21st century cyberphysical systems education, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2015.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:ella m. atkins, university of michigan,robert f. brammer, brammer technology, llc,harry h. cheng, university of california, davis,elsa m. garmire, nae,1 dartmouth college,scott hareland, medtronics,mats p. heimdahl, university of minnesota, minneapolis,ken hoyme, adventium labs,edward a. lee, university of california, berkeley,jerome p. lynch, university of michigan, alberto sangiovannivincentelli, university of california, berkeley,robert f. sproull, nae, university of massachusetts, andyannis c. yortsos, nae, university of southern california.1 nae, national academy of engineering.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii acknowledgment of reviewersalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by philip m. neches, teradata corporation, and samuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc., who were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentssummary 11 the transformative nature of cps and  13 workforce needs the transformative nature of cps, 13 building a cps workforce, 18 cps: an emerging engineering discipline, 222 cps principles, foundations, system 24  characteristics, and complementary skills principles: integrating the physical and cyber, 25 foundations of cps, 27 system characteristics, 30 complementary skills, 323 paths to cps knowledge 34 overview of relevant existing paths and programs to  cps expertise, 36 k12 education programs, 38 vocational and community colleges, 39 undergraduate courses, concentrations, and programs, 40 graduate degree programs, 59a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contents4 developing and institutionalizing cps  60 curricula  drawing students to cps, 60 recruiting, retaining, and developing the needed faculty, 62 curriculum development and resources, 65 fostering development of the cps discipline and cps  education, 67appendixesa biographies of committee members and staff 71b briefers to the study committee 82c workshop agendas 84a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summarycyberphysical systems (cps) are ﬁengineered systems that are built from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algorithms and physical components.ﬂ1 cps can be small and closed, such as an articial pancreas, or very large, complex, and interconnected, such as a regional energy grid. cps engineering2 focuses on managing interdependencies and impact of physical aspects on cyber aspects, and vice versa. with the development of lowcost sensing, powerful embedded system hardware, and widely deployed communication networks, the reliance on cps for system functionality has dramatically increased. these technical developments in combination with the creation of a workforce skilled in engineering cps will allow the deployment of increasingly capable, adaptable, and trustworthy systems.cps engineering and the cps workforcecps are already widely deployed and used today. examples include automobiles that sense impending crashes and perform various tasks to 1 denition from national science foundation, 2016, ﬁcyberphysical systems,ﬂ program solicitation 16549, nsf document number nsf16549, march 4, https://www.nsf.gov/publications/pubsumm.jsp?odskey=nsf16549.2 the committee uses the terms ﬁcps engineeringﬂ and ﬁcps engineerﬂ to mean a set of skills and knowledge needed to design and build a cps and a person with those skills; the terms are not limited to a set of credentials or to someone who has a degree or certication in cps.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationprotect passengers and medical devices that sense glucose levels or the heart™s rhythm and intervene to restore normal body function. as these examples illustrate, cps often support critical missions that have signicant economic and societal importance and raise signicant safety and cybersecurity concerns. however, today™s practice of cps system design and implementation is often ad hoc, not taking advantage of even the limited theory that exists today, and unable to support the level of complexity, scalability, security, safety, interoperability, and ˚exible design and operation that will be required to meet future needs.engineers responsible for developing cps but lacking the appropriate education or training may not fully understand at an appropriate depth, on the one hand, the technical issues associated with the cps software and hardware or, on the other hand, techniques for physical system modeling, energy and power, actuation, signal processing, and control. in addition, these engineers may be designing and implementing lifecritical systems without appropriate formal training in cps methods needed for verication and to assure safety, reliability, and security. a workforce with the appropriate education, training, and skills will be better positioned to create and manage the next generation of cps solutions. building this workforce will require attention to educating the future workforce with all the required skillsšintegrated from the ground upšas well as providing the existing workforce with the needed supplementary education. it proved difcult to obtain comprehensive data on industrial demand for cps skills, and the committee was not in a position to commission systematic surveys to collect such information itself. instead, the committee has relied on the perspectives of industry experts, including those who briefed the committee or who participated in the two workshops convened during its study. it was also apparent from these presentations that the cps eld will continue to evolve as new applications emerge and as more research is done.finding 1.1: cps are emerging as an area of engineering with signicant economic and societal implications. major industrial sectors such as transportation, medicine, energy, defense, and information technology increasingly need a workforce capable of designing and engineering products and services that intimately combine cyber elements (computing hardware and software) and physical components and manage their interactions and impact on the physical environment. although it is difcult to quantify the demand, a likely implication is that more cpscapable engineers will be needed.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 3finding 1.2: the future cps workforce is likely to include a combination of (1) engineers trained in foundational elds (such as electrical and computing engineering, mechanical engineering, systems engineering, and computer science); (2) engineers trained in specic applied engineering elds (such as aerospace and civil engineering); and (3) cps engineers, who focus on the knowledge and skills spanning cyber technology and physical systems that operate in the physical world. the mix of programs offered by universities will re˚ect the perspectives of individual institutions, their resources, and the demand universities see from students and their employers, and in turn affect the educational backgrounds of the cps workforce. over time, as the eld itself changes and matures, education and employer demand will coevolve.finding 1.3: given that most entrylevel engineering and computer science positions are lled by undergraduates, it is important to incorporate cps into the undergraduate engineering and computer science curricula.recommendation 1.1: the national science foundation, together with universities, should support the creation and evolution of undergraduate education courses, programs, and pathways so that engineering and computer science graduates have more opportunities to gain the knowledge and skills required to engineer cyberphysical systems. the efforts should be complemented by initiatives to augment the skills of the existing workforce through continuing education and master™s degree programs.cps principles, foundations, system characteristics, and complementary skillsthis section summarizes the knowledge and skills needed to engineer cps. it is derived from an examination of existing courses, programs, and instructional materials as well as consideration of the topics highlighted in comments from industry experts. the emphasis is deliberately on core principles and foundations re˚ecting the challenge of packing the material needed to span both cyber and physical aspects into an already crowded engineering curricula. the committee has identied the following four broad areas for cps education programs to cover: a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 a 21st century cyberphysical systems education principles that dene the integration of physical and cyber aspects in such areas as communication and networking, realtime operation, distributed and embedded systems, physical properties of hardware and the environment, and human interaction.  foundations of cps in (1) basic computing concepts, (2) computing for the physical world, (3) discrete and continuous mathematics, (4) crosscutting applications, (5) modeling, and (6) system development.  system characteristics required of cps, such as security and privacy; interoperability; reliability and dependability; power and energy management; safety; stability and performance of dynamic and stochastic systems; and human factors and usability.each area is brie˚y outlined in the sections below (and discussed in more detail in chapter 2).principlescps bridges engineering and physical world applications and the computer engineering hardware and computer science cyber worlds. basic principles of the physical world include physics, mathematical modeling, analysis, and algorithm and systems design and deal with their associated uncertainty and risk. principles of the computer engineering and computer science (cyber) worlds deal with embedded computation and communications hardware systems, software programming, and networking, because sensors are a key hardware bridge between the physical and cyber worlds, it is important to understand the properties of sensors and their realworld behavior, and techniques for processing the signals they produce. control theory is an important tenet of cps; relevant elements include stability, optimization, and how to control distributed, digital systems. foundations of cpsdrawing on these principles, the committee identied the following six key overarching intellectual foundations for a cps curriculum:1. basic computing concepts beyond those covered in a couple of introductory programming courses, such as embedded hardware, data structures, automata theory, and software engineering.2. computing for the physical world, which involves understanding physical world properties, realtime embedded systems, and computing resource constraints such as power and memory size. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 53. discrete and continuous mathematics beyond calculus, such as differential equations, probability and stochastic processes, and linear algebra.4. crosscutting application of sensing, actuation, control, communication, and computing re˚ecting the central role of interactions between physical and cyber aspects and the reliance on control over communication networks, sensing, signal processing, and actuation with realtime constraints.5. modeling of heterogeneous and dynamic systems integrating control, computing, and communication, with emphasis on uncertainty and system heterogeneity, including such techniques as linear and nonlinear models, stochastic models, discreteevent and hybrid models, and associated design methodologies based on optimization, probability theory, and dynamic programming. 6. cps system development, especially for safetycritical, highcondence, and resilient systems, requires a lifecycle view from initial requirements to testing to certication and inservice use, including formal verication and validation procedures and adaptable designs that can accommodate system evolution.finding 2.1: core cps knowledge involves not only an understanding of the basics of physical engineering and cyber design and implementation, but understanding how the physical and cyber aspects in˚uence and affect each other.recommendation 2.1: cyberphysical systems educational programs should provide a foundation that highlights the interaction of cyber and physical aspects of systems. most current courses fail to emphasize the interaction, implying that new courses and instructional materials are needed.system characteristicsmany cps are large, complex, and/or safety critical. successful development of such systems requires knowledge of how to ensure that systems possess the following characteristics:  security and privacy, interoperability, reliability and dependability, power and energy management, safety, stability and performance, and human factors and usability. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationthese topics are best introduced early and infused throughout the cps curriculum in coursework and projects, much as the best practice in engineering is to address these issues from the outset of system design.complementary skillsthe growing scale and complexity of engineering systems mean that engineers are increasingly working collaboratively with experts from multiple disciplines. ﬁsoftﬂ skillsšin such areas as communication, ˚exibility, and an ability to work on teams, including multiple disciplinesšare of particular importance for cps engineering because the work is inherently interdisciplinary. the pace of change in science and engineering knowledge generally and the newness and rapid ˚ux of cps suggest that cps courses and programs emphasizing learning and critical thinking, as well as specic techniques and methods, are needed.box s.1 paths for teaching cyberphysical systemspotential perspectives and paths for teaching cps include the following: exposure to cps in k12. es in, for example, basic calculus, physics, programming, or robotics could relieve some of the pressure on an alreadycrowded undergraduate curriculum and would in any event help ensure that students arrive ready to embark on a cpsfocused curriculum when they begin their undergraduate studies. existing science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem) initiatives and the computer science core concepts. vocational and community college programs. these programs play several roles in developing the workforce: a pathway to 4year institutions, vocational training, and updating the skills of the existing workforce. adding cps skills to community college programs would not only create paths to 4year cps degrees but would also train the workforce that will be needed to operate and maintain increasingly complex cps. midcareer engineers may also need to bolster their skills and knowledge as their jobs increasingly involve cps. inclusion of cps in introductory engineering and computer science courses. the majority of engineers will need a basic understanding in the complexities of building and maintaining cps. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 7 one or more cps survey courses taught at the undergraduate level. survey courses provide students with a basic understanding of cps and the key challenges to their design, both of which are especially important for domain experts from the individual engineering disciplines (i.e., aerospace, civil, and mechanical engineering). engineering programs that include a cps concentration or focus. although more deliberate approach to teaching cps foundations; moreover, this may also be true of other areas, including civil, chemical, and biomedical engineering. the committee believes that the creation of a new type of engineerša cps engineer who is an expert at the intersection of the cyber and physical issuesšwill be needed to meet workforce needs.  a handful of graduate degree programs that or computer science slant. an m.sc. program aimed at graduates from other en ph.d. programs in cps.cps faculty, combined with industry demand for ph.d. training and sustained research funding, is likely to spur institutions to establish ph.d. programs. if cps industry than will pursue academic careers. paths to cps knowledgethere will be multiple paths for attaining cps knowledge and skills (box s.1). one reason is that the workforce is likely to include both domain experts who are knowledgeable about cps principles and a new type of engineer who is an expert at the intersection of cyber and physical issues. another reason is that many different approaches will be undertaken at colleges and universities depending on their present circumstances, such as existing department structures and curricula, faculty expertise, and available resources. designing a cps degree is quite complex and involves, for example, a careful balancing of physical and cyber aspects and general cps and application knowledge. because cps degree curricula are in their infancy, they will doubtless evolve substantially as cps are more widely deployed. moreover, cps programs will doubtless share with most engia 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationneering degree programs the challenge of prioritizing topics to t in a manageable 4year program of study.finding 3.1: the diversity of current departmental structures, faculty expertise and interests, and curricula suggest that there are multiple feasible and appropriate models for strengthening cps engineering. the committee envisions that universities will (1) enrich current engineering programs with cps content, (2) create cps survey courses, (3) create new master™slevel cps degrees, and, ultimately, (4) develop new undergraduate cps engineering degree programs. many universities may not currently have the expertise or resources to establish extensive cps education programs. a useful alternative in these cases would be to forge more limited partnerships among several departments to implement jointly taught courses. for example, key cps content could be introduced into mechatronics, robotics, or transportation courses. doing so over time could help reduce the burdens associated with infusing cps throughout engineering and building the courses needed to implement a cps program.finding 3.2: because cps engineering centers on the interaction of physical and cyber aspects of systems, it will often not be sufcient to create cps curricula by simply combining material from existing courses. new courses will need to be designed.recommendation 3.1: the national science foundation should support the development of university education programs that dene a path and plan for the creation of a cyberphysical systems engineering degree. recommendation 3.2: the national science foundation, professional societies, and university administrations should support and consider allocating resources for the development of new cyberphysical systems (cps)focused courses within existing engineering programs, new cpsspecic classes for cps engineering majors and minors, and an overall curriculum for an undergraduate cps engineering degree program. recommendation 3.3: universities should consider adding cyberphysical systems content to freshmanlevel introductory courses for students in all areas of engineering and computer science. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 9recommendation 3.4: engineering schools, byandlarge, have already redesigned their curricula to emphasize projectbased learning. because this is especially important for cyberphysical systems (cps) education, these projectbased courses should be extended to support cps principles and foundations.opportunities and obstacles for institutionalizing cps curriculaseveral obstacles stand in the way of building successful cps programs. the nature of cps makes it difcult to develop and teach cpsfocused curricula. moreover, although students may be interested in cps technologies or in the applications that cps enable, they may not realize that they ought to seek out courses or a program that emphasizes cps knowledge and skills. also, few mechanisms exist to support extensive faculty commitment to a new interdisciplinary discipline, which makes it hard to develop, recruit, or retain the faculty needed to provide an uptodate cps education for undergraduate students. moreover, an array of resourcesšfrom new textbooks to laboratory equipmentšis needed to support any new curriculum.drawing students to cpsat the undergraduate level, one key will be exposing stemoriented students to the existence of the eld of cps, its links to related areas like robotics and the internet of things (iot), and the potential benets of its formal study. one important opportunity is to include cps as part of freshman ﬁintroduction to engineeringﬂ programs across engineering and not just in computer science and electrical engineering. finding 4.1: although there are many stem courses and programs at the high school and undergraduate level that introduce the students to some cps elements, such programs often do not provide a broad introduction to cps foundations and principles and tend to be overly focused either on simplistic applications or disciplinecentric content.recommendation 4.1: those developing k12 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem) programs and educating and training stem teachers should consider opportunities to enrich these programs with cyberphysical systems (cps) concepts and applications in order to lay intellectual foundations for future work and expose students to cps career opportunities. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationfinding 4.2: incoming college students appear to be unfamiliar with the term cps, cps concepts, and job opportunities in cps. they are, however, drawn to courses and programs in more widely visible cpsrelated topics such as robotics, the internet of things (iot), health care, smart cities, and the industrial internet.recommendation 4.2: those developing cyberphysical systems engineering courses and programs should consider leveraging the visibility of and student interest in areas such as robotics, the internet of things, health care, smart cities, and the industrial internet in descriptions of careers, courses, and programs and when selecting applications used in courses and projects. recruiting, retaining, and developing the needed facultyfaculty teaching cps courses will be most effective if they are able to draw on expertise in particular aspects of cps, knowledge of the other aspects of a complete cps system, and domain or applicationspecic needs. today, most cps education (and research) is being performed by a small number of faculty members who previously established themselves in a related eld and then ventured into this newer, more interdisciplinary eld. in the long term, academic institutions will have opportunities to recruit new faculty who have graduated with a cps degree or specialization and who have a record of conducting cpsspecic research as well as people with industrial experience with cps engineering. indeed, some institutions have already begun explicitly looking for such individuals. both research funding and opportunities for academic advancement are needed to develop a pool of faculty. the national science foundation™s cyberphysical systems program has helped build an academic community around cps and foster links between academia and industry. the parallel development of several wellrecognized cps conferences and the creation of a new cps journal have also made it easier for faculty with a multidisciplinary prole to establish themselves as cps researchers and still meet the academic evaluation criteria. nevertheless, it will take time and investment to build the necessary complement of faculty to educate those who engineer cps. finding 4.3: because cps is a new eld that draws on multiple disciplines, not all institutions can be expected to have enough faculty with the requisite knowledge to teach all of the courses needed for a cps degree program.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 11recommendation 4.3: the national science foundation should support the development of cyberphysical systems faculty through the use of teaching grants and fellowships.despite the challenges of entering a new eld, young faculty may have an advantage becoming leaders in the cps eld, given the novelty of the area, because they do not need to compete with the large number of wellestablished and wellrecognized leaders found in more mature elds. developing needed courses and instructional materialsalthough the committee was encouraged by the release of several textbooks during the course of its work, the number of textbooks, curricular materials, and laboratory facilities that exist to support cps remains limited. just as merely regrouping current classes will not yield a cps curriculum, current texts may not fully incorporate the effects of the physical system on cyber technology, and vice versa. furthermore, often the complexity of cps demands that students gain a full understanding of how the physical environment impacts these systems. realistic models can provide some of this knowledge, but testbeds will be needed for students to fully realize the constraints the physical environment can create. these testbeds are expensive to create and maintain, and many universities do not have, or will not allocate, the resources to create such testbeds. finding 4.4: if they are to teach new cps courses and build cps programs, universities will need to allocate time and resources to develop cps course materials and to provide the necessary laboratory space and equipment (including both virtual and physical testbeds). finding 4.5: testbeds are needed to provide students with sufciently realistic applications and problems. these can be both virtual and physical and can be remotely accessed and shared among multiple institutions and developed and operated in cooperation with industry.recommendation 4.4: the national science foundation, professional societies, and universities should support the development and evolution of cyberphysical systems textbooks, class modules (including laboratory modules), and testbeds. these parties should partner with industry in developing and maintaining realistic testbeds. * * *a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationas cps become more pervasive, demand will grow for a workforce with the capacity and capability to design, develop, and maintain them. an understanding of not only the cyber or the physical aspects of systems, but also their interactions will become more and more valuable. a workforce with these skills will be better positioned to help industry pursue current and future advances across the myriad applications for cps. the actions recommended in this report point to ways to ensure that aspiring engineers and computer scientists are equipped with the skills necessary to meet the demand for a modern cps workforce. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.131the transformative nature of cps and workforce needsthis chapter discusses the transformative nature of cyberphysical systems (cps), their importance to industry, and the associated workforce needs. it looks at broad indicators of the economic importance of cps applications as well as testimony presented to the committee about the cps skills sought by industry. the transformative nature of cps the engineered world has seen a major transformation during the last few decades. elements that previously existed in purely mechanical or electrical (i.e., physical) form, and in particular those elements describing logic, control, and decisionmaking, increasingly take the form of embedded systems and software (i.e., cyber elements). the acronym cps is often used to describe ﬁengineered systems that are built from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algorithms and physical components.ﬂ1 in this denition, ﬁcyberﬂ refers to the computers, software, data structures, and networks that support decisionmaking within the system, and ﬁphysicalﬂ denotes not only the parts of the physical systems (e.g., the mechanical and electrical components of an automated vehicle) but also the physical world in which the system interacts (e.g., 1 denition from national science foundation (nsf), 2016, ﬁcyberphysical systems,ﬂ program solicitation 16549, nsf document number nsf16549, march 4, https://www.nsf.gov/publications/pubsumm.jsp?odskey=nsf16549.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationroads and pedestrians). cps is closely related to terms in common use today, such as internet of things (iot), the industrial internet, and smart cities, and to the elds of robotics and systems engineering (box 1.1).several emerging technology trends support the increased deployment of cps: communication networks, databases, and distributed systems allow control and decisionmaking on physical systems to be done remotely, collaboratively, and in a distributed manner, which is enabling functionality impossible a few years ago.  the developments that have given rise to the eld of data science make it possible to collect, store, analyze, and act on large amount of realworld data. decreasing costs of components and systems have allowed the use of cps within everyday devices such as home thermostats and automobile brakes. for example, lower cost sensors are being deployed across the board, from the use of sensor nets to detect approaching natural disasters such as ˚ooding and earthquakes to those that support safer car travel.  wide deployment and increased reliability of highspeed wireless networks support devices that rely on a continuous connection to the internet. cps can be small and selfcontained, such as an articial pancreas, or very large and complex, such as a regional energy grid. they are increasingly used to provide economically or societally important capabilities, many with critical infrastructure or lifesafety implications (box 1.2). cps can provide extraordinary ˚exibility by allowing unprecedented growth in economy, functionality, safety, performance, and accuracy of control and operational decisionmaking. indeed, virtually all industries have embraced cps. a recent mckinsey global institute report on the iot, for which cps provides the technical foundation, captured some of the economic importance of cps applications succinctly by stating, ﬁthe hype has been greatšthe value may be greater.ﬂ2 the mckinsey report estimates a potential worldwide economic impact of as much as ﬁ$11.1 trillion per year in 2025 for iot applications in nine settingsﬂšdevices attached to or inside the human body, homes, retail environments, ofces, factories, custom production environments, vehicles, cities, and other outside settings.3 gartner recently forecast a 30 percent increase in the number of 2 mckinsey global institute, 2015, the internet of things: mapping the value beyond the hype, june, http://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/businesstechnology/ourinsights/theinternetofthingsthevalueofdigitizingthephysicalworld.3 ibid, p. 23.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transformative nature of cps and workforce needs 15box 1.1 areas related to cyberphysical systemsand underpins several important technical visions. robotics focuses on systems incorporating sensors and actuators that operate autonomously or semiautonomously in cooperation with humans. it encompasses an array of topics that include kinematics, dynamics, and path planning; robot hardware and control software; perception, sensing, and state estimation; and control of manipulators and vehicles. many robots would be considered cps, cps are not robots, and some of the topics covered in a robotics program are  systems engineeringsuch topics as modeling and integration. however, systems engineering typically concentrates on the organization, management, and integration required for large systems but does not necessarily address the detailed technological needs that arise in combining the physical with the cyber aspects of systems.  the internet of thingsphysical attributes, and virtual personalities and use intelligent interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into the information network, and often communicate data associated with users and their environments.ﬂ as iot progresses, it is increasingly being applied to applications that require cps characteristics such as control, realtime response, and safetycritical operation. iot applications like smart cities (see below) are rapidly becoming more sophisticated and reliant on cps capabilities. the industrial internet 3 combines the iot with the ability to collect and analyze large volumes of data to manage industrial systems and operations. smart cities is a vision in which urban areas and other communities leverage information technology to better manage community infrastructure and plications augment sensing and monitoring with realtime response and control, they become reliant on cps capabilities.  institute of electrical and electronics engineers, uae section homepage, http://www.the internet of things 2012: new horizons, internet of things 3pitches an industrial internet,ﬂ mit technology review a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationﬁconnected thingsﬂ from 2015 to 2016 and a threefold increase to over 20 billion devices in 2020.4 a related concept is the industrial internet, which combines iot and big data analytics for industrial applications. a 2015 report from ge and the consulting rm accenture cites projections 4 gartner, inc., 2015, ﬁgartner says 6.4 billion connected ‚things™ will be in use in 2016, up 30 percent from 2015,ﬂ press release, november 10, 2015, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3165317.box 1.2 a cpsenabled futurecyberphysical systems (cps) can be used to provide economically or societally important capabilities in the following areas:  transportation. cps is already used in automobiles that can sense impending crashes and perform various tasks to protect passengers. cps technologies promise to greatly reduce the annual death toll from car crashes caused by human error and to reduce greatly the time wasted and pollution generated by highway congestion. cps technologies for aviation and airport safety technology could relieve congestion and enable safe integration of autonomous air vehicles into u.s. airspace.  manufacturing. the complexity of what can be designed and built and what society demands is constantly increasing. the time scale for product development cycles is decreasing, even as product variety is increasing. cps technologies facturing facilities). health care.glucose levels or heart rhythm abnormalities and intervene to restore normal body function applied more broadly, cps will help to scale access to care for a growing in the design of more costeffective, easiertocertify, and safer medical products.  energy. renewable electric energy resources are intermittent and uncertain, necessitating new sensors, switches, and meters, and also an infrastructure distribution system that allows consumers to manage their energy use. agriculture. with global population projected to surpass 9 billion people between production and consumption,global food losses and food waste, rome, italy, http://www.fao.org/foodlossandfoodwaste/en/, p. v.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transformative nature of cps and workforce needs 17that worldwide industrial internet spending could reach $500 million by 2020 and be responsible for as much as $15 trillion of the global economy by 2030.5 at the same time, rms in the information technology sector are increasingly investing in cps areas such as selfdriving cars (e.g., google and uber) and the iot (e.g., ibm). speaking to the potential of cps and the technical challenges of realizing that potential, in testimony to the house committee on science and technology in 2008, don winter, vice president for engineering and information technology at boeing phantom works, observed the following:cyberphysical systems are pervasive at boeing, and in the aerospace industry at large. they are becoming increasingly prevalent in other sectors, notably automotive and energy management. their importance to our products is huge and their complexity is growing at an exponential rate.6the contribution of cps to aerospace systems has grown dramatically, noted winter, having risen from less than 10 percent of the design, development, validation, and certication cost for transport aircraft in the 1970s to about 50 percent by the 2000s. it is worth observing that even as it offers enormous safety benets, the adoption of cps also introduces new risks. for example, although it is also susceptible to failure, a purely mechanical linkage may be less dangerous than separate sensors and actuators that could lead to failure and injury as a result of a software mistake, hardware malfunction, or cybersecurity attack. these risks magnify the need for a highly skilled workforce.foundational advances resulting from academic research will support the next generation of cps that can be designed, implemented, deployed, and maintained to meet requirements using emerging functional and nonfunctional properties. advances in achieving functional properties allow new solutions to be realized; for example, tomorrow™s solutions will allow microelectric grid transactions for higher energy efciency and disease prevention (not just maintenance). advances in achieving nonfunctional properties (i.e., security, safety, reliability, and dependability) will enable future systems to operate with increased condence in the presence of riskšfor example, realizing condence in cityscale autonomous transportation systems. 5 general electric and accenture, 2014, industrial internet insights report for 2015, http://www.ge.com/digital/sites/default/les/industrialinternetinsightsreport.pdf, accessed november 1, 2016.6 don c. winter, 2008, testimony at a hearing on the networking and information technology research and development (nitrd) program, committee on science and technology, u.s. house of representatives, july 31.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationthe national science foundation (nsf) has an ongoing cps research program that was given additional impetus by recommendations of august 2007 and december 2010 reports of the president™s council of advisors on science and technology.7 re˚ective of both the diverse applications of cps and its importance for progress in many sectors, the nsf program works with a wide array of federal mission agencies: the u.s. department of homeland security™s science and technology directorate; the u.s. department of transportation™s federal highway administration and intelligent transportation systems joint program ofce; the national aeronautics and space administration™s aeronautics research mission directorate (armd); several institutes and centers of the national institutes of health; and the u.s. department of agriculture™s national institute of food and agriculture.8 the national institute of standards and technology has established a cyberphysical systems and smart grid program ofce pursuing research and the development of architectures, frameworks, and standards for cps and cps applications.9 other federal cps research initiatives include the defense advanced research projects agency™s adaptive vehicle make and highassurance cyber military systems programs and the department of transportation™s connected vehicle and intelligent transportation systems program. cps research initiatives can also be found in many other countries (box 1.3).building a cps workforceit proved difcult for the committee to obtain comprehensive data on demand for cps skills and knowledge. it is especially challenging to gather systematic information of the sort requested for an emerging, highly interdisciplinary eld like cps. it is likewise difcult to gather even anecdotal information from smaller rms because they tend not to have readily identiable points of contact on these issues. no surveys appear to have been conducted on industrial demand for skills or of cpsrelated university programs in the united states. nor do current 7 from the president™s council of advisors on science and technology reports leadership under challenge: information technology r&d in a competitive world: an assessment of the federal networking and information technology r&d program, august 2007, and designing a digital future: federally funded research and development in networking and information technology, december 2010, https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ostp/pcast/docsreports; and nsf, 2016, ﬁcyberphysical systems,ﬂ program solicitation 16549.8 nsf, ﬁcyberphysical systems (cps),ﬂ https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgmsumm.jsp?pimsid=503286, accessed november 1, 2016.9 national institute of standards and technology, ﬁcyberphysical systems,ﬂ https://www.nist.gov/el/cyberphysicalsystems, accessed november 1, 2016.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transformative nature of cps and workforce needs 19government statistics provide sufcient granularity to separate out cps positions from other computing or engineering jobs. the committee was not in a position to commission systematic surveys of either industry or academia to collect such information itself. lacking comprehensive data about workforce needs in cps, the committee relied on the perspectives of industry experts who participated in box 1.3 global investments in cps researchthe following are examples of longterm research initiatives in cyberphysical systems (cps):  industry 4.0 program seeks to use the potential of cyberphysical systems (the internet of things) to maintain industrial leadership. industry intelligent production systems and processes and the realization of distributed and networked production sites. the european union (eu) initiated a major joint technology initiative with šby european nations and industry called advanced research and technology for embedded intelligence systems3 and subsequently merged with an integrated circuit technology initiative to create the european techand development needs and policies that would foster smart system integration.4 the current eu framework programme for research and innovation (horizon areas, such as smart systems, autonomous systems, intelligent transport systems, factory automation, the internet of things, and smart communities. south koreaal it industry promotion agency (nipa) programs. cps was also a major point of discussion during a highlevel information and communication technology policy 5digital economy in japan and the eu: an assessment of the common challenges and the collaboration potentialmarch.strategic r&d opportunities for 21st century cyberphysical systems: connecting computer and information systems with the physical world3the impact of control technology (t. samad and a.m. annaswamy, eds.), http://www.ieeecss.org.4kt.supa.ac.uk/market/artemiseniaceposs.5a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationthe two workshops convened during its study as well as a set of briefings. a list of all workshop speakers or briefers to the committee, which included a number from industry, can be found in appendix b. workshop speakers representing a wide array of industry sectorsšautomotive, agriculture, medical devices, and space, along with a large industrial conglomerate and a vendor of cps engineering software tools, discussed the changing nature of their products, the array of new skills needed in their engineering workforce, and the challenges they face in developing the necessary talent. a summary of some of their observations is provided in box 1.4. people from diverse industry sectors reported that they needed people with cps engineering skills. in some cases, products box 1.4 comments on industry need for a cpscapable workforceworkshop participants and briefers to the committee from several industry sectors provided many comments about the growing importance of cps in industry and the resulting demand for cps skills. these included the following: automotive industry. describing why demand for cps talent is growing in the automotive industry, craig stephens, from ford research and advanced engineering, noted that although basic automobile engineering knowledge (such as power train, combustion, and emissions) remains fundamental, automotive engineers also need to be able to design, develop, and test systems that include communication and sensing technologies and more sophisticated computer controls. these new skills are especially important in new applications, such as elecor autonomous driving. stephens noted that the auto industry has been successful in providing the necessary training, but companies like ford hope that employees inc., cited aeronautics and aerospace as another transportation industry in which cps play an increasingly important role. for example, numerous cpsintensive services) make up the air transportation environment. agriculture and construction equipmentincreasingly cpsintensive as well. for example, deere manufactures partial and fully autonomous vehicles, provides mesh wireless and telematics links between vehicles, updates and diagnoses faults in its products remotely, and is developing applications for the agronomic data that its products collect. moreover, williams noted, a large industrial farm today is a system of systems and requires a systems approach to developing and deploying products and services rather than the traditional focus on individual products. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transformative nature of cps and workforce needs 21were not being developed because there were not enough people available with the cps skills necessary to do the job. in other cases, people from industry noted that their workforce would be restructured if more cpseducated individuals were available.speaking to the demand for cps skills, joseph salvo, director at ge global research observed that ﬁgoing forward . . . almost all of our employees are going to be touched by this.ﬂ asked how many cps engineers ford motor company needed, craig stephens, from ford™s research and advanced engineering organization, responded ﬁ[the] short answer is, more than we can get.ﬂ given the prevalence of cps throughout industry, the work of many  medical devices.discussed the increasing capability of medical devices to monitor and diagnose health conditions, be lifesustaining (pacemakers), or simply improve life through the skills needed to develop future medical devices. space. david nichols and daniel dvorak described the cps needs of curiosity and the dealing with autonomy requirements; engineering design at the assembly, subsyswho already possess all the needed cps and other engineering skills. indeed, senior engineers. tools supporting cps developmentware company that develops products that support modelbased system engimodeling, algorithm design, control system design, network understanding, and engineering process. there is also a new emphasis on cps skills, including nondeterminism, managing timing and latency, and cosimulation. mills noted that source: adapted from national research council, interim report on 21st century cyberphysical systems education, the national academies press, washington, d.c., a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationengineers revolves around cps, whether they consider themselves experts in this area or not. many have not received formal education or training in key cps topics, such as formal methods, verication, or security, and may not fully understand the challenges of designing the software or physical systems for lifecritical systems. ad hoc cps system design and implementation runs the risk of not supporting the scalability, security, and design ˚exibility required to meet today™s and tomorrow™s needs. this is of particular concern given the role cps plays in mission and safetycritical systems, and the cybersecurity challenges faced with all computer systems. better education and training and the development of a cps discipline is therefore a priority, since many if not most of the systems that society relies on will be cps. developing effective cps solutions requires a workforce that has the right mix training and skills. this workforce will include skill levels ranging from those who can help develop sophisticated capabilities to those who can help deploy and maintain cps solutions over long periods of time. engineering projects are by nature collaborative, and engineering teams involve a range of expertise, including cps.accordingly, a variety of educational and training regimes will be needed. the multidisciplinary skills required will build on existing workforce capabilities in areas of engineering, computer science, and information technology. to that end, part of the effort will need to focus on supplementing the skills of the existing workforce, while another part will need to focus on a future workforce that has all prerequisite skills built in from their education.finding 1.1: cps are emerging as an area of engineering with signicant economical and societal implications. major industrial sectors such as transportation, medicine, energy, defense, and information technology increasingly need a workforce capable of designing and engineering products and services that intimately combine cyber elements (computing hardware and software) and physical components and manage their interactions and impact on the physical environment). although it is difcult to quantify the demand, a likely implication is that more cpscapable engineers will be needed.cps: an emerging engineering discipline the emergence of a new eld such as cps from preexisting domains of knowledge is not a new occurrence. in fact, analogies can be drawn to the history of computer and software engineering. electrical engineers in the 1940s could not have conceived of computers as commodities. then, a computer was a very large room packed with rack after rack of hot a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the transformative nature of cps and workforce needs 23vacuum tube assemblies, relays, huge power supplies, and the unenviable punched card reader and line printer. the eld of computer engineering slowly emerged as a separate discipline and practice. the separate discipline and practice of software engineering later answered the need for people to more easily and effectively program the computers. it should come as no surprise that, much the same way that an army of electrical engineers is no longer required to build a computer, there is no longer the need for armies of varied engineering disciplines required to build, program, and employ small processors with sensors and controllers (either attached or built in) as components in other systemsšor, for that matter, as systems themselves. however, although the components and tools for designing small, embedded systems are accessible to a hobbyist, the skills and knowledge necessary to develop a large system with veriable reliability and safety requirements are considerable.following a similar pattern, cps incorporate components of disciplines such as embedded systems, software engineering, control systems, networking, and systems engineering. in fact, domains such as aerospace and mechanical engineering and related elds such as robotics have incorporated many cps principles for some time. the experts in this nascent eld will be experts on this intersection of disciplines. finding 1.2: the future cps workforce is likely to include a combination of (1) engineers trained in foundational elds (such as electrical and computing engineering, mechanical engineering, systems engineering, and computer science); (2) engineers trained in specic applied engineering elds (such as aerospace and civil engineering); and (3) cps engineers, who focus on the knowledge and skills spanning cyber technology and physical systems that operate in the physical world. finding 1.3: given that most entrylevel engineering and computer science positions are lled by undergraduates, it is important to incorporate cps into the undergraduate engineering and computer science curricula.recommendation 1.1: the national science foundation, together with universities, should support the creation and evolution of undergraduate education courses, programs, and pathways so that engineering and computer science graduates have more opportunities to gain the knowledge and skills required to engineer cyberphysical systems. the efforts should be complemented by initiatives to augment the skills of the existing workforce through continuing education and master™s degree programs.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242cps principles, foundations, system characteristics, and complementary skillsthis chapter examines at a high level the knowledge required to engineer cyberphysical systems (cps). it draws on an examination of existing courses, programs, and instructional materials as well as consideration of the topics highlighted in comments to the committee from industry experts. many of these foundations are also present in areas like computer science, engineering, and robotics, but the emphasis in cps is on the integration of physical and cyber aspects. the chapter starts with a discussion of this integration and associated principles. drawing on these principles, this chapter identied six foundations for a cps curriculum: basic computing concepts, computing for the physical world, discrete and continuous mathematics, crosscutting applications, modeling, and cps system development. the chapter turns next to a discussion of system characteristics such as scale, complexity, and safety criticality. these topics are best introduced early and infused throughout in cps coursework and projects, much as the best practice in engineering is to address these issues from the outset of system design. the chapter closes with a discussion of complementary skills of value for cps careers: learning to learn and critical thinking, soft skills, and entrepreneurship.given that the potential content for cps is broad and evolving, the emphasis here is on general principles, foundations, system characteristics, and skills rather a large array of specic facts or techniques. this approach is especially important in light of the wide breadth of material relevant to engineering cps and the emerging and fastpaced nature of a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cps principles, foundations, characteristics, and skills 25the eld. with the right foundations, students will be positioned to learn about new developments on the job.because engineering courses and curricula are already packed, it is not viable to simply add more material to span the physical and cyber dimensionsšand certainly not to double the amount of material. nor can all relevant topics t into the cps core curriculum or these principles and foundations. for example, biomemetics, an approach that is useful in areas such as robotics, is not included. (robotics is instead treated as an elective course in the representative curricula in boxes 3.4 through 3.7.) principles: integrating the physical and cyber the core principle of cps is the bridging of engineering and physical world applications and the computer engineering hardware and computer science cyber worlds. basic principles of the physical world include elements of physics, modeling, and realworld intangibles such as uncertainty and risk. concurrently, the principles of computer engineering and computer science worlds deal with embedded systems, networking, programming, and algorithms. cps education thus goes beyond exposure to the traditional dynamical systems models (ordinary differential or difference equations) to an understanding of physical impacts not only at the physical layer, but also across the physicalcyber interface. sensors are an example of a hardware bridge between the physical and cyber worlds. they are the primary devices that collect data from the physical world that are then used as input to the cyber world. understanding the properties and principles of sensors and how to use them in a manner that is aware of sensor and realworld constraints is critical. unfortunately, highlevel abstractions used to simplify system development often have the undesirable side effect of hiding key physical world principles that programmers need to know if the cps they develop are to work properly. once raw data are collected, they are processed via signal processing techniques. the required principles of signal processing include linear signals and systems theory, analog and digital ltering, time and frequency domain analysis, convolution, linear transforms like the discrete fourier transform and fast fourier transform, noise and statistical characterization of signals, machine learning, and decision and sensor fusion. in cps, considerations of the implementations of these signal processing techniques on embedded cpus, running in real time and with safety critical implications, are necessary, as is the topic of sensor reliability. often these issues are not considered in classical signal processing courses. control is a central tenet of cps. relevant elements of control theory include stability and optimization as well as control techniques in the a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcontext of networks, hybrid systems, stochastic systems, and digital systems. of particular importance in the cyber domain are the implications for control of distributed systems and the inherent delays they impose.in today™s networked, wireless, and realtime world, and as cyberphysical systems become embedded in our economy and society, knowledge of the principles underlying these topics is also necessary for cps engineering. areas where students need this knowledge include the following:  communication and networking. cps requires an understanding from physicallayer principles to protocols, layered architectures, and the many realworld properties of wireless communications.  real time. an understanding of topics like realtime scheduling theory, temporal semantics in programs, and clock synchronization in networks is needed.  distributed systems. the distributed and networked nature of cps in many of the applications of interest should be included in cps education. even though distributed systems and networking are covered in traditional engineering or computer science curricula, these courses often do not address cps issues. cps combines the hardware implementation with the software that runs the algorithms, all operating in a natural world setting.  embedded systems. a strong education and training on the principles of embedded software, the many principles of programming, algorithms, software design, formal methods, and platforms (architectures and operating systems) are necessary to enable the development of reliable and highquality cyber components of a cps system.  physical properties. it is important to understand and be able to model the physical properties of the environments and hardware platforms. software design principles that address the realisms of the physical world in such a way as to satisfy safety, reliability, realtime performance, risk management, and security requirements need to be part of the curriculum. human interaction. human factors design, humanintheloop control, and understanding and accounting for the behavioral responses of humans are important for many cps. one important design issue is making cps easy for humans to operate, control, and maintain. similar to other engineering disciplines, handson projects and interdisciplinary teamwork are also fundamental to understanding and seeing core principles applied.finding 2.1: core cps knowledge involves not only an understanding of the basics of physical engineering and cyber design and a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cps principles, foundations, characteristics, and skills 27implementation, but also understanding how the physical and cyber aspects in˚uence and affect each other.recommendation 2.1: cyberphysical systems educational programs should provide a foundation that highlights the interaction of cyber and physical aspects of systems. most current courses fail to emphasize the interaction, implying that new courses and instructional materials are needed.examples of curricula that highlight this interaction are provided in chapter 3 (boxes 3.2 to 3.7).foundations of cpsdrawing on these principles, the committee identied six key overarching foundations for a cps curriculum (box 2.1).  foundation 1, basic computing concepts, is included to emphasize that the cyber expertise required cannot be achieved with only one or two programming classes; it can only be attained with solid training in computing that draws on examples and case studies from the physical domain. in particular, it is necessary to teach how the properties of the box 2.1 foundations of cyberphysical systemsfoundation 1. basic computing conceptsthe cyber expertise required for cyberphysical systems (cps) cannot be achieved with only one or two programming classes; it can only be attained with solid training in computing. the basic computing concepts listed below should be taught using examples and case studies from the physical domain. these concepts are as follows: embedded hardware; data structures and algorithms;state machines widely used in cps) and discrete event systems; programming; software engineering and modelbased design; and realtime operating systems and programming for networks.continueda 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationfoundation 2. computing for the physical worldthere is a need for computing foundations to embrace physical world properties and constraints. realworld complexities often give rise to situations not addressed by the software and often result in failures. software designs and implementations must be aware of the resource limitations of the platforms themselves as well as conditions that the real world imposes on the platform. students will need to understand are the following concepts: properties of sensors and analysis of signals; programming with sensors and actuators in open environments and with multiple modalities; realtime embedded systems; resource management and constraints such as time, memory size, and power; and techniques such as redundancy and faulttolerance for managing unreliability in physical systems. foundation 3. discrete and continuous mathematicsboth discrete and continuous mathematics are needed as foundational skills tinuous and discrete systems and having the knowledge to deal with that integration is critical. concepts students will need to understand are as follows: probability, statistics, and stochastic processes; calculus and differential equations.foundation 4. crosscutting application of sensing, actuation, control, communication, and computingthis foundation is essential due to the crosscutting focus of cps between the physical and cyber aspects of systems, as well as control over communication networks and sensing, signal processing, and actuation with realtime constraints. signal processing, and embedded software design and implementation are at the core of this foundational principle. concepts will include the following: control principles including linear and nonlinear systems, stochastic sys optimization and optimal control of dynamic systems;box 2.1 continueda 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cps principles, foundations, characteristics, and skills 29 networking concepts including wireless communications, synchronous and asynchronous communications, and adhoc networking; realtime analysis including task models describing realworld information sources, timetriggered or eventtriggered control, decisionmaking with noisy data; signal processing using control, computation, and communication models; safety, reliability, and dependability; security and privacy; impact of physical properties on software requirements; human factors related to humaninloop and behavioral aspects; and networked control.foundation 5. modeling of heterogeneous and dynamic systems integrating control, computing, and communicationcps modeling requires a complete picture of control, communications, and computing with emphasis on representing and accounts for modularity, abstraction, uncertainty, and heterogeneity. relevant techniques include linear and nonlinear models, stochastic models, and discreteevent and hybrid models, and associated design methodologies based on optimization, probability theory, and dynamic  properties of the physical world, including uncertainty and risk; properties of computational devices, including computational and power limits; properties of communication systems, including limitations of wireless communications; error detection and correction; merging physical and computational modeling; andfoundation 6. cps system development safety, resilience, security, and privacy; requirement development; assurance cases and hazard analysis; modelbased design and tools; system design, including design for system evolution and lifecycle  platforms such as the internet of things or cloud computing; and testing cps in the laboratory and in their intended environment.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationphysical world have to be addressed in the cyber world to achieve the system characteristics listed in the next subsection.  foundation 2, computing for the physical world, highlights the need to include properties and constraints of the physical world. realworld complexities often give rise to situations not addressed by the software, often resulting in failures; consequently, it is necessary to have a foundation in laws of the physical world. software designs and implementations need to take into account the resource limitations of the platforms themselves as well as conditions that the real world imposes on the platform.  foundation 3, discrete and continuous mathematics, highlights advanced math beyond calculus needed for cps engineering. this re˚ects the fact that cps deals with both continuous and discrete systems, and the knowledge on how to deal with that integration is critical.  foundation 4, crosscutting application of sensing, actuation, control, communication, and computing encompasses knowledge of control, signal processing, and embedded software design and implementation that one would expect to permeate all aspects of the curriculum  foundation 5, stresses the need for modeling of heterogeneous and dynamic systems integrating control, computing, and communication with an emphasis on uncertainty and heterogeneity. such work is especially challenging because physical and cyber modeling use different and often incompatible models. focusing on the merging and interactions of models across the physical and cyber aspects of systems is necessary.  foundation 6, cps system development identies the requirements for a lifecycle view of developing a cps from initial requirements to certication to deployment. concepts that transcend the entire life cycle include safety, resilience, security, and privacy.system characteristicsbuilding systems that operate with increased condence in the presence of uncertainty and with acceptable levels of risk requires an understanding of how to address relevant design aspects (i.e., security, reliability, and dependability). consider, for example, what it takes to design a cityscale autonomous transportation system that people can condently use with minimal safety concerns. the committee also sees examples of gaps in today™s deployed systems, such as the vulnerability to cyberattacks and poor interoperability. the following attributes and the associated design approaches and mindset are best introduced early in the cps curriculum and infused throughout in cps coursework and projects: security and privacy. all information technologybased systems are subject to cyberattacks. many cps are especially vulnerable either a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cps principles, foundations, characteristics, and skills 31because they are located in open environments or can be communicated with wirelessly. ensuring that those designing such systems are familiar with security and privacy risks and techniques for protecting them will be crucial.  interoperability. especially in largescale cps, systems will be composed of components from different vendors, and portions may be operated by different entities. realizing the full promise of cps will require interoperability among heterogeneous components and systems. achieving interoperability requires knowledge of how to dene and use common architectures, standardized interfaces, and data standards. reliability and dependability. many cps will be part of our daily lives, and their utility will require high reliability and dependability. new problems arise because many cps devices have limited computational power, memory, and energy. the best systems are those designed from the start with reliability (and safety) in mindšnot as something to be xed during testing. cps will also need to be robust to uncertainties that may be difcult to quantify in the design phase. in order to make sure these uncertainties are addressed, they must be tracked and addressed during implementation stages. power and energy management. the compact size and autonomous operation of some cps components make energy management a critical engineering design priority. safety. with the proliferation of cps into daily lives, it becomes exceedingly important to ensure that actions taken on humans and the environment are safe and that the risks associated with these actions can be assessed and managed.  stability and performance. the stability of cps, which are dynamic and stochastic systems, involves such factors as the linearity or nonlinearity of the system, the bandwidth of the systems, sampling rate, the poles and zeroes of the system, the modeling of the noise and uncertainty affecting the system, and limitations of sensors and actuators such as noise corruption or saturation.  human factors and usability. human factors design, humanintheloop control, and understanding and accounting for the behavioral responses of humans are all important for many cps applications. for instance, critical cps are used to support the health care and wellbeing of the elderly.these considerations are often essential in ensuring a system will operate with increased condence in the presence of uncertainty and with acceptable levels of risk. the importance of improving education in these areas is highlighted by the prevalence of cyberattacks against cps, poor usability, and lack of interoperability. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationmost cps will have to be developed with these system characteristics in mind. as a result, these concepts will need to be woven throughout a stateoftheart cps curriculum at all levels. the challenge in building software and hardware systems that have these properties is not unknown to the computer science and engineering domains. exploring these challenges and learning how to determine if systems have these properties are essential to deploying better cps.complementary skillsa 2004 national academy of engineering (nae) report on the future of engineering highlights the implications for engineering education of the pace of change in science and engineering knowledge and the decreasing length of product cycles.the comfortable notion that a person learns all that he or she needs to know in a fouryear engineering program just is not true and never was. not even the ﬁfundamentalsﬂ are xed, as new technologies enter the engineer™s toolkit. engineers are going to have to accept responsibility for their own continual reeducation, and engineering schools are going to have to prepare engineers to do so by teaching them how to learn.1this observation is especially apt for an emerging and rapidly changing area like cps, and suggests that cps courses and programs need to emphasize ongoing learning and critical thinking about technology as well as specic techniques and methods.the nae report also takes note of the growing scale and complexity of engineering systems, which mean that engineers are increasingly working collaboratively with experts from multiple disciplines. it describes the ﬁsoft skillsﬂ needed to work effectively in such environments:essential attributes for these teams include excellence in communication (with technical and public audiences), an ability to communicate using technology, and an understanding of the complexities associated with a global market and social context. flexibility, receptiveness to change, and mutual respect are essential as well. for example, it already is found that engineers may come together in teams based on individual areas of expertise and disperse once a challenge has been addressed, only to regroup again differently to respond to a new challenge.2the need for such skills is especially acute for cps, where the engi1 national academy of engineering, 2004, the engineer of 2020: visions of engineering in the new century, the national academies press, washington, d.c., p. 24.2 ibid., pp. 3435.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cps principles, foundations, characteristics, and skills 33neering work is inherently interdisciplinary. there are many opportunities to teach students about effective teamwork, especially in project activities culminating in a capstone project course.another trend in engineering education relevant to cps is the integration of entrepreneurship. a 2013 article by byers et al. observed that. . . it is no longer enough to come out of school with a purely technical education; engineers need to be entrepreneurial in order to understand and contribute in the context of market and business pressures. for engineers who start companies soon after graduation, entrepreneurship education gives them solid experience in product design and development, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis. these skills are just as relevant for success in established enterprises as they are in startups; students with entrepreneurial training who join established rms are better prepared to become effective team members and managers and can better support their employers as innovators.3indeed, several speakers at the workshops organized for this study observed that engineering students increasingly wish to be entrepreneurial. given the potential economic impact of cps, related areas, and their applications, there is likely to be growing demand for integrating entrepreneurship into cps engineering education. entrepreneurship would naturally t into capstone or other projectbased courses.3 t. byers, t. seelig, s. sheppard, and p. weilerstein, 2013, entrepreneurship: its role in engineering education, the bridge 43(2):3540.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.343paths to cps knowledgechapter 1 posits that almost all engineering elds will be impacted by the wide use of cyberphysical systems (cps) and that the workforce will include domain experts who are knowledgeable of cps principles, including a new type of engineerša cps engineeršwho is an expert in the intersection of cyber and physical worlds. this suggests that multiple paths to cps knowledge are required to meet workforce needs. it is expected that many different approaches will be undertaken depending on the situation at each university or college. anticipating the diverse workforce needs, the challenges associated with implementing cps courses and programs, and a range of approaches already under way at universities, this report presents multiple alternatives. one good alternative, especially in the short term (and possibly the easiest to implement logistically) is a master™slevel program. this does not obviate the need for cps education at the b.s. level or the longterm needs for b.s.level classes and even degrees. given that the vast majority of engineers are hired at the b.s. level, it does not seem feasible to simply defer all cps education to the master™s level.ultimately, the mix of programs offered by universities will re˚ect the perspectives of individual institutions, their resources, and the demand universities see from students and their employers, and in turn affect the educational backgrounds of the cps workforce. over time, as the eld itself changes and matures, education and the cps skills that employers demand will coevolve.in particular, many universities may not currently have the expertise a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 35or resources to establish extensive cps education programs. a useful alternative in these cases would be to forge more limited partnerships among several departments to implement jointly taught courses. for example, key cps content could be introduced into mechatronics, robotics, or transportation courses. doing so over time can help reduce the burdens associated with infusing cps throughout engineering and building the courses one would need to implement a cps program. for example, a theory course developed to include students from computer science and mechanical engineering, as well as traditional control theory, will produce a new class of the sort that is needed for cps.finding 3.1: the diversity of current departmental structures, faculty expertise and interests, and curricula suggest that there are multiple feasible and appropriate models for strengthening cps engineering. the committee envisions that universities will (1) enrich current engineering programs with cps content, (2) create cps survey courses, (3) create new master™slevel cps degrees, and, ultimately, (4) develop new undergraduate cps engineering degree programs.recommendation 3.1: the national science foundation should support the development of university education programs that dene a path and plan for the creation of a cyberphysical systems engineering degree. in this chapter, the committee provides examples of several paths forward. it should be emphasized that these are examples, and a wide spectrum of possible solutions from varying perspectives is anticipated. this chapter explores the following approaches to cps knowledge:exposure to cps in k12,vocational and community college programs,cps discussions in introductory engineering and computer science courses, one or more cps survey courses taught at the undergraduate level, domainspecic degree programs that include a cps concentration or focus, a bachelor™slevel cps degree, anda master™slevel cps degree.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationoverview of relevant existing paths and programs to cps expertisethe committee was pleased to discover that a diverse set of cps program models have grown organically from computer science and electrical engineering departments. additionally, several domain areas have created programs that support the design in cps, for example, civil engineering masters in intelligent infrastructure. table 3.1 gives a small sampling of cps academic offerings. table 3.1 examples of programs in cps or embedded systemsuniversity/departmentsample coursesname of degree university of pennsylvania department of computer and information sciencecis 540: principles of embedded computationcis 541: embedded software for life critical applicationsm.s. in engineering in embedded systemsillinois institute of technology college of sciencecs 556: cyberphysical systems: languages and systemscs 557: cyberphysical systems: networking and algorithmsmaster™s in computer science with a specialization in cyberphysical systemsuniversity of colorado, boulder department of electrical, computing and energy engineering ecen 5613: embedded system designecen 5023: mobile computing and iot securityprofessional master™s program (30 hours) or certificate (9 hours) in embedded systems engineering iowa state university college of engineeringcpre 558: real time systemscpre 588: embedded computer systemsembedded systems graduate certificateuniversity of illinois college of electrical and computer engineeringece 486: control systemscs 431: embedded systemsundergraduate concentration in cyberphysical systemsnew york university school of engineeringcs 2204: digital logic and state machine designel 5483: real time embedded systemsundergraduate computer science degree with a concentration in computer hardware and embedded systems university of california, berkeleyeecs 149.1x: cyber physical systemsopen access online coursea 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 37the few cps degree programs that exist at present are at the graduate level, which perpetuates the belief that one must become an expert in one eld before commencing study of cps. for example, current programs require a student to complete a bachelor of science degree in either electrical and/or computer engineering before attempting to augment his or her studies with the cyber component, or complete the cyber portion rst and add the physical portion afterwards. there are a few undergraduate courses offered within existing programs that offer cps as a concentration instead of a standalone degree program. additionally, there are certication programs that complement the degree programs, as well as certication specialties. the university of california, santa cruz, for example, offers an introduction to cyberphysical systems course through its college of engineering as a part of the engineering curriculum. this class provides a basic overview of concepts and tools of cps such as ﬁmodeling and analysis tools for continuoustime and discretetime systems; nite state machines; state˚ow; timed and hybrid automata; concurrency; invariants; linear temporal logic; verication; and numerical simulation.ﬂ1 the course provides an introduction to modeling and analysis of cps. after the systems of interest are summarized via examples in engineering and science, several models of continuoustime systems and discretetime systems are introduced. the main focus is on models in terms of differential equations for the modeling of physical processes. finite state machines and state˚ow are introduced and combined with the physical models. applications of the resulting models for design and analysis of embedded systems are discussed. with this basic background, the more advanced timed automata and hybrid automata models are introduced. then, linear temporal logic, which is the main tool taught in this class, is introduced and applied to specify the desired system behavior. tools for analytical study and numerical verication for the satisfaction of linear temporal logic formulas are presented and discussed in numerous applications.another example is the university of california, berkeley, course ﬁintroduction to embedded systems,ﬂ an introductory class that introduces the students to the design and analysis of computational systems that interact with physical processes. the course uses a textbook2 written by two berkeley faculty.canvassing the offerings available at most universities reveals that current courses are not sufcient to meet the need of developing engi1 university of california, santa cruz, ﬁcmpe249: introduction to cyberphysical systems,ﬂ https://courses.soe.ucsc.edu/courses/cmpe249, accessed december 5, 2016.2 e.a. lee and s.a. seshia, 2015, introduction to embedded systems, a cyberphysical systems approach, second edition, http://leeseshia.org.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationneers who are adequately skilled in cps. few emphasize mission or safetycritical systems, and handson project work tends to ignore properties like fault tolerance and robustness. also, a focus on developing new systems over understanding tools and techniques needed to test and maintain current systems was noted. these deciencies are due to a variety of issues, including a lack of an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary approach, the lack applicationbased work, limited software engineering approaches, lack of integration, composition, and systemlevel concerns. additionally, interdependencies are not accounted for in the traditional engineering coursework. in this approach, systems are broken down into components and the students design them, but they do not think about how the two are connected. in addition to these analytical skills, cps also requires skill in synthesizing systems from understood components and integrating multiple disciplines and perspectives. a report of a national institute of standards and technologysponsored workshop on future opportunities for cps encourages signicant enhancements to the engineering curricula in cps degree programs, emphasizing systems sciences, engineering with an enhanced focus on multidisciplinary research.3 establishing multidepartment cps degrees and resources will help to build and sustain the future cps workforce, with the goal of establishing a more formal teaching and training approach to cps.recommendation 3.2: the national science foundation, professional societies, and university administrations should support and consider allocating resources for the development of new cyberphysical systems (cps)focused courses within existing engineering programs, new cpsspecic classes for cps engineering majors and minors, and an overall curricula for an undergraduate cps engineering degree program. k12 education programsstrong foundations in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem) topics, coupled with exposure to cps concepts and applications, can (1) introduce students to possible careers in cps, (2) provide students with the foundations they will need to succeed in cps or other stem undergraduate programs, and (3) make it easier to t a full cps 3 national institute of standards and technology, 2013, strategic r&d opportunities for 21st century cyberphysical systems: connecting computer and information systems with the physical world, gaithersburg, md., january, http://www.nist.gov/el/upload/12cyberphysicalsystems020113nal.pdf.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 39curriculum into a 4year course of study by giving students a head start. both core stem courses, such as calculus and physics, and courses on topics such as programming and robotics can all be extended with cps content. moreover, applications such as robotics provide timely and very attractive opportunities to motivate stem education generally and introduce cps content specically. for example, the uc davis center for integrated computing and stem education (cstem) has developed a capstone course, ﬁprinciples and design of cyberphysical systems,ﬂ4 based on use of a robotics kit, that is intended to spark interest in computing and cps specically. an introductory course on cps could also be offered as a capstone of a high school career technical education course of study.without a robust stem education in k12, wouldbe cps students are at a considerable disadvantage. furthermore, given the challenges in incorporating the extensive knowledge required for cps into a 4year undergraduate degree, there are considerable advantages to introducing foundational material at the k12 level. calculus and physics are already standardized and emphasized, especially for students interested in stem careers. by contrast, programming, robotics, and other cpsrelated topics are not as well dened or institutionalized. several efforts, most recently and broadly the ﬁcs for allﬂ initiative, are aimed at introducing computer science and computational thinking into k12 education across the country and may provide opportunities to introduce cps concepts and foundations. vocational and community collegescommunity colleges fulll multiple roles in providing educational opportunities for students. for some, it is a pathway to a 4year institution and a bachelor™s degree. as such, students participating in engineering programs at these institutions should be made aware of cps and the appropriate courses that will better prepare them to undertake this eld of study in a 4year program. furthermore, these programs must be sufciently rigorous to ensure success once entering a bachelor™s program. for others, community colleges offer vocational training for construction, auto repair, and other similar jobs. an increasing number of vocations will require an understanding of cps fundamentals for installation and maintenance of the advanced systems that rely on cps. these jobs, which depend on vocational education, include auto repair, hvac installation and maintenance, and medical care. vocational and community college education will need to evolve to develop new skills and incorpo4 uc davis center for integrated computing and stem education, ﬁcstem mathict pathway,ﬂ http://cstem.ucdavis.edu/curriculum/ictpathway/, accessed november 1, 2016.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationrate new knowledge to support these changing professionsšas well as new elds such as design, installation, and maintenance of solar energy systems, wind turbine systems, and broadband communications systems. an example is the washtenaw community college,5 which started an advanced transportation center that is working to develop curricula, create opportunities for vocational training, and strengthen the community college and university interactions around connected cars and other advanced transportation systems.people also use community colleges for the refreshment of knowledge and for retraining in technologies that have continued to evolve. community colleges could therefore provide midcareer professionals who have already completed a degree in a related discipline (e.g., computer science, electrical engineering, or mechanical engineering) with a means to bolster their skills and capabilities in cps knowledge. a set of the education modules could be fashioned into continuing education courses. in the event that a licensing regime for engineers is in place for these related engineering domains, it is likely that the courses so fashioned could be used to satisfy state requirements for continuing education. undergraduate courses, concentrations, and programsthis section considers various ways to incorporate cps into undergraduate education. it starts by discussing ways to add cps content to introductory courses for engineering and computer science undergraduates and approaches for creating survey courses that provide a more indepth introduction to cps. it then turns to ways to add a cps specialization to existing engineering programs and options for creating an undergraduate program in cps. finally, it discusses the need for ˚exibility in course work, the importance of handson work for learning about cps, and the need to create new courses to teach cps.current engineering curricula already have extensive content with limited room for new classes, so the proposed curricula replaces existing courses with new ones designed for cps. in the case of new concentrations in cps, the suggested courses would replace those offered as part of existing concentrations. for example, instead of taking classes for a concentration in control, software engineering, or networking, a student would take new classes designed for a cps concentration. in the case of a cps degree, the example curricula include new classes that would substitute for those in the curricula from which they are derived. 5 washtenaw community college, ﬁadvanced transportation center,ﬂ http://sites.wccnet.edu/atc/, accessed november 1, 2016.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 41introductory engineering and computer science coursesas noted in chapter 1, an increasing number of what was once simply physical or simply cyber systems now integrate components of each. for example, mechanical and aerospace engineers will inevitably need to incorporate their physical designs with system controls and automation. as a result, engineers will need a basic understanding of integrating the physical and cyber technologies and the complexities of building and maintaining cps. most, if not all, engineering programs provide freshman engineering students with an opportunity to take introductory engineering courses. the majority of these are domain specicšeach engineering department or school develops and teaches the course. the courses provide students with an overview of the eld while also teaching basic engineering skills and problem solving. given the wide deployment of cps and the impact it has on the more traditional disciplines, the committee suggests that these courses should include discussion of the complexities of cps and introduce some of the key cps concepts. the committee recognizes that these courses cover a wide set of material already; however, cps can be woven through some of this material. for example, many of these courses include a handson project or a semesterlong project. cps concepts could be incorporated into these assignments by providing realworld tasks. aerospace engineering students could work on drone control; civil engineering students could examine implications of smart cities; and mechanical engineers could explore robotics. introducing students to the challenges of integration establishes that one does not develop systems in a vacuum and instead must consider outside impacts, including human factors, realworld constraints, and the limits of software and physics. recommendation 3.3: universities should consider adding cyberphysical systems content to freshmanlevel introductory courses for students in all areas of engineering and computer science. new survey courses in cpsgiven the wide breadth of knowledge required for cps, the structure of survey courses could take several approaches. one approach would be a class based on modules chosen from the multidisciplinary areas of cps. such a course could include modules on sensor networks, embedded computing, signal processing, control theory, and realtime systems. a twocourse sequence might add multiple modules from security and privacy, modelbased design, formal methods, hybrid systems, and data science and machine learning. in the module approach, it is emphasized a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationthat each module should not be completely independent of others, and class principles and concepts must stress the interactions across the various modules. another approach might stress the safety critical aspects of cps and include topics such as fault tolerance, modelbased design, concurrency and distributed algorithms, models of computation, formal methods of specication and verication, realtime systems, and hybrid systems (which brings in control theory). a third approach might focus on modeling, design, and analysisšall from a multidisciplinary approachšwith an explicit focus on the interdependencies between the cyber and the physical worlds. topics might include continuous and discrete dynamics, hybrid systems, concurrent models of computation, embedded systems, multitasking and realtime scheduling, temporal logic, model checking, and quantitative analysisšall emphasizing integration with physical systems.regardless of the approach, survey courses should stress the complexities of integrating physical with cyber aspects of systems and at least touch on the foundations and system characteristics outlined in chapter 2. box 3.1 provides some examples of highlevel undergraduate survey courses; any such listing of courses and programs represents only a sampling of an alwaysevolving set of courses and programs being developed and offered in the united states and worldwide. although the topics are listed in box 3.1, it is important to note that all of the classes include handson projects or laboratory work that not only emphasize course topics but also the integration of the cyber and physical worlds.traditional engineering programs with cps specialization traditional undergraduate engineering programs (e.g. aerospace, civil, mechanical, and chemical engineering, to name a few) will also benet from the incorporation of cps principles into their course offerings. some elds, such as aerospace and mechanical engineering, have incorporated cps principles for some time, but primarily from a physical world point of view. hence, the challenge will be to increase knowledge of cyber elements and their interactions with physical elements and (1) ensure that the necessary changes to include cps principles in the curricula meet requirements set by the accreditation board for engineering and technology (abet) and (2) adequately prepare students to pass the national council of examiners for engineering and surveying fundamentals of engineering (fe) exam. the degree to which cps principles are currently incorporated into domainspecic curricula varies considerably depending on the discipline. undergraduate civil and mechanical engineering curricula require students to take similar math, natural science, and basic engineering and a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 43box 3.1 examples of survey coursescis 541/441: embedded software for lifecritical applicationsinsup lee, university of pennsylvaniathis survey course is taught within the computer and information sciences department and has an emphasis on realtime issues. current prerequisites are systems. the course also includes a series of projects that implement safetycritical embedded systems, such as a pacemaker or infusion pump.  topicsintroduction to cyber physical systems cps applications characteristics and challengesrequirements, modeling, and analysis modelbased developmentł requirements capture and modelingł state machines, timed automatał properties and model checkingł user mental modelsł architecture description languagesł code generation and synthesisimplementation paradigms and techniquesł realtime operating systemsł programming paradigms and languagesł compositional and feedbackbased realtime schedulingł feedback control in computer systemsł virtual machines, hypervisors, separation kernelsł components, plugandplay of embedded systemsł mixed criticality systemsł distributed realtime systems concepts: ordering, global time, clock synchronizationł security and privacył testing coverage and generationł modelbased testingł closedloop testingł ł humancomputer interactionsł ł hazard analysis, assurance casescontinueda 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationlecturesł introduction to cyberphysical systemsł introduction to realtime embedded systemsł realtime operating systems, virtual machines, hypervisorł realtime scheduling: edf, rm, servers, priority inversionł multiprocessor realtime schedulingł realtime programming languages and paradigmsł synchronizationł feedback in computer systemsł medical cyberphysical systemsł pacemaker challenge problem ł assurance casesł medical device quality issuesšfda perspectiveł formal modeling and model checkingł ł ł code generation/synthesis from state machinesł testing, testing coverage, test generationł realtime testing, modelbased testing, closedloop testingł ł ł humancomputer interaction: user interfaceł user mental modelsł project presentations: pacemaker modeling and implementation, assurance case, and demoeecs 149/249a: introduction to embedded systemsedward a. lee and sanjit a. sehsia, university of california, berkeleythis survey course is taught within the electrical engineering and computer science school. prerequisites include designing information devices and systems or signals and systems, computer architecture, and discrete mathematics. this course includes a series of handson laboratory work that culminates into a team project, which must relate directly to distinct topics covered in the lectures. (see  topicsmodels of computationsł finite state machinesł threadł ordinary differential equationsł hybrid systemsbox 3.1 continueda 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 45ł discrete eventsł basic analysis, control, and systems simulationł bisimulationsł reachability analysisł controller synthesisł approximating continuoustime systemsinterfacing with the physical worldł sensor/actuator modeling and calibrationł concurrency in dealing with multiple realtime streamsł handling numerical imprecision in softwaremapping to embedded platformsł realtime operating systemsł execution time analysisł scheduling ł concurrencydistributed embedded systemsł protocol designł predictable networking ł securitylecturesł cyberphysical systems overviewł sensors and actuatorsł modelbased design and continuous dynamicsł memory architecturesł input and outputł modeling modal behavior and discrete dynamicsł extended and time automatał composition of state machinesł hierarchical state machinesł ł comparing state machinesł reachability analysisł using temporal logic in cps autogradersł multitaskingł operating systems, microkernals, and schedulingł scheduling anomaliesł execution time analysisł ł security for embedded systemsł networkembedded systemsa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.2 model for 4year undergraduate degree in mechanical engineering with cps emphasismath and natural sciences (9 courses) calculus icalculus iivector calculusdifferential equationsprobability and statisticsphysics i (mechanics and dynamics)physics ii (electricity and magnetism)traditional mechanical engineering courses (13 courses) mechanics i: staticsmechanics ii: dynamicssolid mechanics fluid mechanicsthermodynamicssystem dynamicsengineering material scienceheat transferdesign, materials and manufacturingengineering economyscience courses during the rst 2 years. the third year primarily focuses on introducing students to the concentration areas in their respective disciplines. as an example, within civil engineering these concentration areas include structural, geotechnical, transportation, environmental, hydrology/hydraulics, and construction engineering. examples of mechanical engineering concentration areas include robotics and controls, thermal˚uid systems, manufacturing, and solid mechanics. in the fourth year, most students develop a specialization by focusing on one of these concentration areas through their technical electives. a capstone design course is also often part of the fourthyear curriculum.two example curricula are presented in boxes 3.2 and 3.3šone for mechanical engineering and the second from civil engineering. these two a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 47cpsrelated courses in current me curricula (5 courses)introduction to computingcircuits and electronicscomputational methods in engineeringcapstone design (with cpsfocused project)technical electives that could focus on cps (5 courses)proposed new cpscentric electives:principles of cpsnetworkembedded systems programmingsignals and systemscontrol of dynamic systemsmodelbased systems engineeringexamples of cpsrelated electives in current me curricula: modeling and control of motion controlmicroprocessor control of manufacturing systemsroboticsbioinspired designdesign across disciplinesbiomedical instrumentationmechatronicssensor networkssocial science, economics, humanities (8 courses) examples, based on existing curricula from several universities, show that the mechanical engineering curriculum has, to some degree, more existing cpsfocused core classes and technical electives than the civil engineering curriculum. however, these existing courses may require redesign in an effort to better introduce undergraduates to the cyber aspects of cps and their interactions with the physical, as dened in chapter 2. new cpscentric courses have been proposed in both curricula. such courses are meant as examples only, and many more domainspecic courses with a cps emphasis can be dened. given the ˚exibility in today™s abet accreditation process, and because it is anticipated that these courses will primarily be part of the technical elective alternatives, problems meeting abet accreditation requirements or adequately prea 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.3 model for 4year, undergraduate degree in civil engineering with cps emphasismath and natural sciences (10 courses) calculus i calculus iivector calculusdifferential equationsprobability and statisticsphysics i (mechanics and dynamics)physics ii (electricity and magnetism)science elective (biology or earth science)traditional civil engineering courses (13 courses)mechanics i: staticsmechanics ii: dynamicssolid mechanicsfluid mechanicsthermodynamicsenvironmental engineeringcivil engineering materialsrequired electives (4 classes from structural engineering, construction technical engineering, transportation engineering)engineering economyparing a student to pass the fe exam should be minimal. in fact, some of the ﬁnewﬂ course topics (e.g., signals and systems, sensor networks, and structural health monitoring) already exist as electives in a few undergraduate engineering curricula. this ˚exibility will also allow accommodation of changes in the cps curriculum as the eld evolves.undergraduate bachelor programs in cyberphysical systemsthe committee provides an example of what a bachelor™s degree in cps might look like in boxes 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6. designing a cps degree is a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 49cpsrelated courses in current ce curricula (3 courses)computing for engineerscivil engineering systems (needs to be developed with cps focus) capstone design (with cpsfocused project) technical electives (6 courses)current ce curricula have few undergraduate elective courses that focus on cps concepts. if redesigned, some current elective courses could incorporate cps principles, examples include the following: transportation planning and designinfrastructure rehabilitationsubsurface characterizationenvironmental systems designbuilding information modelingconceptual structural designstructural system testing and model correlationproposed new cpscentric electives:principles of cps: sustainable infrastructureprinciples of cps: urban planningsignals and systemssensor networks for civil engineering systemsmodelbased systems engineeringstructural health monitoringsocial science, economics, humanities (8 courses)this report.quite complexševen without considering resource constraintsšowing to many confounding factors. although such a curriculum would be based on the foundations and system characteristics outlined in chapter 2, it is extremely difcult to produce a single ideal curriculum for the following chief reasons:it would require too many existing courses to cover cps in sufcient depth. hence, without careful program design, either the physical or the cyber aspects will end up with insufcient emphasis. one™s own specialty affects one™s view of an ideal curriculum. for a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.4 one model for 4year, 40course undergraduate degree in cpsmath and natural science (10 courses)calculus i and ii differential equationsprobability and statisticsphysics i (mechanics and dynamics)physics ii (electrical circuits)chemistry or biologydiscrete mathcps core (12 courses)computer programmingdata structures and algorithmsprogramming physical systemssoftware engineeringmodelbased system design heterogeneous models of computationformal methods and synthesis resourceaware realtime computingcontrol systems optimizationdigital signal processing example, to a control theory expert, a single course on control would not cover the topic to a depth they feel is necessary. a basic control course might be desired in addition to an embedded systems control course. the committee stresses that the examples provided were developed with an understanding of these complexities and only serve as examplesšnot as the canonical curriculum. caveats and important notes are provided in the next section.box 3.4 presents one possible example of an undergraduate cps degree program curriculum. the example produced assumes a limit of 40 undergraduate courses so that the degree can be granted in 4 years. to support the physical foundations of cps, a set of mathematics and natural science courses are necessary. ten such classes are presented in box 3.4. flexibility should also exist to replace classes with electives if students place out of any earlier coursework. box 3.4 also presents an example of 12 courses that could serve as the core of this new major. a particular unia 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 51versity may choose to structure this material differently, but the content found in these courses is important.depending on the college or university, computer science and engineering may be located within the natural sciences, in engineering schools, or in schools of computing. cps programs have already grown organically within both computer science and electrical engineering programs. the resulting cps curricula will tend to look somewhat different depending on whether the program comes from a computer science perspective (see, for example, box 3.5)6 or from an electric and computer engineering perspective (see, for example, box 3.6). either of these curricula would provide tightly coupled physical and cyber instruction, but with different 6 a cps program based on a computer science program might not formally be housed in an engineering school if the computer science department was located in another college. however, signicant interactions with engineering departments would be needed to provide a full degree that covers the physical side of cps.senior capstone design, 2 semesters (counts as 2 courses)senior capstone would include the following:industry participationinterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business and management programs cps electives (2 courses)possible topics: inference under uncertainty, security, privacy, wireless sensor networks, computer architecture, operating systems, databases, data science, cloud computing, communication networks, network science, network control, resiltion, robotics, stochastic systems, adaptive systems societal impact electives (3 courses)show students the sense of empowerment their cps skill set providesethicspossible topics: modern avionics, automotive systems, robotics, smart unmanned aerial vehicles social science and humanities (8 courses)free electives (3 courses)a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.5 model for 4year, 40course undergraduate degree in cps, electrical engineering programmath and natural science1,2 (11 courses)calculus i and ii  differential equationsprobability and statisticsphysics i (mechanics and dynamics)physics ii (electricity and magnetism)chemistry or biologynatural sciences elective (statistical physics, biochemistry, systems biology)introduction to cps (1 course)freshman laboratory course emphasizing handson, multidisciplinary teamwork with a cps systemcomputing foundations (5 courses) programming physical systemsheterogeneous models of computation(distributed) algorithmsformal methods and synthesisresourceaware realtime computingcps core (7 courses) digital signal processing networks emphasis. most universities allow for the crosslisting of courses that are applicable to electrical and computer engineering and computer science degrees, which tends to blur such distinctions and provides students with the ˚exibility to acquire the desired balance of perspectives as they study cps.caveats and notes on curriculumflexibility in course workin today™s engineering schools, the need for ˚exibility in curricula is stressed for students. more and more universities are increasing the a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 53stochastic systems (estimation, detection, inference, adaptation)modelbased system design sor network, medical devices) control systemsoptimizationcps electives (choice of 3 courses)possible topics: security, privacy, data science, cloud computing, networks, intelligence, optimization, adaptive systems senior capstone design (2 semesters; counts as 2 courses)senior capstone would include the following:industry participationinterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business and management programs societal impact electives (2 courses)show students the sense of empowerment their cps skill set providespossible topics: modern avionics, automotive systems, robotics, smart unmanned aerial vehicles social science and humanities (7 courses) free electives (2 courses) broader exposure across continuous and discrete mathematics.opportunities for electives and lowering the number of prescriptive courses. increased ˚exibility in engineering curriculum provides more opportunities for students to explore cps through survey courses, engineering electives, and minors or certicates, while avoiding the accreditation issue discussed in earlier sections. accordingly, the committee™s example curricula provide for ˚exibility. for example, the curriculum example depicts two cps technical electives, three social impact electives, eight humanities, and three unrestricted electives. flexibility also exists in how the introduction to cps and capstone projects are taught.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.6 model for 4year, 40course undergraduate degree in cps, computer science programmath and natural science (11 courses)calculus i calculus iidifferential equationsprobabilities and statisticsdiscrete math (mathematical foundations of cs)physics i (mechanics and dynamics)physics ii (electricity and magnetism)biology or chemistryintroduction to cps (1 course)freshman laboratory course emphasizing handson, multidisciplinary teamwork with a cps systemcps engineering foundations (6 courses)select six from the following list:gramming classes)šdeal with uncertainties, risk management, reliability, dependability and securitynetworked embedded systemsšincluding wireless network, sensor networks, realtime, and control inputs, distributed systems, and communication networksmodelbased developmentšmodeling, logic, formal methods and synthesis, but all geared toward cpsdigital signal processingstochastic systems (estimation, detection, inference, adaptation)value of laboratory and handson workprojectbased learning is becoming increasingly present in university engineering courses. cps is particularly suited for handson learning activities and laboratory work, and projectbased learning seems especially well suited to conveying the complexities of integrating cyber and physical issues. reliance on theoretical training and waiting for a capstone design project at the end of an undergraduate education may fail to tie all of the concepts together adequately, so the ongoing, practical application of theoretical learning to real problems is key. it is common practice a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 55humanintheloop for cpsoptimizationcircuitscs/cps (9 courses)data structures and algorithms computer architecture(realtime) operating systemsalgorithms and complexityselect three from the following list: š databases (cs) š networks and security š computer networks š computer security š software engineering (cs) š robotics š  š  š safety, security, privacy for highassurance cps applications senior capstone design (2 semesters; counts as 2 courses)senior capstone would include:industry participationinterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business and management programs societal impact electives (2 courses)technology and societyethics in engineering and science social science and humanities (7 courses) free electives (2 courses)for course syllabuses to now include classical homework, exams, and projects. class projects aim at addressing a specic realistic problems by bringing together multiple concepts introduced in a course. in pioneering examples of projectbased courses, instructors get engaged with students, mainly in the laboratory, promoting the creativity, teamwork, and effective accomplishment of nal products. the students select real problems and work in teams toward building complete prototypical solutions for such problems. students build hardware, compose new hardware from existing of hardware components, and learn to integrate the hardware with effective software to generate solutions to real problems. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationin addition to class projects, students also typically complete capstone projects, wrapping up their studies into large projects requiring concept integration and teamwork among students with expertise in multiple areas. there are also examples where projects are linked across multiple courses. recommendation 3.4: engineering schools, byandlarge, have already redesigned their curricula to emphasize projectbased learning. because this is especially important for cyberphysical systems (cps) education, these projectbased courses should be extended to support cps principles and foundations.cpsoriented project classes are particularly challenging to teach today because of the extremely rapidly changing landscape of available hardware and software. the traditional approach of dening a project mission that gets reused year after year does not work in this scenario. teaching such project courses requires budgets for purchasing new hardware and software with regularity and requires considerable technical support and expertise to keep up with the possibilities. such courses may only be only sustainable with signicant institutional support in the form of course managers and laboratory technicians.need for new coursessimply collecting current courses into a new cps program is not likely to be sufcient. students will not truly be exposed to nor understand the intricacy of the interactions of the physical and cyber issues if this approach is taken. to give a simple illustration, most standard computer science courses do not cover realtime programming even though this topic is essential for building cps, which interact with the physical world. as another example, standard courses on control typically ignore the computational model in which the controller will be implemented. those courses that do cover computational implementations of control systems, typically called digital control systems, generally have unrealistic models of computation. in other words, they assume either innite computational resources or antiquated computational models. moreover, typical introductory courses in control systems do not teach students about how to dene the formal requirements needed to include control in the design ˚ows used in modern cps applications.finding 3.2: because cps engineering centers on the interaction of physical and cyber aspects of systems, it will often not be sufcient a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 57to create cps curricula by simply combining material from existing courses. new courses will need to be designed.because this is such an important point, it is illustrated by the following set of examples for how traditional courses could be modied to cover topics needed for cps: control theory. control theory classes in electrical engineering emphasize topics such as stability, performance, optimization, and design of linear and nonlinear feedback systems. hybrid control, an important topic for cps, has received growing attention in these courses. additional topics needed for cps are the connection of control theory with networks and realtime and distributed systems, humansintheloop, security, and software. control examples can be supplemented with those from cps that include physical, cyber, and networking elements. knowledge of how to implement the control policies in software and address real time performance and security are needed. a redesign for a cps course would provide enough basics and add the needed additional topics while reducing the emphasis on some traditional topics such as proofs of stability.software design and programming classes. the examples used in traditional classes typically use nonphysical world applications that do not sufciently consider the uncertainty, real time, and security challenges of the physical world. for cps, it is important that students learn to program with sensors and actuators. for example, it is important to understand the properties of sensors and not have the properties hidden behind a highlevel application program interface. for example, software that improperly handled transient signals from the lander touchdown sensor likely caused a mars lander to prematurely ﬁthinkﬂ it had contacted the surface, causing it to shut down the retrorockets at quite a distance from the surface, resulting in mission failure.7 students must learn to program in a robust and secure fashion, including how to implement feedback controllers and use signal processing techniques of varying levels of sophistication. applying realtime principles to system design and implementation to meet deadlines is essential. cps software that interacts with users also needs special attention when human control can put humans or major systems at risk.probability and stochastic processes. the basic principles of probability, uncertainty, and risk should be applied to cpstype physical world systems, noisy sensor and signal properties, and overall risk assessment 7 jet propulsion laboratory, special review board, 2000, report on the loss of the mars polar lander and deep space 2 missions, report jpl d18709, http://space˚ight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/2000/mpl/mplreport1.pdf, p. 26.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationbox 3.7 model for a 1year m.sci. cps degreecps core introduction to cyberphysical systems š an introduction to all the core classes and how they relate to cpsarchitectures for cps š sensors, actuators, networks, distributed computationembedded and realtime systems š emphasis on computing reliably and timely with noisy sensor data over wired and wireless networksformal methods š formal models of computation including discrete and analog computationsignal processing š digital signal processing on hardware and software š emphasis on distributed signal processing over networks.feedback control š modeling of physical and computational processes š implementation on hardwareinference under uncertainty š basics of modeling uncertainty, statistical inference, detection and estimationelective classes (3 courses)computer and network security š to cover attacks exploiting physical properties of computation (e.g., time, temperature, radiation)hybrid systems continuous componentsnetworked control systems š control over wired and wireless networks š impact of delays, packet collisions, and protocols on performancecomputer architecturesystems engineering sensor networksmedical embedded systemsroboticsmodeling from dataa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paths to cps knowledge 59and management for systems composed of hardware and software operating in nondeterministic environments. knowledge on how to use and program with concepts of probability and uncertainty for decisionmaking is required as well. classes that show students how to apply key principles to cps domains such as smart grids, jet engine control, or medical systems are of increasing importance.graduate degree programsa handful of masters of science degrees focused on embedded systems or cps exist. despite the existing programs, the committee felt that providing a model curriculum would be helpful, especially given the focus on electrical engineering or computer science that many of the existing programs have. another possibility is to add a cps concentration to a robotics graduate program. box 3.7 presents a model for a m.sc. degree that could be obtained in 1 year, although the typical student will take between 1 and 2 years to nish all the requirements while conducting some research. the classes are divided into required core classes and electives. for departments in a semester system, students would take eight classes. students wishing to nish the m.sc. degree in 1 year would take four classes in the fall semester and four classes in the spring semester or three classes in the fall quarter, three classes in the winter quarter, and three classes in the spring quarter. the m.sc. degree would also require a project illustrating the challenges of designing cps that work reliably in the real world.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.604developing and institutionalizing cps curriculaa number of things can be done to build and foster cyberphysical systems (cps) programs that support current and future workforce needs. one is early exposure to cps concepts and applications in k12 and introductory college courses. another is to build the needed teaching faculty, which is challenging because the traditional academic pipeline at many universities has few mechanisms in place that support extensive faculty commitment to an interdisciplinary eld. additionally, the resources needed to teach cps courses, including textbooks, testbeds, and laboratory space, may be limited. this chapter discusses steps that academic institutions, industry (box 4.1), and the national science foundation can take to strengthen undergraduate cps education. drawing students to cpsstudents are likely to be initially attracted to cps through exposure to cpsrelated technical areas such as robotics, autonomous vehicles, and the internet of things (iot) or exposure to applications that address national and global problems in areas such as sustainability, environmental issues, and health. beyond that, students may need some link to be drawn between these topics and the discipline of cps.as discussed in chapter 3, a strong k12 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem) foundation and exposure to cps concepts and applications can help attract students and prepare them for undergraduate study in cps. notably, several of the k12 stem programs a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.developing and institutionalizing cps curricula 61introduce students to cps concepts, and many are based on robotics.1 by using concrete cps examples, these programs are an effective way to introduce the concepts of cps and highlight their correlations with elements of their stem education. at the undergraduate level, the concepts of cps can be reinforced by again making the link between cps and related technology areas. as recommended in chapter 1, this introduction to cps can be part of freshman ﬁintroduction to engineeringﬂ programs. faculty need not shy away from topics that pique student interest even as they stress the cps foundations that underpin such areas. students, particularly those at universities, are acutely aware of job opportunities and salaries associated with various engineering disciplines. therefore, promoting job needs and compensation for cps graduates to highschool seniors and undergraduate and graduate students will also promote the eld. invited lecturers and from industry can help make introductory (and other cps) courses current and compelling and also expose students to opportunities in industry.1 examples include such as the first lego league (http://www.rstlegoleague.org/), which brings stem robotics to younger children starting in the 4th grade, first robotics (see http://www.usrst.org/roboticsprograms/frc), the university of california, san diego, cosmos program (http://www.jacobsschool.ucsd.edu/cosmos/index.shtml), or robocup junior (http://rcj.robocup.org/), accessed november 1, 2016.box 4.1 the role of industry in evolving cps programs and curriculaalthough much of the work to develop cyberphysical systems (cps) programs and curricula will take place in academia, industry can also play an important part. potential roles for industry include the following: encouraging industry experts to participate as guest lecturers and adjunct and guest faculty to support the development of cps programs; providing ongoing feedback on the design of cps courses and curricula and on the preparation of students who work in industry as interns or new hires; anda 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationfinding 4.1: although there are many stem courses and programs at the high school and undergraduate level that introduce the students to some cps elements such programs often do not provide a broad introduction to cps foundations and principles and tend to be focused either on overly simplistic applications or on too disciplinecentric content.recommendation 4.1: those developing k12 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem) programs and educating and training stem teachers should consider opportunities to enrich these programs with cyberphysical systems (cps) concepts and applications in order to lay intellectual foundations for future work and expose students to cps career opportunities. finding 4.2: incoming college students appear to be unfamiliar with the term cps, cps concepts, and job opportunities in cps. they are, however, drawn to courses and programs in more widely visible, cpsrelated topics such as robotics, the iot, health care, smart cities, and the industrial internet. recommendation 4.2: those developing cyberphysical systems engineering courses and programs should consider leveraging the visibility of and student interest in areas such as robotics, the internet of things, health care, smart cities, and the industrial internet in descriptions of careers, courses, and programs and when selecting applications used in courses and projects. recruiting, retaining, and developing the needed facultycps exists not only across disciplines, but also at the intersection of various disciplines. faculty teaching cps foundational, specialized, or projectbased courses will need to have an understanding of the multidisciplinary aspects of the cps spectrum. cps faculty will not only need depth in a particular aspect of cps, but will also need the capability to relate their expertise to the other aspects of a complete cps system and its respective domainspecic needs. the steps for recruiting, retaining, and developing the needed cps faculty are brie˚y discussed below.recruitingmore new cpsspecic faculty will be produced as more research is pursued in the eld. in the long term, the ideal faculty recruit will (1) a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.developing and institutionalizing cps curricula 63have graduated with a cps degree or specialization and (2) have a record of conducting cpsspecic research. another source of faculty would be those with industrial experience in cps technologies. it is furthermore expected that the calls for faculty positions will explicitly mention cps education and research. in fact, even now there are already several universities that include cps in their call for new faculty. currently and in the nearfuture before cps education is well established, cps faculty recruitment will require departments to look for faculty who will have both intense depth but also breadth. recruiters will look for charismatic faculty with a highlevel of initiative who will play an important role in drawing students to cps education. recruitment also requires the opening of teaching slots, which will inevitably lead to competition for these slots from more traditional research areas. it must be acknowledged that the teaching capital for current students is already limited, and universities may be reluctant to add additional constraints by taking on cps as a new discipline within existing programs. as a result, new hires tend to be limited to individuals who can support a university™s current core curriculum. therefore, developing a specic cps degree program will create clear opportunities for hiring individuals with a teaching and research background focused specically on cps. retaining the current academic system, in particular tenure and promotion decisions, builds strongly upon the depth in the faculty™s own eld and through publications that are often discipline limited. because cps faculty will have a broader prole of research, they may publish in a variety of venues, and the current promotion criteria may limit the development of cpscentric faculty. however, there are a number of wellrecognized conferences in cps (e.g., cps week), as well as textbooks and a new association of computing machinery journal transactions on cyberphysical systems. such events and publication venues create a growing academic community around cps. young cps faculty with a multidisciplinary prole can then establish themselves as cps researchers and still meet the academic evaluation criteria. interestingly, given the novelty of the area, young faculty could more easily become leaders in the cps eld, as they do not need to nd a place in other more mature elds with a large number of wellestablished and wellrecognized leaders. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationdevelopingfaculty members who have a proven record in their own eld and then venture into this more interdisciplinary eld once they achieve tenure do much of the existing cps education and research. in the future, the committee envisions the development of new entrylevel faculty as cps educators. given the already broad scope of this study, the committee did not explore the development of ph.d. programs in cps in any depth. for example, it did not consider the extent to which much of the training necessary for ph.d. students might be covered by the educational content in master™slevel programs. nevertheless, over time, provided that demand for faculty and research funding opportunities are both sustained, it is reasonable to anticipate that institutions will start establishing ph.d. programs in cps. moreover, if cps follows the pattern of other engineering disciplines, ph.d.level engineers will ll important technical leadership roles in industry and more ph.d.™s will take jobs in industry than will pursue academic careers, contributing further to demand for ph.d. programs in cps.while the new specialized cps faculty is emerging, the use of teaching modules may serve to alleviate some of the time and resource constraint placed on educators. the committee envisions that faculty experts in multiple cps disciplines could then design and coteach new courses or build course modules so that the students can be jointly taught the combined material. such coteaching opportunities will lead to the development of the coteaching faculty as increasingly procient cps educators. professional organizations such as the american society of engineering educators can help promote the development of innovative teaching in cps and develop conference tracks to promote the exchange of information about best practices in cps education.industry experts can contribute to the development of cps programs in such roles as guest lecturers and adjunct and visiting faculty. an opportunity for crossdiscipline teaching arises where experts in one eld partner with experts in other elds to teach a modular course.universities, industry, and government laboratories also must identify and reward effective cps program mentors. for example, projectbased courses where students solve welldened problems involving real physical systems that need to be integrated with safe and secure programs will be of special signicance. students will be challenged to devise and develop solutions that actually work, and the cpsfocused research experience of undergraduates, as well as industry and government laboratory summer intern programs, will further promote the cps discipline with undergraduates. such programs will not be successful without dedicated mentors who can motivate students to explore cps engineering and excite a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.developing and institutionalizing cps curricula 65these students about their career possibilities if they choose to pursue a cps education.finding 4.3: because cps is a new eld that draws on multiple disciplines, not all institutions can be expected to have enough faculty with the requisite knowledge to teach all of the courses needed for a cps degree program. recommendation 4.3: the national science foundation should support the development of cyberphysical systems faculty through the use of teaching grants and fellowships.curriculum development and resources chapter 3 lays out several options for education programs at the undergraduate levelšfrom survey courses to full degree programs. common features of all of these options is that new or redesigned courses will be needed in order to teach the complexities of cps and that opportunities for handson work, which is key to reenforcing key concepts and integration, is essential. in order for universities to support new education programs, they will need the appropriate resources, including new textbooks and test beds and laboratory space. a limited number of textbooks, curricular materials, and laboratory facilities exist to support cps. few textbooks exist that provide a complete overview of cps; these textbooks are essential to teaching welldesigned survey courses. the committee was encouraged by the release of several textbooks during its work. edward lee and sanjit seshia compiled a new textbook, introduction to embedded systems: a cyberphysical systems approach, when developing their survey course at university of california, berkeley, because one simply did not exist that met their needs.2 rajeev alur also released another text, principles of cyberphysical systems, in 2015.3 traditional course textbooks for standard engineering courses, such as controls or signal processing, may not fully incorporate the effects of the physical system on cyber technology, and vice versa. just as courses will need to be signicantly redesigned, so will textbooks. both may sometimes be accomplished by supplementing existing materials with cps material, exercises, and laboratory projects. furthermore, cps are often very complex and students need a full 2 e.a. lee. and s.a. seshia, 2015, introduction to embedded systems: a cyberphysical systems approach, second edition, http://leeseshia.org.3 r. alur, 2015, principles of cyberphysical systems, mit press, cambridge, mass.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationunderstanding of how the physical environment impacts these systems. realistic models can provide some of this knowledge, but handson engagement through projectbased learning is integral to developing an understanding of cps complexities, and participation in complex interdisciplinary projects will help develop needed systemslevel thinking. providing students with these opportunities depends on having the appropriate facilities.design laboratories where students can work on integrative cps projects with multidisciplinary teams are one option. another is to provide students with access to testbeds that allow for the codesign of physical and computational components to demonstrate the benets of integrating simulation and experimentation. it is also important for students to be exposed to testbeds because they are a key element of industrial practice as part of the development process. a classic example of industrial testbeds is hardwareintheloop, where one combines simulation and physical devices, where possible, to reduce cost and complexity and increase ˚exibility with physical components where simulation does not provide sufcient delity. testbeds are expensive to create and maintain, and many universities do not have, or will not allocate, resources to create such testbeds. partnerships among institutions and with industry can help share the costs and leverage existing resources, and ensure that testbeds re˚ect the current state of art and practice.finding 4.4: if they are to teach new cps courses and build cps programs, universities will need to allocate time and resources to develop cps course materials and to provide the necessary laboratory space and equipment (including both virtual and physical testbeds). finding 4.5: testbeds are needed to provide students with sufciently realistic applications and problems. these can be both virtual and physical and can be remotely accessed and shared among multiple institutions and developed and operated in cooperation with industry.recommendation 4.4: the national science foundation, professional societies, and universities should support the development and evolution of cyberphysical systems textbooks, class modules (including laboratory modules), and testbeds. these parties should partner with industry in developing and maintaining realistic testbeds. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.developing and institutionalizing cps curricula 67fostering development of the cps discipline and cps educationas discussed above, more can be done to raise awareness about career opportunities in cps among prospective students. in industry, although there is growing awareness of the need for cps skills, the full set of skills required to effectively engineer cps is not universally appreciated.sustained support for research allows students to focus their graduate research on cps, which in turn produces the next generation of entrylevel faculty that can build and teach the discipline. research also generates papers for conferences and journals and creates innovative ideas and startup spinoffs. all of these byproducts of research funding help to dene cps as an accepted discipline and raise awareness at all levels within the technical community. cps will also become more visible as formal specializations and degree programs emerge and as cpstrained engineers make signicant contributions to industry.those within the eld can assist by reaching out to industry, preparing materials, and participating in workshops and seminars to broaden understanding of what cps is (and is not), the complicated nature of cps, and what can be gained by hiring people more formally educated in the eld of cps. such education can be passive (e.g., availability of material on websites) or active through workshops and seminars.at universities, some of the push for cps education will naturally occur from the bottomupšthat is, faculty making the effort to incorporate cps material into the curriculum and develop cps courses. however, as with any emerging interdisciplinary area, if these initiatives are to take root, the encouragement and support of university administrators will be essential. many university administrations already promote teaching and research closely aligned with cps, such as curricula emphasizing engineering applications with direct societal impact and engineering programs oriented toward interdepartmental teamwork and complex, realworld systems. university administrations can additionally support emerging or planned cps education by providing the necessary personnel, laboratory space, and initiation grants.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71abiographies of  committee members and staffjohn a. stankovic, cochair, is the bp america professor in the computer science department at the university of virginia. dr. stankovic served as chair of the department for 8 years. he is a fellow of both the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee) and the association for computing machinery (acm). he has been awarded an honorary doctorate from the university of york. he won the ieee realtime systems technical committee™s award for outstanding technical contributions and leadership. dr. stankovic also won the ieee technical committee on distributed processing™s distinguished achievement award (inaugural winner). he has seven best paper awards, including one for the acm conference on embedded networked sensor systems (sensys) 2006. he also has two best paper runner up awards, including one for the acm/ieee conference on information processing in sensor networks (ipsn) 2013. he has also been a nalist for four other best paper awards. dr. stankovic has an hindex of 107 and more than 41,000 citations. in 2015, he was awarded the university of virginia distinguished scientist award, and in 2010, the school of engineering™s distinguished faculty award. dr. stankovic also received a distinguished faculty award from the university of massachusetts. he has given more than 35 keynote talks at conferences and many distinguished lectures at major universities. currently, he serves on the computer science telecommunications board of the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. dr. stankovic was the editorinchief for the ieee transactions on distributed and parallel systems and was founder and coeditorinchief for the a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationrealtime systems journal. his research interests are in realtime systems, wireless sensor networks, wireless health, cyberphysical systems (cps), and the internet of things. dr. stankovic received his ph.d. from brown university.james sturges, cochair, is an independent consultant specializing in program management and systems engineering for very large, complex aerospace and defense systems. he retired in 2009 from lockheed martin corporation, where he had been director, engineering processes, and director, mission assurance. prior to that, mr. sturges was vice president, engineering and total quality, at loral air trafc control/lockheed martin air trafc management, and c3i strategic business area director for loral tactical defense systems, arizona. he is an associate fellow and past member of the standards executive council and chair of the systems engineering technical committee of the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics, and was twice chair of the corporate advisory board for the international council on systems engineering. early in his career, mr. sturges was a naval aviator, instrument instructor and check pilot, and antisubmarine warfare ofcer for the u.s. navy. he has a b.a. from the university of north carolina and an m.s. and aeronautical engineer degree from the naval postgraduate school at monterey.alexandre bayen is the liaocho professor of engineering at the university of california, berkeley. he is a professor of electrical engineering and computer science and civil and environmental engineering and director of the institute of transportation studies. he is also a faculty scientist in mechanical engineering at the lawrence berkeley national laboratory. he was a visiting researcher at nasa ames research center from 2000 to 2003. between january 2004 and december 2004, he worked as the research director of the autonomous navigation laboratory at the laboratoire de recherches balistiques et aerodynamiques (ministere de la defense, vernon, france), where he holds the rank of major. dr. bayen has authored two books and more than 150 articles in peerreviewed journals and conferences. he is the recipient of the ballhaus award from stanford university (2004) and the career award from the national science foundation (2009), and he is a nasa top 10 innovator on water sustainability (2010). his projects mobile century and mobile millennium received the 2008 best of its award for best innovative practice at the its world congress and a tranny award from the california transportation foundation (2009). mobile millennium has been featured more than 200 times in the media, including tv and radio (cbs, nbc, abc, cnet, npr, kgo, the bbc) as well as in the popular press (wall street a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 73journal, washington post, la times). dr. bayen is the recipient of the presidential early career award for scientists and engineers (pecase) from the white house (2010) and the recipient of the okawa research grant award, the ruberti prize from ieee, and the huber prize from asce. he received an engineering degree in applied mathematics from the ecole polytechnique, france; an m.s. degree in aeronautics and astronautics from stanford university; and a ph.d. in aeronautics and astronautics from stanford university.charles r. farrar is the engineering institute leader at los alamos national laboratory (lanl) and a laboratory fellow. this institute is a research and education collaboration between lanl and the university of california, san diego (ucsd) jacobs school of engineering with a research focus on multidisciplinary projects that integrate advanced predictive modeling, novel sensing systems, and new approaches to information technology. he has 33 years™ experience at lanl. dr. farrar™s research interests focus on developing integrated hardware and software solutions for monitoring the health of structures. the results of this research have been documented in more than 400 publications as well as numerous keynote lectures at international conferences. additional professional activities include an associate editor position for earthquake engineering and structural dynamics and the development of a short course entitled ﬁstructural health monitoring: a statistical pattern recognition approach,ﬂ which has been offered more than 30 times at conferences and to industry and government agencies in asia, australia, europe, and the united states. dr. farrar is also an adjunct professor in the structural engineering department at ucsd where he teaches a graduate course on structural health monitoring. in 2007, he was elected a fellow of the american society of mechanical engineers. he received a ph.d. in civil engineering from the university of new mexico in 1988. marye anne fox is the former chancellor of ucsd. she has received honorary degrees from 12 institutions in the united states and abroad, and in october 2010, president barack obama awarded dr. fox the national medal of science, the highest honor bestowed by the u.s. government on scientists, engineers, and inventors. previously, she was chancellor at north carolina state university, and she spent 22 years at the university of texas where she advanced to vice president for research and held the waggoner regents chair in chemistry. dr. fox is a member of the national academy of sciences. she earned a bachelor™s degree in science from notre dame college, a master™s degree in science from cleveland state university, and a ph.d. in chemistry from dartmouth college.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationsantiago grijalva is an associate professor of electrical and computer engineering at the georgia institute of technology. he joined the faculty in 2009. he is the director of the advanced computational electricity systems laboratory, where he conducts research on realtime power system control, informatics, and economics, and renewable energy integration in power. in 2012, dr. grijalva was appointed as the strategic energy institute associate director for electricity systems, responsible for coordinating large efforts on electricity research and policy at georgia tech. he was a postdoctoral fellow in power and energy systems at the university of illinois from 2003 to 2004. from 1995 to 1997, he was with the ecuadorian national center for energy control as engineer and manager of the realtime ems software department. from 2002 to 2009, he was with powerworld corporation as a senior software architect and developer of innovative realtime and optimization applications used today by utilities, control centers, and universities in more than 60 countries. dr. grijalva is a leading researcher on ultrareliable architectures for critical energy infrastructures. he has pioneered work on decentralized and autonomous power system control, renewable energy integration in power, and unied network models and applications. he is currently the principal investigator of various future electricity grid research projects for the department of energy, the advanced research projects agencyenergy, the electric power research institute, and the power systems engineering research center, as well as other government organizations, research consortia, and industrial sponsors. dr. grijalva received the electrical engineer degree from escuela politécnica nacional (epn)ecuador in 1994, the m.s. certicate in information systems from universidad de las fuerzas armadas (espe)ecuador in 1997, and m.s. and ph.d. degrees in electrical engineering from the university of illinois, urbanachampaign, in 1999 and 2002, respectively.himanshu khurana is the senior manager for the integrated security technologies section of the knowledge systems laboratory at honeywell automation and control systems. the integrated security technologies section focuses on research, development, and technology transition in cybersecurity, computer vision, surveillance, and biometrics. dr. khurana™s research interests lie in the area of distributed system security, especially as applied to largescale distributed systems and critical infrastructures, and he has published 50 articles in this area. prior to joining honeywell, he was with the university of illinois, urbanachampaign, and served as the coprincipal investigator for the trustworthy cyber infrastructure for power center (now the tcipg). he has been involved with several smart grid initiatives, including the north american synchrophasor initiative, the national institute of standards and technola 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 75ogy cyber security working group, dnp3 technical committee, and in developing relevant cyber security standards. he obtained his m.s. and ph.d. from the university of maryland, college park.panganamala r. kumar, professor of electrical and computer engineering at texas a&m university, obtained his b. tech. degree in electrical engineering (electronics) from the indian institute of technology (iit) madras in 1973, and the m.s. and d.sc. degrees in systems science and mathematics from washington university, st. louis, in 1975 and 1977, respectively. from 19771984, dr. kumar was a faculty member in the department of mathematics at the university of maryland, baltimore county. from 19852011 he was a faculty member in the department of electrical and computer engineering and the coordinated science laboratory at the university of illinois, urbanachampaign. currently, he is at texas a&m university, where he is a university distinguished professor and holds the college of engineering chair in computer engineering. dr. kumar has worked on problems in game theory, adaptive control, stochastic systems, simulated annealing, neural networks, machine learning, queueing networks, manufacturing systems, scheduling, wafer fabrication plants, and information theory. his current research is focused on stochastic systems, energy systems, wireless networks, secure networking, automated transportation, and cps. dr. kumar is a member of the u.s. national academy of engineering (nae) and the world academy of sciences. he was awarded an honorary doctorate by eth in zurich. he received the ieee field award for control systems, the american automatic control council (aacc) donald p. eckman award, the fred w. ellersick prize of the ieee communications society, the outstanding contribution award of the acm special interest group on mobility of systems, users, data and computing (sigmobile), the infocom achievement award, and sigmobile testoftime paper award. he is a fellow of ieee and an acm fellow. he was a guest chair professor and leader of the guest chair professor group on wireless communication and networking at tsinghua university, beijing, china. he is a d. j. gandhi distinguished visiting professor at iit bombay. he is an honorary professor at iit hyderabad. he was awarded the distinguished alumnus award from iit madras, the alumni achievement award from washington university in st. louis, and the daniel c. drucker eminent faculty award from the college of engineering at the university of illinois.insup lee is the cecilia fitler moore professor of computer and information science and director of precise center, which he founded in 2008, at the university of pennsylvania. he also holds a secondary appointment in the department of electrical and systems engineering. a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationdr. lee received a b.s. degree with honors in mathematics from the university of north carolina, chapel hill, in 1977, and a ph.d. degree in computer science from the university of wisconsin, madison, in 1983. his research interests include cps, realtime systems, embedded and hybrid systems, formal methods and tools, highcondence medical device systems, runtime verication, software certication, and trust management. the theme of his research activities has been to assure and improve the correctness, safety, and timeliness of lifecritical embedded systems. dr. lee and his student received the best paper award at the ieee realtime systems symposium (rtss) 2003 on compositional schedulability analysis. his papers also received the best paper award in ieee rtss 2012, the best student paper at the ieee realtime and embedded technology and applications symposium 2012, and the cobest paper at the eighth annual collaboration, electronic messaging, antiabuse, and spam conference (ceas) 2011. recently, he has been working in medical cps and security of cps. he has served on many program committees and chaired several international conferences and workshops, including ieee rtss, ieee rtcsa (international conference on embedded and realtime computing systems and applications), ieee isorc (international symposium on realtime computing), concur (international conference on concurrency theory), acm emsoft (international conference on embedded software), acm/ieee iccps (international conference on cyberphysical systems), and hcmdss/md pnp (high condence medical devices, software, and systems and medical device plugandplay interoperability). dr. lee has also served on various steering and advisory committees of technical societies, including cps week, embedded systems week, acm special interest group on embedded systems, ieee technical committee on realtime systems (tcrts), rv (runtime verication), and atva (automated technology for verication and analysis). he has served on the editorial boards on the several scientic journals, including ieee transactions on computers, formal methods in system design, and realtime systems journal. he is a founding coeditorinchief of kiise journal of computing science and engineering since 2007. he was chair of ieee computer society technical committee on realtime systems (20032004) and an ieee computer science distinguished visitor speaker (20042006). dr. lee was a member of technical advisory group of president™s council of advisors on science and technology networking and information technology (20062007). he received an appreciation plague from ministry of science, it and future planning, south korea, for speaking at the universal linkage for top research advisor (ultra) program forum in 2013. he is an ieee fellow and received an ieee tcrts outstanding technical achievement and leadership award in 2008.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 77william milam is a technical expert at the ford research and innovation center, ford motor company. his research addresses modeling and implementation of advanced technology automotive engines for improved fuel economy and emissions, and improvements in systems engineering processes for the design of automotive embedded systems. he is a senior member of the ieee and a member of sae international (formerly the society of automotive engineers). mr. milam serves as a member of the sae electronic design automation standards committee and the sae architecture analysis and design language standards committee and chairs the sae model based embedded systems engineering task force.sanjoy k. mitter received his ph.d. degree from the imperial college of science and technology in 1965. he taught at case western reserve university from 1965 to 1969. he joined the massachusetts institute of technology (mit) in 1969 where he has been a professor of electrical engineering since 1973. dr. mitter was the director of the mit laboratory for information and decision systems from 1981 to 1999. he has also been a professor of mathematics at the scuola normale, pisa, italy, from 1986 to 1996. he has held visiting positions at imperial college, london; university of groningen, holland; inria, france; tata institute of fundamental research, india and eth, zürich, switzerland; and several american universities. in 2012, dr. mitter was the ulam scholar at lanl and the john von neumann visiting professor in mathematics at the technical university of munich, germany. he was awarded the aacc richard e. bellman control heritage award in 2007. he was the mckay professor at the university of california, berkeley, in 2000 and held the russellseverancespringer chair in fall 2003. he is a fellow of ieee and a member of the nae. dr. mitter is the winner of the 2000 ieee control systems award. he was elected a foreign member of istituto veneto di scienze, ed arti, in 2003. his current research interests are communication and control in a networked environment, the relationship of statistical and quantum physics to information theory and control, and autonomy and adaptiveness for integrative organization.josé m.f. moura is the philip and marsha dowd university professor of electrical and computer engineering at carnegie mellon university (cmu), and, by courtesy, a professor of biomedical engineering. he is a member of the nae, a fellow of the u.s. national academy of inventors, a corresponding member of the portugal academy of science, an ieee fellow, and a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science (aaas). dr. moura has been a visiting professor at new york university (20132014), a visiting professor at mit (20062007, 19992000, a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationand 19841986), a visiting scholar at the university of southern california (summers of 19791981), and was on the faculty of instituto superior técnico (ist) (portugal). his research interests are in data science and statistical signal and image processing. two of his patents (coinventor alec kavcic) are found in more than 3 billion hard drives of over 60 percent of all computers sold since 2003 and were the subject of a $750 million settlement in 2016 between cmu and marvell. current research projects include data analytics for unstructured big data, distributed inference in networks, spiral (an intelligent compiler), nondestructive healthmonitoring systems, bioimaging, signal processing on graphs, and image/video processing. dr. moura™s work has been sponsored by defense advanced research projects agency, national institutes of health, ofce of naval research, army research ofce, air force ofce of scientic research, and national science foundation (nsf) grants and several industrial grants. dr. moura received the ieee signal processing society award for outstanding technical contributions and leadership in signal processing and the ieee signal processing society technical achievement award for fundamental contributions to statistical signal processing. he is vice president for technical activities and serves on the board of directors of the ieee, served as ieee division ix director (20122013), and was the president of the ieee signal processing society (20082009). he was editorinchief of ieee transactions on signal processing, acting editorinchief for ieee signal processing letters, and was on the editorial board of acm transactions on sensor networks and ieee proceedings. he served on several ieee boards, including the education activities board (2010) and the ieee technical activities board (tab) (20082009). he holds d.sc. and m.sc. degrees in electrical engineering from mit and an electrical science degree from ist (portugal).george j. pappas is the joseph moore professor and chair of the department of electrical and systems engineering at the university of pennsylvania. he also holds a secondary appointment in the departments of computer and information sciences, and mechanical engineering and applied mechanics. he is member of the grasp laboratory and the precise center. dr. pappas has previously served as deputy dean for research in the school of engineering and applied science. his research focuses on control theory and, in particular, hybrid systems; embedded systems; hierarchical and distributed control systems, with applications to unmanned aerial vehicles; distributed robotics; green buildings; and biomolecular networks. he is a fellow of ieee and has received various awards, such as the antonio ruberti young researcher prize, the george s. axelby award, and the nsf pecase. dr. pappas received his ph.d. from the university of california, berkeley, in 1998.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 79paulo tabuada is a professor of electrical engineering and vice chair for graduate affairs at the university of california, los angeles (ucla). between january 2002 and july 2003, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the university of pennsylvania. after spending 3 years at the university of notre dame as an assistant professor, he joined the electrical engineering department at ucla, where he established and directs the cyberphysical systems laboratory. dr. tabuada™s research interests include modeling, analysis, design, control, and security of cps. he received his ﬁlicenciaturaﬂ degree in aerospace engineering from ist (portugal) in 1998 and his ph.d. degree in electrical and computer engineering in 2002 from the institute for systems and robotics, a private research institute associated with ist. dr. tabuada™s contributions to cps have been recognized by multiple awards, including the nsf career award in 2005, the aacc donald p. eckman award in 2009, and the ieee control systems society george s. axelby outstanding paper award in 2011. in 2009, he cochaired the international conference hybrid systems: computation and control (hscc™09), and in 2012, he was program cochair for the 3rd international federation of automatic control workshop on distributed estimation and control in networked systems (necsys™12). he also served on the editorial board of ieee embedded systems letters and ieee transactions on automatic control. his latest book, verication and control of hybrid systems: a symbolic approach, was published in 2009.manuela m. veloso is the herbert a. simon professor in the computer science department, school of computer science, at cmu and the department head of the machine learning department. she holds courtesy appointments in the robotics institute, the electrical and computer engineering department, and mechanical engineering department. dr. veloso researches in articial intelligence and robotics. she founded and directs the coral research group for the study of multiagent systems where agents collaborate, observe, reason, act, and learn. dr. veloso is a fellow of ieee, aaas, and the association for the advancement of articial intelligence (aaai). she was president of aaai and president of the robocup federation. she received the 2009 acm/sigart autonomous agents research award for her contributions to agents in uncertain and dynamic environments, including distributed robot localization and world modeling, strategy selection in multiagent systems in the presence of adversaries, and robot learning from demonstration. dr. veloso and her students have contributed a variety of autonomous robots, for robot soccer, education, and service robots. more recently, she introduced symbiotic robot autonomy, in which robots are autonomous but aware of their perceptual, cognitive, and actuation limitations and can proactively ask for help from humans, other robots, and the web. for the past 3 years, a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80 a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationfollowing robust localization, task planning, and symbiotic autonomy, her collaborative service robots, cobots, have navigated for more than 1,000 km in the multi˚oor buildings at cmu. dr. veloso holds a ph.d. in computer science from cmu and b.sc. and m.sc. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from ist (portugal).staffjon eisenberg is director of the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national academies. he has also been study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies exploring internet and broadband policy and networking and communications technologies. in 19951997 he was a aaas science, engineering, and diplomacy fellow at the u.s. agency for international development, where he worked on technology transfer and information and telecommunications policy issues. dr. eisenberg received his ph.d. in physics from the university of washington and b.s. in physics with honors from the university of massachusetts, amherst.virginia bacon talati is a program ofcer for the cstb. she formerly served as a program associate with the frontiers of engineering program at the nae. prior to her work at the national academies, she served as a senior project assistant in education technology at the national school boards association. ms. bacon talati has a b.s. in science, technology, and culture from the georgia institute of technology and an m.p.p. from george mason university, with a focus in science and technology policy.shenae bradley is an admistrative assistant at the cstb. she currently provides support for the committee on sustaining growth in computing performance, the committee on wireless technology prospects and policy options, and the computational thinking for everyone: a workshop series planning committee, to name a few. prior to this, she served as an administrative assistant for the ironworker management progressive action cooperative trust and managed a number of apartment rental communities for edgewood management corporation in the maryland/dc/ delaware metropolitan areas.christopher jones was an associate program ofcer for the cstb. he joined the national academies in 2016 as a mirzayan science and technology policy fellow for the board on science, technology, and economic policy. prior to this, he was a startup founder working in the connected car and energy efciency domain, a white house fellow working a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 81on material science and water issues, and a fulbright grantee assessing heavy metal contaminant removal technologies for drinking water. dr. jones received his ph.d. and m.a. degrees from rice university and b.s. from the florida state university, all in chemistry.a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82bbriefers to the study committeecommittee meetingšjanuary 13, 2014david corman, national science foundationworkshopšapril 30, 2014alex bayen, university of california, berkeleydick bulterman, fxpaldavid corman, national science foundationryan izard, clemson universitydan johnson, honeywellhimanshu khurana, honeywell internationaljeancharles lede, defense advanced research projects agencykevin massey, defense advanced research projects agencyjohn mills, simuquestsanjai rayadurgam, university of minnesotajoe salvo, ge researchalberto sangiovannavincentelli, university of california, berkeleylucio soibelman, university of southern californiacraig stephens, ford research and advanced engineeringjanos sztipanovits, vanderbilt universitypaulo tabuada, university of california, los angelesjon williams, john deerea 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 83committee meetingšjune 26, 2014daniel dvorak, jet propulsion laboratoryworkshopšoctober 23, 2014tarek abdelzaher, university of illinois, urbanachampaigndouglas adams, vanderbilt universitysteve anton, tennessee technological universityharry cheng, university of california, davisandré dehon, university of pennsylvaniamagnus egerstedt, georgia institute of technologynorman fortenberry, american society for engineering educationchristopher gill, washington universityscott hareland, medtronicjonathan how, massachusetts institute of technologyclas jacobson, united technologies corporationphilip koopman, carnegie mellon universityedward lee, university of california, berkeleyjerry lynch, university of michigandimitri mavris, georgia institute of technologyshankar sastry, university of california, berkeleyhenning schulzrinne, columbia universitycommittee meetingšmarch 1213, 2015ryan kastner, university of california, san diegoyoky matsuoka, twitterastro teller, google, inc.feng zhao, microsoft research asiaa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84cworkshop agendasapril 30, 2014  national academy of sciences washington, d.c.the goal for this workshop is to gain an understanding of the need for cyber physical systems workers, the impact of cps on various sectors, core skills and knowledge, and educational barriers. questions include:what are cps, and how does it relate to engineering, computer science, and other related disciplines? what role do cps play in sustaining innovation and supporting u.s. competitiveness and economic growth? what sorts of jobs require cps knowledge and skills? (e.g., engineering design, test and evaluation, operations) where does one nd this talent today? how much of the needed knowledge and skills are covered in undergraduate degree programs or graduate education? how much onthejob training is required? what are the core knowledge areas, capabilities, and skills that individuals working in cpsintensive elds need? how do they map onto traditional undergraduate degree programs and courses in engineering and computer science? what areas are covered in graduate programs and courses? where are there gaps in courses, textbooks and other course materials, teaching tools, curricula, and degree programs? what are the barriers in the educational pipeline to developing needed cps knowledge, skills, and capabilities?a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 858:30 a.m. introduction and welcome jack stankovic, university of virginia, cochair jim sturges, lockheed martin (retired), cochair8:45 the importance of cyber physical systems moderator: jack stankovic panelists: david corman, national science foundation  janos sztipanovits, vanderbilt university [remotely] joe salvo, ge researchwhat are cps, and how does it relate to engineering, computer science, and other related disciplines?what are some of the key applications of cps? how do cps help advance economically or societally important capabilities?what sectors will depend most on cpsenabled capabilities? what role do cps play in sustaining innovation and supporting u.s. competitiveness and economic growth?10:00  break10:15 current and anticipated workforce needs moderator: bill milam panelists: dick bulterman, fxpal  lucio soibelman, university of southern california craig stephens, ford research and advanced engineering  jon williams, john deerewhat sorts of jobs require cps knowledge and skills? (e.g., engineering design, test and evaluation, operations)where does one nd this talent today? how much of the needed knowledge and skills are covered in undergraduate degree programs or graduate education? how much onthejob training is required?what are expectations for the future size of the cps workforce, in total or as a share of total positions? how important is it to have a workforce of sufcient capacity and capability?a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86 a 21st century cyberphysical systems education12:00 p.m. lunch1:00 knowledge , capabilities, and skills needed in a cps workforce moderator: insup lee panelists: dan johnson, honeywell [remotely] kevin massey, defense advanced research projects agency john mills, simuquest sanjai rayadurgam, university of minnesota  alberto sangiovannivincentelli, university of california, berkeley each sector deploying cyberphysical systems has tended to work independently of others in developing the necessary science, engineering, workplace skills, and regulatory approachšre˚ecting in part the historically modest ﬁcyber contentﬂ of most systems and organic efforts to solve the problems at hand. today, there is growing interest in seeking advances with common application in science and engineering (including scientic and engineering principles, algorithms, models, and theories); tools (including programming languages and tools for reasoning about the properties of cps); and building blocks (innovative hardware and software components, infrastructure, and platforms).what knowledge and skills are common across sectors? what are sectorspecic?what are the core knowledge areas, capabilities, and skills that individuals working in cpsintensive elds need? how do they map onto traditional undergraduate degree programs and courses in engineering and computer science? what areas are covered in graduate programs and courses?where are there gaps between what is taught and what employers need?how do employees lacking needed knowledge or skills acquire them? how do employers provide these education and training opportunities to their employers?2:30  breaka 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 872:45 challenges and opportunities in cps education moderator: sanjoy mitter panelists: alex bayen, university of california, berkeley ryan izard, clemson university  george pappas, university of pennsylvania  to make progress in the cps education pipeline, it will be important to understand the nature of current barriers and to develop strategies to overcome them. one challenge is the multidisciplinary character of educational foundations for cps literacy. looking across computer science, electrical engineering, and other engineering disciplines will be critical. moreover, the audience for education in cps is not found only in a traditional academic context where disciplines and knowledge are relatively settled. the challenges also include reeducating today™s faculty, devising new preparation paths for university computer science and engineering students, upgrading k12 teachers and the k12 pipeline, as well as the existing workforce. new modalities for labcentric, teamtaught, and online education are emerging, which merit investigation as potential tools for accelerating progress toward a more cpscapable workforce and society.where are there gaps in courses, textbooks and other course materials, teaching tools, curricula, and degree programs?what initiatives are underway to address perceived gaps? how can we assess their impact?what are some of the obstacles that need to be overcome? can courses and programs be realigned as needed? do we have the faculty needed to teach cps material?does our k12 educational system provide the necessary foundation for later cps education and work?what are the barriers in the educational pipeline to developing needed cps knowledge, skills, and capabilities?what are some current programs/projects that are being developed to address these challenges? 4:00 breaka 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88 a 21st century cyberphysical systems education4:15 summary and discussion moderator: jim sturges panelists: chuck farrar, los alamos laboratories himanshu khurana, honeywell international paulo tabuada, university of california, los angeles5:30  adjournoctober 23, 2014  national academy of sciences washington, d.c.the rst workshop focused on identifying cps educational requirements. this workshop is focused on identifying solutions. questions examined include:would there be a cps engineer? would there be a major in cps? if it™s run out of an ece department, what would it look like? if it was run out of a cs department, what would it look like? should it not be run out of a single department? should it be run out of more complicated, coordinated multidisciplinary departments?should it just be the fouryear electives, so it™s kind of a concentration rather than a whole major?what happens in an aerospace department or a mechanical or civil engineering or chemical?what should we be doing in community colleges, if anything, or high schools or k12?october 2, 2014 9:00 a.m. introduction and welcome jack stankovic, university of virginia, cochair jim sturges, lockheed martin (retired), cochair9:30 current and anticipated workforce needs presenter: scott hareland, medtronics10:00  break10:00 innovative trends in engineering education presenter: norman fortenberry, american society for engineering educationa 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 8911:00 incorporating cps knowledge into existing engineering curricula moderator: george pappas šcivil engineering presenter: douglas adams, chair, civil and environmental engineering, vanderbilt university šaerospace  presenter: jonathan how, massachusetts institute of technology12:00 p.m. lunch breakout sessions 1. envisioning an undergraduate degree program in cps: what knowledge and course work would make up a cps degree program? how much of this course work is new versus existing courses? what course work might be displaced by cpscentric courses? 2. disciplinecentric cps knowledge: how will cps be incorporated into existing disciplines, such as civil or aerospace engineering? 3. engineering and cswide core knowledge: what core knowledge in cps should be a part of all engineering and computer science curriculum? what course work might be displaced by cpscentric course work?2:00  teaching courses for cps presenter: andré dehon, university of pennsylvaniahow will courses taught for cps differ from course taught to a more general audience (i.e. classic control course verse control course for cps)?2:15 including cps core knowledge into general engineering education presenter: shankar sastry, university of california, berkeley [remotely]3:15 cps outside/beyond 4year degree programs moderator: bill milam  šintroducing cps in high school presenter: harry cheng, university of california, davis šonline education/moocs  presenter: magnus egerstedt, georgia tech a 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90 a 21st century cyberphysical systems education4:30 critical knowledge: lessons from teaching a course and writing a textbook presenter: edward lee, university of california berkeley [remotely]5:30 receptionoctober 3, 2014 8:30 a.m. teaching for cps (continued) moderator: manuela veloso panelists: trek abdelzaher, university of illinois at urbanachampaign  henning schulzrinne, columbia university how will courses taught for cps differ from course taught to a more general audience (i.e., classic control course verse control course for cps)? 9:15 building current and future faculty moderator: paulo tabuada panelists: jerry lynch, university of michigan  philip koopman, carnegie mellon university  christopher gill, washington university how do we create the teaching and research capacity needed to support cps education?what are barriers to hiring faculty for cps?what other resources are needed to support cps education?10:15 break10:30 breakout group report back11:00 industry exposure, research projects, and moderator: chuck farrar projectbased learning panelists: dimitri mavris, georgia institute of technology clas jacobson, united technologies corporation  steve anton, tennessee technological universitya 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 91how do we measure and document the value of extracurricular activities?how to best incorporate projectbased learning curriculum into degree programs?what is the role of industryacademic partnerships, coops, and internships?12:30 p.m. wrap up discussion jack stankovic, university of virginia, cochair jim sturges, lockheed martin (retired), cochaira 21st century cyberphysical systems educationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.