detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/24676foundational cybersecurity research: improving science,engineering, and institutions104 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309455299 | doi 10.17226/24676lynette i. millett, baruch fischhoff, peter j. weinberger, editors; computerscience and telecommunications board; division on engineering and physicalsciences; national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicinefoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lynette i. millett, baruch fischhoff, peter j. weinberger, editors computer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesa consensus study report offoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001this project was supported by the national security agency with assistance from the national science foundation under award number cns1400278. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for this project.international standard book number13: 9780309455299international standard book number10: 0309455294digital object identier: https://doi.org/10.17226/24676additional copies of this publication are available for sale from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, nw, keck 360, washington, dc 20001; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313; http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2017 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americasuggested citation: national academies of sciences, engineering, and  medicine. 2017. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutions. washington, dc: the national academies press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24676.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences was established in 1863 by an act of congress, signed by president lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise the nation on issues related to science and  technology. members are elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. dr. marcia mcnutt is president.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964 under the charter of the national academy of sciences to bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to engineering. dr. c. d. mote, jr., is president.the national academy of medicine (formerly the institute of medicine) was established in 1970 under the charter of the national academy of  sciences to advise the nation on medical and health issues. members are elected by their peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. dr. victor j. dzau is president.the three academies work together as the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. the national academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. learn more about the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine at www.nationalacademies.org. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.consensus study reports published by the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine document the evidencebased consensus on the study™s statement of task by an authoring committee of experts. reports typigathered by the committee and the committee™s deliberations. each report has been subjected to a rigorous and independent peerreview process and it represents the position of the national academies on the statement of task.proceedings published by the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or other event convened by the national academies. the statements and opinions contained in proceedings are those of the participants and are not endorsed by other participants, the planning committee, or the national academies.for information about other products and activities of the national academies, please visit www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecuritybaruch fischhoff, carnegie mellon university, cochairpeter weinberger, google, inc., cochairjandria s. alexander, the aerospace corporationannie antón, georgia institute of technologysteven m. bellovin, columbia universityseymour e. goodman, georgia institute of technologyronald l. graham, university of california, san diegocarl e. landwehr, independent consultantsteven b. lipner, safecoderoy a. maxion, carnegie mellon universitygreg morrisett, cornell universitybrian snow, independent consultantphil venables, goldman sachssteven j. wallach, micron technologystafflynette i. millett, associate director and senior program ofcervirginia bacon talati, program ofcerfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science and telecommunications boardfarnam jahanian, carnegie mellon university, chairluiz andre barroso, google, inc. steven m. bellovin, columbia universityrobert f. brammer, brammer technology, llcedward frank, apple, inc.laura haas, ibm corporationmark horowitz, stanford universityeric horvitz, microsoft researchvijay kumar, university of pennsylvaniabeth mynatt, georgia institute of technologycraig partridge, raytheon bbn technologiesdaniela rus, massachusetts institute of technologyfred b. schneider, cornell universitymargo seltzer, harvard universityjohn stankovic, university of virginiamoshe vardi, rice universitykatherine yelick, university of california, berkeleystaffjon eisenberg, director lynette i. millett, associate director virginia bacon talati, program ofcershenae bradley, administrative assistantemily grumbling, program ofcerrenee hawkins, financial and administrative managerkatiria ortiz, research associatefor more information on cstb, see its website at http://www.cstb.org; write to cstb, national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, 500 fifth street, nw, washington, dc 20001; call (202) 3342605; or email cstb at cstb@nas.edu.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethis study emerged from an informal request to the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine™s computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) from brad martin of the national security agency. the project was initiated by the special cyber operations research and engineering (score) interagency working group and sponsored with assistance from the national science foundation. the statement of task for the committee on future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecurity, established by the national academies to carry out this study, is as follows:an ad hoc national research council committee will conduct a multiphased sequential study to consider future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecurity, to include relevant efforts in economics and behavioral science as well as more ﬁtraditionalﬂ cybersecurity topics. it will also consider how investments in foundational work support mission needs in the long term. the committee will  review current unclassied and classied cybersecurity research strategies, plans, and programs as well as requirements in both domains. it will consider major challenge problems, explore proposed new directions, identify gaps in the current portfolio, consider the complementary roles of research in unclassied and classied settings, and consider how foundational work in an unclassied setting can be translated to meet national security objectives. phase 1 will involve preliminary data gathering and analysis by the committee, but no report will be issued. in phase 2, the committee will undertake additional data gathering, analysis, and deliberations. in phase 3, the committee would extend foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii prefaceits data gathering and analysis from phase 2. the study will result in two reports: (1) a public report at the conclusion of phase 2 providing a highlevel roadmap for foundational cybersecurity research based only on public domain information and (2) an additional, brief public report and a nonpublic classied annex as necessary re˚ecting the committee™s work in phase 3. this report is the result of phase 2. the committee, whose  biographies are listed in appendix b, gathered input through a number of data gathering sessions. the committee appreciates the insights and perspectives provided by the experts who presented briengs; they are listed in appendix a. with a perennial societal challenge like cybersecurity, a topic that has been explored extensively and where real breakthroughs have proven elusive, a challenge is to avoid welltrodden ground. the committee was mindful of the sponsor™s request to focus on opportunities where a fresh approach to the problem could prove fruitful. thus, this report does not present a list of hard open research problems (there are many such  worthy lists, some of which are summarized in appendix c) nor argue for specic programs. instead, the committee offers alternative approaches to framing research problems, organizing research programs, and integrating research and practice. we hope to offer fresh ways to realize the potential of the resources and intellect invested in addressing cybersecurity challenges. this report represents the cooperative effort of many people. we thank the individuals who came to speak with us during the course of the study. we appreciate the work of our committee. circumstances beyond the committee™s control delayed activity at certain phases of the project, and we appreciate its members™ patience and that of our sponsors throughout the process. we also thank the reviewers whose comments helped to strengthen the report considerably. baruch fischhoff and peter weinberger, cochairscommittee on future research goals and  directions  for foundational science in cybersecurityfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgment of reviewersthis consensus study report was reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine in making each published report as sound as possible and to ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we thank the following individuals for their review of this report: robert axelrod, university of michigan,frederick chang, southern methodist university,john mclean, naval research laboratory, peter neumann, sri international, robert oliver, university of california, berkeley, shari lawrence p˚eeger, dartmouth college, angela sasse, university college london, william scherlis, carnegie mellon university, and fred schneider, cornell university. although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations of this report nor did they see the nal draft foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x acknowledgment of reviewersbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by william h. press, university of texas, austin. he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with the standards of the national academies and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content rests entirely with the authoring committee and the national academies.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xicontentssummary 11 cybersecurity challenges and security science 10 challenges to achieving cybersecurity, 11 scientic underpinnings of cybersecurity, 13 example efforts, 14 outline of this report, 172 the role of social, behavioral, and decision  21 sciences in security science contributions from social, behavioral, and decision sciences, 26 building collaborative communities, 28 incentives, resources, and risk in cybersecurity, 29 understanding incentives and resources, 30 risk analysis, 31 making progress, 333 engineering, operational, and lifecycle  34 challenges in security science lessons from development organizations, 34 lessons from realworld deployments, 36 challenges of cybersecurity metrics, 39 additional research topics, 40foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii contents4 foundational research topics 43 attack detection and attribution, 44 defensible design, architecture, and technologies, 46 resilience and adaptability, 47 illustrative topics in the social, behavioral, and decision  sciences, 49 criticality and evaluation, 525 institutional opportunities to improve  54 security science opportunities to improve research practice and approach, 54 structural approaches toward improved interdisciplinarity, 59 addressing foundational cybersecurity research in federal programs, 62 assessment and evaluation, 63 mission criticality, 65appendixesa briefers to the study committee 71b committee biographies 73c highlights from other research agendas 82foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summaryattaining meaningful cybersecurity presents a broad societal challenge. its complexity and the range of systems and sectors in which it is needed mean that successful approaches are necessarily multifaceted. moreover, cybersecurity is a dynamic process involving human attackers who continue to adapt. despite considerable investments of resources and intellect, cybersecurity continues to pose serious challenges to national security, business performance, and public wellbeing. modern developments in computation, storage, and connectivity to the internet have brought into even sharper focus the need for a better understanding of the overall security of the systems we depend on.the research cultures that have developed in the security community and in afliated disciplines will increasingly need to incorporate lessons not just from a wider variety of disciplines, but also from practitioners, developers, and system administrators responsible for securing realworld operational systems. this report is aimed primarily at the cybersecurity research community, but takes a broad view that efforts to improve foundational cybersecurity research will need to include many disciplines working together to achieve common goals.there have been many reports on cybersecurity research offering many recommendations. rather than echo these reports and expand their lists of proposed projects, the committee has focused on foundational research strategies for organizing people, technologies, and governance. these strategies seek to ensure the sustained support needed to create an agile, effective research community, with collaborative links across disciplines and between research and practice.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 foundational cybersecurity researchpart of the task of the committee on future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecurity was to consider gaps in the federal research program. in the committee™s view, the security community and funders understand the breadth of the challenge and the importance of emphasizing progress on all frontsša diversity evident in the diverse approaches taken by the federal agencies supporting cybersecurity research. instead of focusing on gaps, this report offers a  framework that links research efforts. the strategy advocated below requires unusual collaborations among disciplines focused on technologies and those focused on the individuals and organizations that try to attack and protect them. achieving those collaborations will require creating incentives that run counter to academic pressure for publications and user pressures for shortterm results. to this end, the committee™s analysis is organized under the four follow ing broad aims for cybersecurity research: ł support, develop, and improve security scienceša longterm, inclusive, multidisciplinary approach to security science.ł integrate the social, behavioral, and decision sciences into the security science research effort, since all cybersecurity challenges and mitigations involve people and organizations.ł integrate engineering and operations for a lifecycle understanding of systems.ł sustain longterm support for security science research providing institutional and community opportunities to support these approaches.not every research effort will or needs to address all four aims. however, articulating where each sits with respect to them is important to the coherence of the research program. these four aims are discussed below. strengthen the scientific underpinnings of cybersecuritysecurity science has the goal of improving understanding of which aspects of a system (including its environment and users) create vulnerabilities or enable someone or something (inside or outside the system) to exploit them. ideally, security science provides not just predictions for when attacks are likely to succeed, but also evidence linking cause and effect pointing to solution mechanisms. a science of security would develop over time, for example, a body of scientic laws, testable explanations, predictions about systems, and conrmation or validation of predicted outcomes.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 3a scientic approach to cybersecurity challenges could enrich understanding of the existing landscape of systems, defenses, attacks, and adversaries. clear and wellsubstantiated models could help identify potential payoffs and support of mission needs while avoiding likely dead ends and poor places to invest effort. there are strong and welldeveloped bases in the contributing disciplines. in mathematics and computer science, these include work in logic, computational complexity, and game theory. in the human sciences, they include work in judgment, decision making, interface design, and organizational behavior. include the social, behavioral, and decision sciences in security sciencetechnical approaches alone will not sufce for cybersecurity as long as humans play roles in systems as developers, users, operators, or adversaries. major security breakdowns have occurred because individuals misplace trust, organizations create perverse incentives, or adversaries discover and exploit design ˚aws. meeting security needs effectively requires understanding that human context. how does cybersecurity affect the realworld business or organization? does it drain human or other resources, or does it re˚ect a balance between keeping the business or organization secure and keeping it economically viable? what investments does it deserve and receive? how does the perceived value of possible practices compare with their demonstrated efcacy? what evidence would help to make that assessment? social, behavioral, and decision sciences provide the reservoir of knowledge for addressing some of these questions and for making other research more useful for those responsible for vulnerable systems. such expertise can also be vital, especially during design, for revealing any disconnects between intention and actual use and in articulating the variety of potential users and their contexts.human behavior affects all stages of the life cycle of a cybersecurity system: design, implementation, operation, maintenance, monitoring, revision, and replacement. each stage offers opportunities to increase or reduce vulnerability: how design teams are constituted and managed, how procedures and interfaces are tested for usability, what incentives and resources are provided for security, how operators are trained and their performance evaluated, how the business case is made and understood. our adversaries™ systems have their own life cycles, which might be disrupted at each stage. as a result, achieving effective cybersecurity will depend on understanding and addressing human dimensions of systems. doing so will require overcoming psychological and institutional impediments that make effective collaboration difcult.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 foundational cybersecurity researchon the whole, the traditional cybersecurity community lacks expertise in social science analysis tools and methods. as a result, it not only relies on intuition, when it could draw on science available, but also struggles in its attempts to validate its approaches, falling below scientic standards in experimental design. collaborating with social scientists and understanding their standards for research and publication would bring new tools to bear and yield new insights. a psychological barrier to such collaborations is that system designers and operators have unwarranted condence in their intuitive theories about others™ behavior. indeed, the humanœcomputer interaction research community has a motto, ﬁyou are not the user,ﬂ to remind researchers and practitioners not to assume that other people share their perceptions and motivations. the primary institutional barrier to utilizing the social, behavioral, and decision science expertise is that these disciplines are largely absent from the cybersecurity research community. indeed, the community often lacks even the absorptive capacity to identify these needs, recruit the expertise needed to address them, and critically evaluate claims about system security elements that can be compromised by human failures in design, deployment, training, or management. without that expertise, the cybersecurity community must improvise its own theories and research methods that are central to those sciences: experimental design, identifying confounds, metaanalysis, sensitivity analysis, and so on. conversely, because those sciences have not been drawn into addressing the unique challenges of cybersecurity, they have limited experience in applying (and explaining) their research to those domains and in identifying the unique foundational research questions that they pose. to create more effective collaborations, it is essential to foster interactions that address the needs of both these disciplines and the cybersecurity community. one thing crossdisciplinary researchers can do is to evaluate how well a result from one context will hold true in another. the committee identies barriers to collaboration both within and among the disciplines and discusses strategic institutional options to overcome them. those strategies include creating institutional settings with the following: support reserved for projects that are jointly dened by members of different disciplines; working groups with the sustained interpersonal contact needed to create trusted relationships and absorb one another™s work practices; training programs in the essentials of other disciplines, both short term for working professionals and extended at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels; and positions that require their holders to demonstrate both practical and academic accomplishments.cybersecurity poses grand challenges that require unique collaborations among the best people in the relevant core disciplines, who typically foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 5have other options for their time and energy. sponsors of cybersecurity research need to create the conditions that make it worth their while to work on these issues. if successful, cybersecurity research will benet not only from the substantive knowledge of the social, behavioral, and decision sciences, but also from absorbing their research culture with respect to theory building, hypothesis testing, method validation, experimentation, and knowledge accumulationšjust as they will learn from the complementary expertise of the cybersecurity community. thus, these collaborations have transformative potential for the participating disciplines, while addressing the urgent practical problems of cybersecurity.address engineering, operational, and  lifecycle challenges in security scienceimproving cybersecurity requires that security considerations be integrated into the practice of hardware and software development and deployment. research in many key technical areas can embed assumptions about, for example, agility and expected operations and maintenance, or research can be focused on how to improve postdeployment activities related to systems. that is, research that focuses on how maintenance and system administration affect overall system performance is part of a holistic approach to cybersecurity research. in this spirit, software development organizations developing commodity systems have made substantial efforts to improve their practices and systems. these organizations have, over time, created development practices for reducing the prevalence of exploitable vulnerabilities in released software. a critical component of these approaches is feedback loops tracing discovered vulnerabilities or attacks to root causes. applied systematically, these feedback loops can lead to new tools or techniques and are fundamental to improving cybersecurity. these efforts are an essential part of security science, integrating what is known about stateoftheart software engineering practices; social, behavioral, and organizational theory; current understandings of the threat landscape; and models of attacks and defenses. practical lessons from companies working at the cutting edge of secure system development can inform research approaches that incorporate scientic models.system administrators and other practitioners are often on the frontlines of securing systems. it is important to develop mechanisms whereby researchers can learn about the real problems being experienced in the eld by practitioners. opportunities include work on resilient architectures, composition of components and properties, logging systems, variability, and conguration. researchers in these areas benet signicantly from industry contacts and trust relationships with practitioner colleagues.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 foundational cybersecurity researchresearch is also needed on metrics useful for informing organizational practices. as a starting point, the measures practiced by the most successful organizations could be made public in a way that makes them available for use as metrics by others. this work would need to be kept uptodate. research on what can be done in terms of organizational practices and the extent to which practices enhance security is needed. adversaries change tactics and approaches frequently, and the organizations that hope to defend themselves must adapt continuously. security science here will involve understanding how science, models, attacks, and defenses interact; how systems are engineered, deployed, and maintained; and how organizations decide to invest in, develop, and promulgate technologies, practices, and policies regarding security. the traditional decoupling of academic research from engineering, quality control, and operations leaves gaps in a domain like cybersecurity, where solutions are needed for systems deployed at scale in the real world. these gaps highlight the importance of not just technology transfer, but of incorporating a lifecycle perspective (from development to deployment, maintenance, administration, and aftermarket activities) into proposed foundational research approaches. support and sustain foundational research for security sciencethis report is intended to complement the federal networking and information technology research and development program™s 2016 federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan.1 it elaborates on several specic components of the strategic plan and offers a framework for organizing that research. most elements of the research agenda in this report can be mapped to components of the strategic plan. the committee outlines a foundational technical research agenda clustered around three broad themes that correspond to those in the strategic plan: detect (detection and attribution of attacks and vulnerabilities), protect (defensible systems that are prepared for and can resist attacks), and adapt (resilient systems that can recover from or cope with a wide range of adversarial behavior). many familiar technical topics fall within these clusters. many challenges span themšmaking an understanding of how they interact critical.research that links social, behavioral, and decision sciences and cybersecurity should encourage advances in cybersecurity practices 1 national science and technology council, federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan: ensuring prosperity and national security, networking and information technology research and development program, february 2016.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 7and outcomes. illustrative topics include the following: how individuals interact with and mentally model systems, risk, and vulnerability; incentives and practices in organizations; adversary assessment; why and how cybersecurity measures are adopted; and managing con˚icting needs and values in policy, organizations, and technologies. a better understanding of how policies, practices, and improvements are adopted (or neglected) would allow organizational science to leverage cybersecurity research. two overarching research challenges are how to assess the criticality of a particular capability or application in a given context and how to evaluate the results of research and prioritize implementation. in both cases, there are opportunities to apply foundational science to cybersecurity needs.foster institutional approaches and opportunities to improve security sciencethe research cultures that have developed in the security community and afliated disciplines will increasingly need to adjust to embrace and incorporate lessons from both a wider variety of disciplines and practi tioners, including the developers, and administrators responsible for securing realworld operational systems. given the dynamic, rapidly evolving nature of the problem, the cybersecurity research community itself has struggled to develop a sustained science of security. a 2016 computing research association (cra) memo2 suggests that computing research suffers from counterproductive incentives emphasizing publication quantity and shortterm results, inhibiting longerterm efforts and infrastructure development. this report proposes strategies to address these counterproductive incentives. the committee was asked to consider gaps in the federal research program. in the committee™s view, the security community and funders understand the breadth of the challenge. the gaps that the committee identied are not strictly topics or problems that are not being addressed. instead, the committee focused on how programs and projects are framed and conducted, with an emphasis on creating integrative security science that is capable of seeking and incorporating relevant social, behavioral, and decision science results and operational and lifecycle understandings. the committee was also asked to consider how foundational efforts in cybersecurity bear on missioncritical applications and challenges, such as those faced by agencies working in classied domains. from the commit2 b. friedman and f.b. schneider, ﬁincentivizing quality and impact: evaluating scholarship in hiring, tenure, and promotion,ﬂ 2015, computing research association, http://cra.org/resources/bestpracticememos/incentivizingqualityandimpactevaluatingscholarshipinhiringtenureandpromotion/.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 foundational cybersecurity researchtee™s perspective, the same principles apply, whatever the domains (from protecting systems that contain information on an intelligence agency™s sources and methods, to preventing the servers running the latest bestselling augmented reality mobile game from being compromised, to general deterrence efforts). thus, foundational efforts in cybersecurity, as described in this report, could yield results that are broadly applicable. one potential distinction the committee considered was between classied and unclassied efforts: although there may be differences in the nature of threat and what is known and by whom about that threat, privatesector entities are increasingly on the front line, facing and securing themselves against ﬁnationstateﬂlevel attacks. moreover, even if people and processes differ in public and privatesector organizations, all depend on human behavior of the sort that social, behavioral, and decision science research integrated with technical cybersecurity research can inform. there are also research efforts in the classied and unclassied domains that leverage similarities in basic technologies, humans interacting with systems, and organizations managing them. making those connections is not always done, however. it falls to funders, the researchers, and the consumers of research to make those connections. problems and assumptions may need to be translated across the classied/unclassied boundary, but foundational results should be applicable in each. it will be particularly important to develop and nd people who are skilled at these translations. * * *the challenge of cybersecurity and the urgent nature of risks to  society posed by insecure systems and a dynamic and fastchanging environment understandably promotes an emphasis on moving fast. paradoxically, however, the eld is still so comparatively new, and the nature of the challenge is so hard, that indepth scientic research is needed to understand the very nature of the artifacts in use, the nature of software, the complexity and interdependencies in these humanbuilt systems, and importantly, how the humans and organizations who design, build, use, and attack the systems affect what can be known and understood about them. encouraging research to address these challenges will require sustained commitments and engagements. thus, programs that encourage longhorizon projects where these connections can be worked out will be important. the fact that these systems are designed, developed, deployed, and used by humans, and that humans are also the adversaries behind attacks on them, means that the work done in the social, behavioral, and decifoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 9sion sciences will be critical. deepening understanding of humans and human organizations, and linking that understanding to more traditional research in cybersecurity, is necessary to develop a robust security science and to deploy systems most effectively so that they do what they were designed to do, secured against human adversaries. cybersecurity can be viewed as a cutting edge of computing that demands a broad, multidisciplinary effort. addressing the global cybersecurity challenge needs not just computer science, engineering science, and mathematics, but also partnerships with other disciplines to draw on what we know and understand about human nature and how humans interact with and manage systemsšand each other. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101cybersecurity challenges and security sciencedespite considerable investments of resources and intellect, cybersecurity continues to pose serious challenges to national security, business performance, and public wellbeing. modern developments in computation, storage, and connectivity to the internet have brought into even sharper focus the need for a better understanding of the overall security of the systems we depend on. the cybersecurity task is daunting, and the world continues to change. we see increasing replacement of physical systems with digital ones, increasing use of digital systems by larger segments of the population, and increasing use of digital systems in ways that the designers and developers never intended. in the early days, the security focus was on protecting networks, servers, and client workstations. today™s concerns include targeted attacks on electromechanical control systems and mobile devices. systems of all kinds are becoming larger and more inter connected. other changes in recent years include the character of the threat, its sophistication, goals and targets; increasingly sophisticated supply chains for softwarereliant systems that themselves include components from diverse sources; and wide deployment of internet of things (iot) devices (e.g., infrastructure controlled by scada systems,1 home automation, and selfdriving and partly automated vehicles and automated highways). success in protecting one area drives attackers to probe 1 scada refers to supervisory control and data acquisition systems typically used to monitor and control industrial processes in the physical world. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity challenges and security science 11elsewhere. all of these trends result in larger impacts when systems are compromised. this committee was asked to consider future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecurity, including economics and behavioral science as well as more ﬁtraditionalﬂ cybersecurity topics. it brought together researchers from different disciplines and practitioners from different sectors. there have been many reports on cybersecurity research offering many recommendations. rather than echo those reports and expand their lists of proposed projects, the committee focused on foundational research strategies for organizing people, technologies, and governance. these strategies seek to ensure the sustained support needed to create an agile and effective research community, with collaborative links across disciplines and between research and practice. the aim of the report is to encompass a broad security science that includes fundamental underpinnings related to scientic laws, attacks, policies, and environments;2 social, behavioral, and decision science considerations; as well as engineering, operational, and lifecycle challenges. this report is aimed primarily at the cybersecurity research community, but it takes a broad view that efforts to improve foundational science in cybersecurity will need to be inclusive of many disciplinary perspectives and ensure that these disciplines work together to achieve common goals.3challenges to achieving cybersecuritycyberspace is notoriously vulnerable to varied and changing attacks by hackers, criminals, terrorists, and state actors. the nation™s critical infrastructure, including the electric power grid, air trafc control system, nancial system, and communication networks, depends on information technology for its operation and thus is susceptible to cyberattack. these concerns are not new, nor is recognition of the importance of research as an essential element in u.s. national cybersecurity strategy. for example, as early as 1991, the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine highlighted the role of research in understanding and address2 this formulation was rst described in f.b. schneider, blueprint for a science of cybersecurity, the next wave 19(2), 2012.3 regarding privacy: although the committee was tasked to consider cybersecurity, there is overlap in the cybersecurity and privacy research communities (and research  problems). and privacy research itself demands input from many disciplines. as an end, protecting privacy is one measure of system performance. as a means, compromised privacy can create openings for other mischief; fear over compromise may motivate behavior that benets the system overall. many of the approaches suggested in this report should also apply to privacy research, even if the particular examples do not overlap directly. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 foundational cybersecurity researching vulnerabilities through scientically sound policies, technologies, and behavioral interventions.4 it focused on endtoend strategies, linking the previously stovepiped domains of communications security and system security. the present report adopts the same encompassing view.why is the cybersecurity situation so challenging despite years of attention? one major challenge is that we rely on systems and components that were not designed with modern threats in mind. many of these systems and components are intrinsically weak due to decadesold design choices as well as outdated security goals and assumptions about the nature of the threat. another challenge is that even welldesigned systems have bugs, creating vulnerabilities that attackers will work hard to ndšand often succeed in nding. many systems evolve over time, combining newer components with legacy components; often this evolution occurs with only limited application of systems engineering principles and without an understanding of what the securitycritical components are or the dependencies on them. despite growing awareness of these threats, many organizations still do not (or cannot) spend the resources needed to understand or x their vulnerabilities. when they see software as safetycritical, other concerns (e.g., costs, schedules) may limit their efforts to improve systems security. moreover, fallible humans design, maintain, use, and repair systems in ways that may unintentionally expose and facilitate ease of breakin. this report bears these realities in mind, considering the behavioral and organizational interventions needed to sustain improvements needed for more securely designed, more bugfree, and more errortolerant systems at acceptable cost.another difculty is that many actors affect cybersecurity, including boards of directors, shareholders, regulators, standards bodies, citizens, nongovernmental organizations, manufacturers, and researchers. as a result, there are often con˚icting views and interests. for instance, password requirements for online banking tend to be much less strict than those used inside the federal government, re˚ecting different tradeoffs. at a  societal level, cybersecurity affects and is affected by the sometimes con˚icting equities of national security, democratic values, and economic prosperity,5 which widens the aperture for the research enterprise considerably. responding to these dynamic challenges requires sustained support for research that can address challenges of today and those still on the horizon. 4 national research council, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991.5 see ﬁtensions between cybersecurity and other public policy concerns,ﬂ chapter 7 in national research council, at the nexus of cybersecurity and public policy: some basic concepts and issues, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2014.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity challenges and security science 13it requires collaboration across disciplines, because overall system security depends on individual and organizational behavior as well as technology. it requires the ability to recongure approaches as threats (and successes) evolve, which means having short cycles for receiving and responding to feedback. meeting these requirements will not be easy in a world organized around scientic disciplines, corporations and institutions, regulatory and standards bodies, and government  bureaucraciesšeach functioning in ways that have been developed in the past to focus on other areas. for these reasons, the committee has primarily focused on processes for identifying and addressing problems, rather than on problems per se.scientific underpinnings of cybersecuritysecurity science6 has the goal of improving the understanding of which aspects of a system (including its environment and users) create vulnerabilities or enable someone or something (inside or outside the system) to exploit them. ideally, security science provides not just predictions for when attacks are likely to succeed, but also evidence linking cause and effect pointing to solution mechanisms. a science of security would develop over time, for example, a body of scientic laws, testable explanations, predictions about systems, and conrmation or validation of predicted outcomes.as an example, adversaries discovered a new interface in an incomplete initial model and used sidechannel attacks7 to exploit it. a systematic, scientic approach to modeling the cryptographic system that took this into account allowed the model to be improved. another example involves the common attack mode of ﬁphishing,ﬂ which is not against a technical system per se but against an individual, where an adversary tries to deceive someone into actions that allow attackers into their system. a model that does not include people invoking malicious software would be 6 recent years have seen increased discussion of what a scientic basis for cybersecurity might entail, and efforts are under way within the cybersecurity research community to develop a security science. see, for instance, f.b. schneider, blueprint for a science of cybersecurity, the next wave 19(2), 2012. continued work in this space is a key component of the foundational approach described in this report. see also c. herley and p. van oorschot, ﬁsok: science, security, and the elusive science of security,ﬂ proceedings of 2017 ieee symposium on security and privacy (forthcoming, available at http://people.scs. carleton.ca/~paulv/papers/oakland2017science.pdf). building this science will be a longterm endeavor that is both forwardlooking, in that its results can be used as a basis for decisions about current and future systems, and retrospective, in that results can be used to explain how and why past efforts failed (or succeeded). as more is understood, scientic analyses can be used to assess both proposed efforts and past practices.7 sidechannel attacks use information derived from the physical characteristics of a system (such as power consumption or electromagnetic leaks) to attack cryptographic systems, rather than exploiting algorithmic weaknesses, such as differential power analysis.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 foundational cybersecurity researchincomplete with respect to this type of attack, however complete it was in other respects. as long as their limits are known, scientic laws derived from incomplete models may still be useful. a set of mathematical laws about cryptography that addresses the strength of algorithms but not sidechannel attacks could still help in designing systems that resist some attacks, even if not all kinds of adversaries. a scientic approach to cybersecurity challenges could enrich understanding of the existing landscape of systems, defenses, attacks, and adversaries. clear and wellsubstantiated models could help identify potential payoffs and support of mission needs while avoiding likely dead ends and poor places to invest effort. there are strong and welldeveloped bases in the contributing disciplines. in mathematics and computer science, these include work in logic, computational complexity, and game theory. in the human sciences, they include work in judgment, decision making, interface design, and organizational behavior. example effortsexamples of research areas in which this sort of scientic approach has been taken include cryptography, programming languages, and security modeling. the cryptography community (which comes from a mathematics tradition) has taken a mathematical approach to problems related to secrecy, integrity, authentication, and nonrepudiation. for example, researchers in this community developed approaches to probabilistic computational secrecy, cryptographic protocol analysis, and logics of authentication with mathematical models that allow the exploration of what is and is not possible with clearly stated assumptions. the cryptography community has developed a set of building blocks and constructive reasoning principles that allow building new approaches (e.g., protocols) whose security attributes can be estimated relative to known building blocks. the programming language and semantics community has followed suit. one example is the work on typebased information ˚ow, which now allows constructing models of languages or systems, and proving relevant properties (e.g., noninterference) and deriving implementations.8 another example is a proof that type checking and program obfuscation are equivalently effective against certain classes of attacks.9 the security 8 d.e. denning and p.j. denning, certication of programs for secure information ˚ow, communications of the acm 20(7):504513, 1977; l. zheng and a.c. myers, ﬁdynamic security labels and noninterference,ﬂ cornell university, https://www.cs.cornell.edu/andru/papers/dynltr.pdf.9 r. pucella and f.b. schneider, independence from obfuscation: a semantic framework for diversity, journal of computer security 18:701749. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity challenges and security science 15modeling community has formulated models of security since the 1970s,10 as well as methods for evaluating these models.11 this work was an instance where the science of security was advanced by introducing tools from another discipline (logic) to evaluate an accepted model. another example of research using a scientic approach con siders abstract security mechanisms and what can be learned about their properties and applicability to classes of attacks. in the case of reference  monitorsšcomponents of a system that allow certain things to  happen (or not) based on a security policyšone interesting result is that rewalls, operating system kernels, and mechanisms that enforce access control lists are all reference monitors. viewed from security science seeking general principle, researchers asked, what general security policies can a reference monitor enforce? the result is that reference monitors can enforce only what are known as safety properties, which require that something bad will never happen.12 this result both demonstrates the robustness of the scientic approach and offers a practical insight to those implementing security technologiesšto wit: understand whether the policy to be enforced is a safety property, and recognize that, if it is not, any security approach that depends on a reference monitor will not be able to enforce it. for instance, rewalls cannot address sophisticated phishing attacks.13 developing scientic laws and models related to composability would help explore and explain how combinations of mechanisms and approaches interact.14 it could be a key contribution, especially if exploring compos10 d.e. bell and l.j. lapadula, ﬁsecure computer system: unied exposition and  multics interpretation,ﬂ mtr2997, mitre corp., bedford, mass., march 1976, available as ntis ad a023 588; j.a. goguen and j. meseguer, ﬁsecurity policies and security models,ﬂ pp. 1120 in 1982 ieee symposium on security and privacy, 1982, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostrecentissue.jsp?punumber=6234453.11 j. mclean, ﬁreasoning about security models,ﬂ 1987 ieee symposium on security and privacy, ieee, 1987, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostrecentissue.jsp?punumber=6234872.12 f.b. schneider, enforceable security policies, acm transactions on information and system security 3(1):3050, 2000; k.w. hamlen, g. morrisett, and f.b. schneider, computability classes for enforcement mechanisms, acm transactions on programming languages and systems (toplas) 28(1):175205, 2006.13 a given rewall may be able to institute a policy that would reject some set of  phishing attacks but cannot defend against the entire class of phishing attacksšnot least because a precise denition of ﬁphishingﬂ is not available. to correctly identify all phishing attacks would require a reference monitor that could understand natural language as well as being able to predict how a program would execute when it is downloaded. this suggests the need for research on a broader notion of phishing that relates to the structure of decision making in organizations and would draw on social, behavioral, and decision sciences, as discussed in chapter 3.14 some work has already been done in this area as well going at least as far back as j. mclean, a general theory of composition for a class of ﬁpossibilisticﬂ properties, ieee transactions on software engineering 22(1):5367, 1996.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 foundational cybersecurity researchability mechanisms and approaches generates new knowledge about independence and its relationship to security. results from that exploration could contribute signicantly to the design and deployment of defensible systems. reasoning about and understanding of the security of systems that have been synthesized from individual components or subsystems remains a challenging problem that is today best tackled by experts with expertise in attackers™ techniques. such experts are in short supply. providing these experts with wellprotected building blocks could help them work more effectively and efciently toward a networkwide security approach as they focus on the seams between components (which are increasingly a target of adversaries). this would be particularly effective if those blocks can be veried or proved correct, together with a way to understand and model how they work together. human factors researchers have developed signal detection theory15 to determine when performance errors re˚ect the inability to detect problems and misaligned incentives for responding to them (undue or insufcient caution). they have developed vigilance theory16 to predict the effects of work conditions (e.g., shift length) on performance. one series of studies combined the two in investigating susceptibility to phishing attacks, nding wide variability in both detection ability and perceived incentives across individuals, as well as differences within individuals when thinking about a potential threat and deciding how to respond. these resulting performance parameter estimates provide a basis for evaluating the relative vulnerability of alternative system congurations.17other questions inviting a scientic approach include the following: ł what are useful or ﬁinterestingﬂ classes of attacks, defenses, and policies? ł what does it mean for systems or subsystems to be independent? replication tolerates failures (because we believe physically separated devices fail independently), but replication does not tolerate attacks (because replicas have the same vulnerabilities). defense in depth works when the component defenses are ﬁindependent.ﬂ ł what are good underlying formalisms for execution? the formal methods community uses ﬁsets of sequences,ﬂ but this is too inexpressive for even simple security policies like condentiality. 15 s.k. lynn and l.f. barrett, ﬁutilizingﬂ signal detection theory, psychological science 25(9):16631673, 2014, doi:10.1177/0956797614541991.16 n.h. mackworth, the breakdown of vigilance during prolonged visual search,  quarterly journal of experimental psychology 1(1):621, 1948, doi:10.1080/17470214808416738.17 c. caneld, b. fischhoff, and a.l. davis, quantifying phishing susceptibility for detection and behavior decisions, human factors 58(8):11581172, 2016, doi: 10.1177/ 0018720816665025.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity challenges and security science 17ł is there an orthogonal set of building blocks related to security? is there a natural correspondence between those building blocks and specic classes or mechanisms? the traditional security notions of condentiality, integrity, and availability are intuitive, but they are not orthogonal, which complicates reasoning and analysis. (condentiality can be achieved by corrupting integrity or by denying access.) programmatically, there have been several efforts toward a science of security in the cybersecurity community, beginning in earnest a few years ago. as one example, the national security agency (nsa) has funded several lablets (groups of researchers tasked with contributing to the development of a systemic body of knowledge)18 and created an annual ﬁbest scientic cybersecurity paperﬂ competition.19 as an adjunct to these lablets and related efforts, the nsa has also established a science of security virtual organization20 to help researchers stay abreast of current news and activities in the eld. there are currently four academic research lablets; they were established to focus on developing a science of security and a community to advance it. the lablets have developed lists of hard problems that involve crossing disciplinary boundaries, and the nsa has worked to get researchers to report results in relation to those problems. the lablet model is designed to promote more direct interactions among researchers (i.e., not just through the literature) with a focus on sharing those diverse research methods that cybersecurity challenges require, including observational empiricism and data analysis, interventional empiricism, mathematical models, and reasoning. a science of security can lead to powerful and explanatory results and predictions. drawing the connections between traditional cybersecurity research and emerging scientic laws and models, and making clear how such results t within an overarching (albeit still emerging) science, will serve to both validate the science as it is developed and contextualize specic results. outline of this reportthe committee™s analysis and recommendations in the rest of this report are organized under the four following broad aims: 18 k. dey, ﬁnsa™s science of security and privacy research network map,ﬂ cyberphysical systems virtual organization, 2016, http://cpsvo.org/group/sos/map.19 for more, see cyberphysical systems virtual organization, ﬁ5th annual best scientic cybersecurity paper competition,ﬂ http://cpsvo.org/group/sos/papercompetition, accessed september 2016.20 cyberphysical systems virtual organization, ﬁscience of security vo: about,ﬂ http://cpsvo.org/group/sos/about, accessed september 2016.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 foundational cybersecurity researchł support, develop, and improve security sciencešin terms of the emerging research efforts in this area, in the practice and reporting of results, and in terms of a longterm, inclusive, multidisciplinary approach to security science.ł integrate the social, behavioral, and decision sciences into the security science research effort, since all cybersecurity challenges and mitigations involve people and organizations.ł integrate engineering and operations, incorporating a lifecycle understanding of systems into the research endeavor and security science.ł sustain longterm support for security science research including material resources and institutional structures that facilitate approaches and opportunities for improvement.box 1.1 illustrates these commitments in the context of the study of passwords. although not every research effort in cybersecurity can box 1.1  the study of passwords as an authentication toolauthentication is a longstanding challenge for system design and engineerenvironment in many ways. the research that has been done to understand why passwords are not an adequate authentication approach provides an example of how all four of the aims articulated in this report come into play. in terms of a password practice protect against (aim 1)? consider the following: the context of policy. password policies usually come with a trusted third party to help recover from losing access (by forgetting a password or having one expire). but if nobody a there have been empirical social science results and technical results about the effective ness of traditional password practices. a 2010 studyb examined password productivity. another 2010 studyc called into question the merit of enforced password expiration. results such as these have not always been readily translated has developed draft rulesde foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity challenges and security science 19is there research that can help us understand how to transition to practice such results better so as to decrease the amount of poor security practice in enterprises? research is needed to understand broadly how to use passwords or other authentication tools in an effective way in deployed systems (aim 3).f are most effective in which contexts? the answers to these questions depend in depend on insights from multiple disciplines (aim 2).acommunications of acm proceedings of the ieee symposium on research in security and privacychi 2010ccs 2010bchi 2010angela2.pdf.cccs 2010ddigital identity guidelines: authentication and lifecycle managementeby internal and external experts and a small set of researchers. this provides an example of how research radically changed recommended practice.fieee security and privacy magazine,copy.pdf.box 1.1 continuedfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 foundational cybersecurity researchor should address all four of these aims at once, articulating where a given effort sits with respect to them is important to the coherence of the research program. security science can be thought of, broadly, as incorporating these elements (to varying degrees as appropriate), ensuring that each piece of a particular research effort meets the standards of its contributing disciplines, and integrating those efforts in coherent and disciplined ways. this chapter has described the report™s overall philosophy. chapters 2 through 5 elaborate it. chapter 2 examines the potential of social, behavioral, and decision sciences to contribute to improved cybersecurity. chapter 3 highlights the importance of incorporating engineering and lifecycle considerations into the cybersecurity research endeavor. chapter 4 outlines a foundational cybersecurity research agenda. chapter 5 offers insights on the organization and leadership of the research community and describes opportunities to improve research practice and approach, concluding with a discussion of how the research community could recongure its efforts to more inclusively address cybersecurity challenges.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.21technical approaches alone will not sufce for cybersecurity insofar as humans play roles in systems as developers, users, operators, or adversaries. major security breakdowns have occurred because individuals misplace trust, organizations create perverse incentives, or adversaries discover and exploit design ˚aws. meeting security needs effectively requires understanding that human context. how does cybersecurity affect the realworld business or organization? does it drain human or other resources, or does it re˚ect a balance between keeping the business or organization secure and keeping it economically viable? what investments does it deserve and receive? how does the perceived value of possible practices compare with their demonstrated efcacy? what evidence would help to make that assessment? social, behavioral, and decision sciences provide the reservoir of knowledge for addressing some of these questions and for making other research more useful for those responsible for vulnerable systems. such expertise can also be vital, especially during design, in revealing any disconnects between intention and actual use and in articulating the variety of potential users and their contexts. relevant elds include  economics (e.g., incentives, resources), sociology (e.g., social networks, norms,  criminology), psychology (e.g., motivation, perception, user interfaces), decision science (e.g., risk assessment, communication), linguistics (e.g., framing and conveying information), organizational psychology (e.g., multiteam systems and information sharing), political science (e.g., deterrence and international norms), and organizational behavior (e.g., recruitment, retention, reporting procedures). the law, although not a science, often  synthesizes 2the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences  in security sciencefoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 foundational cybersecurity researchbox 2.1  the law, policy, and cybersecurity researchcybersecurity challenges ranging from privacy to copyright. the relevant law and policy encompass topics from basic constitutional principles related to search and of an intrusion or breach. laws and policies related to the roles and capabilities a an example of a research topic in this space is the formalization of policies and regulations into models that support automated reasoning. this has been applied to security access policies and privacyrelated policies. the formal models allow for an interesting interplay of human reasoning and automated reasoning. aresults from the sciences, with the broad integrative perspective of the humanities (see box 2.1).on the whole, the traditional cybersecurity community does not typically have expertise in social science analysis tools and methods. as a result, it not only relies on intuition, even when science is available, but the community also struggles in its attempts to validate its approaches and falls below scientic standards in experimental design, confounding variables, classes of confounds that occur in different domains or environments, and so on. collaborating with social scientists and understanding their standards for research and publication would bring new tools to bear and yield new insights. the primary psychological barrier to such collaborations is that system designers and operators have  unwarranted condence in their intuitive theories regarding others™ behavior (or neglect to fully consider the implications). indeed, the humanœcomputer  interaction research community has a motto, ﬁyou are not the user,ﬂ to remind researchers and practitioners not to assume that other people share their perceptions and motivations. the primary institutional barrier to utilizing social, behavioral, and decision science expertise is that these disciplines are largely absent from the cybersecurity research community. indeed, the community often lacks even the absorptive capacity to identify these needs, recruit the experfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 23tise needed to address them, and critically evaluate claims about system security that can be compromised by human failures in design, deployment, training, or management. without that expertise, the cybersecurity community must improvise its own theories and research methods that are central to those sciences: experimental design, identifying confounds, metaanalysis, sensitivity analysis, and so on. conversely, because those sciences have not been drawn into addressing the unique challenges of cybersecurity, they have limited experience in applying (and explaining) their research to those domains and in identifying the unique foundational research questions that they pose. to create more effective collaborations, it is essential to nd ways to foster interactions that address the needs of both of these disciplines and the cybersecurity community of researchers and practitioners. part of what crossdisciplinary researchers can do is verify that use of a result in one context still holds true in another context; a result described in one environment may not be found in a different environmentšand the environmental differences and their importance may not be obvious. chapter 5 offers some programmatic suggestions for how such interactions can be encouraged. the cybersecurity community has long acknowledged and understood the gravity of issues such as insider threat and unrecognized design ˚aws (e.g., those inherited from legacy systems). involving the social, behavioral, and decision sciences directly should be more effective than attempting to create cybersecurity versions of those disciplines from scratch.1approaches to security and technology need to be seen in the larger context of all that a user or organization must accomplish in the sociotechnical domain in which it operates. for instance, how can users and organizations be enabled to perform in ways that maintain security, especially when securityrelated tasks and activities often compete with other tasks for time and effort? social science can illuminate what effectiveness means in terms of enabling users to get to their needed activities and accomplishments without signicant time and effort spent on compliance. more importantly, rather than focus only on security mechanisms, researchers can begin or extend this kind of research by getting to the heart of why users and organizations are expected to perform securityrelated tasks. for example, users need to be authenticated, so what are the most effective authentication mechanisms? and which mechanisms are 1 for more examples, see the august 2015 issue of ieee security and privacy, which explored the topic of learning from other disciplines and the importance of a multidisciplinary perspective and described three case studies in which application of another  discipline™s techniques led to important security and privacy insights (ieee security and privacy, 13(4), julyaugust 2015). see also f. stajano and p. wilson, understanding scam victims: seven principles for systems security, communications of the acm 54(3), 2011.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 foundational cybersecurity researchmost effective in which contexts? the answers to these questions depend in large part on how users and organizations perceive the need for authentication, the time and effort required to enact the authentication, and the tradeoffs between authentication effort and accomplishment of the primary tasks (i.e., the actual tasks for which the users are being rewarded). human behavior affects all stages of the life cycle of a cybersecurity system: design, implementation, evaluation, operation, maintenance, monitoring, revision, replacement, and training.2 each stage offers opportunities to increase or reduce vulnerability: how design teams are constituted and managed, how procedures and interfaces are tested for usability,3 what incentives and resources are provided for security, how operators are trained and their performance evaluated, and how the business case is made and understood. stakeholder con˚icts are a wellknown problem in software engineering, and there are methods for detecting and managing them that could be adapted and evaluated for con˚icts involving utility, security, and usability.4 in the modern threat environment, cybersecurity researchers and practitioners also need to be ready for social sciencebased approaches being adopted by hostile adversaries and ready to respond. box 2.2 describes how the emerging internet of things is an example of the multifaceted and multidisciplinary nature of the cybersecurity challenge. one example of a project that integrated social and organizational analysis with technical research analyzed the ﬁspam value chain.ﬂ5 2 caputo et al. specically studied software development and barriers to attending to security and usability needs (d.d. caputo, s.l. p˚eeger, m.a. sasse, p. ammann, j. offutt, and l. deng, barriers to usable security? three organizational case studies, ieee security and privacy 14(5): 2232, 2016).3 ivan flechais developed the aegis method and uml extension to do this (i. flechais, c. mascolo, and m.s. sasse, integrating security and usability into the requirements and design process, international journal of electronic security and digital forensics 1(1):1226, 2007, doi:10.1504/ijesdf.2007.013589). 4 in one of his last lectures at the royal society in 2002, roger needham raised the fact that security goals of the owner who pays for the system are the ones that are implemented, even if they run counter to the interests of the other stakeholders (r. needham, computer security? philosophical transactions of the royal society, series a 361:15491555, 2003).5 k. levchenko, a. pitsillidis, n. chachra, b. enright, m. félegyházi, c. grier, t. halvorson, c. kanich, c. kreibich, h. liu, d. mccoy, n. weaver, v. paxson, g.m. voelker, and s. savage, ﬁclick trajectories: endtoend analysis of the spam value chain,ﬂ in proceedings of ieee symposium on security and privacy, https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~savage/papers/oakland11.pdf, 2011. stefan savage, one of the researchers, reported on outcomes at a 2015 workshop, summarized in national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, continuing innovation in information technology: workshop report, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2016, p. 58: once alerted to the penalties of working with spammers, the banks quickly dropped these accounts, leaving spammers with no way to monetize their sales. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 25box 2.2  the internet of thingsfaceted nature of the cybersecurity challenge. the iot runs the gamut from voicethere are privacy concerns related to data collection and surveillance. hardware and power constraints mean that approaches to improving security that assume which cybersecurity is needed and the range of organizations and institutions that user expectations and systems requirements will vary widely as will the economics and distribute those repairs (for a fee or not). the business model of some of within the company. the iot also poses challenges for regulatory and governmental institutions other devices.aaresearchers discovered that a signicant majority of transactions for spamadvertised products were handled by a very small number of companies. as a result, they identied a nontechnical chokepoint in the system where a combination of a policy and nancial mechanisms (refusing to authorize credit card payments for those companies) signicantly reduced the amount of spam on the internet. spam up to that point had been seen primarily as a technical identication and ltering problem. while switching emails or domains is easy, switching banks is far more difcult for spammers, and this strategy has proved effective in shutting down certain types of spammers. as a result, there has been a substantial drop in sales of  pirated software as a whole.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 foundational cybersecurity researchthe rest of this chapter discusses how social, behavioral, and decision sciences can contribute to research in cybersecurity and to security science; provides a preliminary list of areas that provide opportunities for collaboration; and examines in more detail two specic topics of particular importance to cybersecurity: (1) incentives and resources and (2) risk analysis. the chapter concludes with a discussion of opportunities to improve prospects for interdisciplinary work in cybersecurity. contributions from social, behavioral, and decision sciencescollaborating with social, behavioral, and decision scientists would put their substantive theories and methodological procedures at the service of the cybersecurity community. achieving that integration will, however, require a sustained commitment. without it, though, these scientists will not develop the working relationships needed to achieve and deserve the trust of cybersecurity researchers and practitioners. nor will they have the incentive to broaden their traditional pursuits in order to master cybersecurity topics and translate them into terms recognizable by their colleagues. unless researchers trained in these disciplines become part of the cybersecurity research community, its members will be forced to continue to do the best they can to nd and interpret the relevant literature.6 results and approaches from other disciplines can help improve cybersecurity research and ultimately cybersecurity outcomes. for instance, research in other domains has documented that people do not have a perfect understanding of threats and can be oblivious to some kinds of threats, and has documented how to afford them the mental models and incentives needed for better risk perceptions. social scientists study the human determinants of trust. they nd, for example, that people tend to anthropomorphize technical systems and look for cues similar to what they would get in a human interaction. research into email and ﬁ˚amingﬂ in the 1980s, when email became popular, revealed this.7 people do not appreciate how much information was eliminated when voice and inperson interactions were restricted to plain text. there is research available for many of those sorts of human topics and behaviors. in this example, what are the aspects of trust in humanœsystem interactions that 6 the computing research association recognized the value and importance of these disciplines to computing broadly in a 2015 letter to the house science committee (available at http://cra.org/govaffairs/blog/2015/04/crastatementopposingamericacompetesreauthorizationact/).7 s. kiesler, j. siegel, and t.w. mcguire, social psychological aspects of computermediated communication, american psychologist 39:11231134, 1984.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 27would never have occurred to the people who would study trust in the fullbandwidth, interpersonal situation? those researchers studying interpersonal communication on email asked questions that had not occurred to social psychologists before because there was this new environment that manipulated or constrained people™s behavior in a way that had not occurred to that eld before. researchers might not have been able to make progress on the question of interpersonal trust without technology. and new technologymediated forms of communication continue to pose new challenges to trust between humans. this illustrates a way in which cybersecurity challenges can offer new opportunities for social scientists to explore their own theories.8 with regard to largescale systems such as today™s cloudbased services, an example of the crosscutting nature of the cybersecurity problem relates to a broader sense of trust. how should trust and expectations regarding trust, as they exist in an enterprise or between institutions, be realigned in a digital context? many information systems treat trust as transitive (if entity a trusts b, and b trusts c, then a also trusts c), but, of course, trust does not work the same way or mean the same thing in interpersonal, social, or organizational contexts. moreover, users of such systems may have little idea what string of relationships underlies any direct relationship. the lack of bandwidth mentioned above does not provide a complete explanation, however. even in noncomputermediated interactions, people look for efciencies and use trust cues as shortcuts to carrying out a full risk and benet assessment. for instance, consumers do not read all reviews of a store they might visit. instead, they quickly scan whether it is well stocked, if staff are appropriately helpful and trained (all signs of investment), and, last, whether the other customers are similar to themselves. once they have had a successful experience, they expect that store to deliver in the future. this approach works reasonably reliably in the physical world, but may not be as reliable online where it is inexpensive for adversaries to mimic trust cues and impersonate others. people bring their trust models from the physical world and do not always realize that they do not apply in the online environment. the recently revealed hacks of major political gures show vulnerability and consequences for even (or perhaps especially) prominent individuals.8 see, for instance, j. steinke, b. bolunmez, l. fletcher, v. wang, a.j. tomassetti, k.m. repchik, s.j. zaccaro, r.s. dalal, and l.e. tetrick, improving cybersecurity incident response team effectiveness using teamsbased research, ieee security and privacy 13:2029, 2015. this work applies theories about multiteam systems to cybersecurity incident response teams. not only has that work tested existing theories; it has also led to new processes for documenting multiteam systems, whether or not they involve cybersecurity.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 foundational cybersecurity researchbuilding collaborative communitiesdesigning competent sociotechnical systems will necessarily encompass multiple disciplines (see box 2.3 for a list of such topics). although there are promising subcommunities within computer science and related disciplines,9 there are signicant barriers to such collaboration. crossing disciplinary boundaries requires deep, sustained participation from researchers in the relevant disciplines, not just expecting experts in one area to cover topics outside their home discipline or to work in parallel, hoping that the pieces mesh. if the cybersecurity community is to engage social scientists, there must be compelling reasons why research in cybersecurity would enhance their careers. these incentives may include providing a pathway for publication in social science venues that can lead to tenure and promotion, as well as framing projects so that graduate students can be involved and use the results for doctoral dissertations. such collaborations are not natural acts for researchers in most communities. as a result, it may be useful to engage researchers who are already well versed in several disciplines to act as ﬁtranslatorsﬂ on crossdisciplinary projects. thus, cybersecurity researchers should not be expected to become experts in social science research, but they need to understand the kinds of controls and quality assurance mechanisms that it requires.moreover, it is not likely to be fruitful to expect cybersecurity  researchers to learn about the ndings of other disciplines on their own. indeed, it can be dangerous if they read a single paper (or worse, a secondary account) without knowing the context for the reported ndingšhow strong it is, how consistent with other research. more productive would be to nd ways to foster interactions with other disciplines so that cybersecurity researchers and practitioners can describe the elements of the problems needing solutions, and researchers from other disciplines can identify those aspects of their disciplines that might be useful in providing insights or solutions. it is the job of a researcher in a given discipline to know the literature and implications of that discipline. this avoids the risk of cybersecurity researchers reading small bits of the literature of that discipline, potentially out of context, and applying results  inappropriately. part of what the crossdisciplinary teams do is verify that a result observed in one context still holds true in another, considering differences that may not be obvious to those without professional training. the institutional challenge is to support social, behavioral, and decision science experts as equal partners when working on cybersecurity research 9 see, for example, the symposium on usable privacy and security (https://cups.cs.cmu.edu/soups/), the workshop on the economics of information security (http://econinfosec.org/), and the privacy enhancing technologies symposium (https:// petsymposium.org/). foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 29box 2.3  some social, behavioral, and decision science topics relevant to security scienceinvestments.others.human factorsšusability design and testing; complementing vs. replacing operators. a and so on.legal and regulatory theoryšunderstanding regulation as both technology supporting and suppressing and interactions with political realities.political actors.a multiple antagonists is an important aspect of the security challenge.efforts.10 the point of a meaningful and sustained crossdisciplinary effort is collaboration (not consultation). incentives, resources, and risk in cybersecuritythis section examines in more detail two specic topics of particular importance to cybersecurity practices in realworld environments: (1) incentives and resources and (2) risk analysis.10 the research community in the united kingdom has endeavored to develop such a community in the research institute in science of cyber security: researchers present results to practitioners, and practitioners present challenges and questions. if the questions cannot be addressed with existing results, a discussion ensues that in many cases leads to new research studies or projects to investigate those questions. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 foundational cybersecurity researchunderstanding incentives and resourcesincentives for attackers and, separately, for the industry and marketplace as a whole are constantly in ˚ux. resources are limited, and investments need to be made carefully. one challenge is to understand when cybersecurity measures are worth investing in and when investments in other capabilities would improve security for an organization. insights from the social sciences can help in making this determination. for instance, an analysis of airport security efforts suggests that sometimes investing in improving nonsecurity aspects of the systems can improve security more than security measures.11 even considering the narrower challenge of specically cyberrelated attacks and defenses, examining resource availability for each can be instructive. that examination should consider the incentives shaping the cybersecurity actions of all actors, from the most casual ﬁscript kiddiesﬂ to the most competent agencies of rstrate powers. every attack has desired outcomes, and the more resources (money, time, opportunity costs) required to acheive those outcomes, the fewer of those outcomes there will be. understanding resource constraints on the part of attackers can help with planning and decision making, and can help focus research activity. a commonly repeated claim is that defenders have to defend everything all the time, but the attackers only have to be successful once, meaning that defenders must expend signicantly more resources than  attackers, especially if attackers are trading information and tools. however, there is a symmetric proposition that sometimes applies: defenders only have to catch an attack once and make changes that thwart it worldwide, after which the attacker™s work to exploit that vulnerability becomes much more difcult, not just in terms of the expense of the immediate engagement, but possibly also in terms of consumption of ﬁzero days.ﬂ12but for this to be true, the defenders have to understand the specic techniques used in the attack (socalled indicators of compromise), develop and implement protective measures, and share that information with people and organizations capable of using it. and those indi viduals and organizations have to be incentivized to apply the appropriate remediations. construction of defenses can include mechanisms whereby defenders not only repel an attack, but also engage with sensors, de˚ection, and other processes that enable them to gain useful information related to the methods, motives, and identities of attackers through the 11 h. molotch, against security: how we go wrong at airports, subways, and other sites of ambiguous danger, princeton university press, princeton, n.j., 2012. 12 a ﬁzero dayﬂ is a vulnerability that has not been publicly disclosed or reported before being exploited. the term refers to the amount of time (zero days) available to create xes or workarounds before the exploit becomes active.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 31process of an engagement. unfortunately, too many organizations do not (or cannot) benet from such knowledge when it is developed and are thus incapable of contributing to the common defense. another example of how incentives affect cybersecurity and might benet from such research is how to secure an infrastructure that depends on components developed by the opensource community. how can opensource developers be incentivized to use better tools and practices in the development of software, particularly safety and securitycritical software? more specically, how can they be incentivized to audit or rewrite older code as new classes of vulnerabilities come to light? one potential advantage of open source is the tremendous sharing of tools and practices within the community. as a result, investments from industry and government stakeholders are likely to yield broad benetšand also in˚uence vendor organizations, commercial tool developers, and so on. what should be the obligations of those who use opensource software in their systems? one effort under way to address opensource software security is the linux foundation™s core infrastructure initiative, which was set up in the aftermath of the discovery of the heartbleed vulnerability in openssl. the processes in place allowed a single developer to make updates over a holiday with just a cursory review by a ﬁcommitterﬂ before being added to the codebase. there were only a handful of developers responsible for software that underpins much online commerce activity. in addition, major corporations were running systems that depended on that component, and the extent of that dependence was either not realized or was not seen as a signicant risk by risk analysts or auditors in those corporations. that vulnerability revealed a number of ways in which a combination of technical, social, and organizational decisions and practices led to a signicant problem.the initiative is set up to bring organizations that depend on opensource software together with opensource development communities with the aim of improving practice. it provides funding for individual developers to work on improving the security of their projects and is also grappling with the problem of how to improve practices more broadly. this initiative and its results are an opportunity to understand better what processes, technologies, and structures make efforts to maintain and improve opensource projects effective. risk analysisa formal risk analysis provides a way to organize information about different kinds of weaknesses a system may havešfrom implementation errors to inadequate backup and recovery mechanismsšand the kinds of foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 foundational cybersecurity researchthreats that may exploit those weaknesses. it helps indicate whether sufcient resources, or too many resources, are being applied to mitigating vulnerabilities, preparing for recovery, and so on. assessments of vulnerabilities and the likely costs of an effective response are both made in the context of threat assumptions, which also need to be characterized as part of the analysis, as do consequences. there are essentially two ways to conduct a risk analysis.13 one is to evaluate relative risk of competing procedures and operational decisions in a given system and to understand implications of changes in the system (e.g., design, operation, maintenance) and its operating environment (e.g., tasks, adversaries, threats). this evaluation can clarify how the system works, how to manage it, and how to evaluate the quality of competing approaches. the toolkit for such analyses includes systematic analyses of existing performance data, translation of existing research into model terms, and disciplined expert elicitation.14 a much more ambitious way of using risk analysis is to try to assess the absolute level of risk in a system. often, the latter is unproductive or even counterproductive, as it leads to large, complicated, unreviewable projects with an incentive to leave out things that are not easily quantied. indeed, in 2013, langner and  pederson argued that without effective ways to calculate risk, managers will always underestimate it and choose to underinvest in security.15 instead, they will invest in other areas that they understand better and that will lead to clear payoffs (e.g., prots, better service, or improved efciency, depending on the kind of organization).conducted appropriately, risk analysis provides an orderly way of putting diverse kinds of information on a common platform. risk analysis can inform system design by creating a transparent platform for sharing assumptions about performance of the system™s elements and their interdependencies. it forces thinking about the metrics that are relevant to a decision maker. often things that are readily countable are not the things that are most important. and, as will be discussed in chapter 4, metrics regarding cybersecurity have been notoriously difcult to develop. effective risk analysis can provide tools for structuring and understanding what information can be collected. risk analysis requires inputs from experts in all the factors affecting system performance, integrated with the 13 see b. fischhoff, the realities of riskcostbenet analysis, science 350(6260):527, 2015; and b. fischhoff and j. kadvany, risk: a very short introduction, oxford university press, oxford, u.k., 2011.14 m.g. morgan, use (and abuse) of expert elicitation in support of decision making for public policy, proceedings of the national academy of sciences 111(20):7176œ7184, 2014.15 r. langner and p. pederson, ﬁbound to fail: why cyber security risk cannot be ‚managed™ away,ﬂ brookings institution, 2013, https://www.brookings.edu/research/boundtofailwhycybersecurityriskcannotbemanagedaway/.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the role of social, behavioral, and decision sciences 33analytical tools of decision science. the result is a transparent platform for summarizing, evaluating, and communicating the state of system knowledge. this type of risk analysis is not done widely in cybersecurity, and research here has high potential payoff in taking fullest advantage of knowledge in security science. making progressthe committee identied barriers to collaboration both within and among the disciplines and recommends strategic institutional initiatives to overcome them. it also identies some promising initiatives to integrate social and behavioral sciences into cybersecurity. one is the national science foundation™s (nsf™s) secure and trustworthy cyberspace portfolio, which is a crosscutting effort that explicitly includes social and behavioral science. another recent nsf effort laid out a vision for experimental cybersecurity research that urges a culture of experimentation, an emphasis on multidisciplinarity, grounding basic work in realworld systems, and recognizing the range of human actors who shape system performance.16 more can be done to improve prospects for and outcomes of interdisciplinary research. there are many barriers to effective and ongoing integration of disparate research cultures. in particular, although individual researchers and research projects can look for ways to work across disciplines, sustained longterm efforts that build on results over time and continue to integrate new results from other disciplines will require support and commitment from both the research community and research funders. knowledge regarding user and organizational incentives for or obstacles to implementing changes in practice and policies is needed for such changes to be put into place. an assertive approach to multidisciplinary integration could lead to a culture of foundational research that involves a conscious and sustained interplay between technical advances and incorporating results from the social and behavioral sciences about how to change systems, developer practices, user expectations, and institutional policies. 16 d. balenson, l. tinnel, and t. benzel, cybersecurity experimentation of the future (cef): catalyzing a new generation of experimental cybersecurity research, 2015, http://www. cyberexperimentation.org/les/5514/3834/3934/ceffinalreport20150731.pdf.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34improving cybersecurity requires that security considerations be integrated into the practice of hardware and software development, evolution, deployment, and evaluationšindeed, to re˚ect an understanding of the life cycle of a system. research in many technical areas may embed assumptions (e.g., about agility and expected operations and maintenance) or may be focused explicitly on how to improve postdeployment activities related to systems. that is, research that focuses on how maintenance and system administration affect overall system performance would be part of a holistic approach to cybersecurity. improved cybersecurity requires good technology control, resilience, and reliability, highlighting the importance of research in software quality assurance as well as more traditional notions of software security research. lessons from development organizationsin addition to what the traditional industrial research and academic communities contribute, software development organizations developing commodity systems have made substantial efforts to improve their own practices and the systems they build. these organizations have, over time, created a set of development practices aimed at reducing the prevalence of exploitable vulnerabilities in released software.1 a critical 1 for example, see, microsoft, ﬁwhat is the security development lifecycle?,ﬂ 2016, https://www.microsoft.com/enus/sdl/default.aspx, accessed september 2016. see also m. howard and s. lipner, the security development lifecycle: a process for developing demon3engineering, operational, and  lifecycle challenges in security sciencefoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engineering, operational, and lifecycle challenges 35component of these approaches is the use of feedback loops from discovered vulnerabilities or attacks that are traced to root causes. applied systematically, these feedback loops can lead to new tools or techniques and are fundamental to improving cybersecurity. these efforts can be part of security science, integrating what is known about stateoftheart software engineering practices; social, behavioral, and organizational theory; current understandings of the threat landscape; and models of attacks and defenses. practical lessons from companies working at the cutting edge of secure system development can inform research approaches that incorporate scientic models. there are also opportunities to use wellestablished opensource projects as raw material for analysis (e.g., use of software lifecycle data). in academia, some of this sort of work has been done using opensource software as a source of information as well as working with large software companies.2 the opensource stacks offer for study an abundance of components, libraries, frameworks, and tools. there is also a strong tradition of data analysis of opensource repository data and other data. and, most obviously, in most opensource projects, there is ready access to code, design documents, test cases, analysis  models, process data, historical data, and so on.recently, the national institute of standards and technology issued a report exploring how to reduce technical vulnerabilities in software.3 it offers an analysis of a number of technical approaches that can be applied in the software development process, their potential impacts, and suggestions for encouraging the development and use of a number of measurements and metrics to help assess software. research on how security outcomes relate to development practices and on the use of particular tools and software languages is foundational. cybersecurity outcomes ultimately rely on the properties of the systems developed and deployed in the real world. if it is known, for instance, that a certain class of programming languages and their compilers can prevent a wide class of strably more secure software, microsoft press, redmond, wash., 2006. microsoft has been especially open regarding its tooling and quality effortsšfeatures include (1) diversity of models and tools, (2) clear pathways and incentives for development teams to adopt improved practices without coercion of a mandate, and (3) a creative approach to assessment of benets and costs. 2 for example, see laurie williams™ research group™s efforts to study software security using empirical analysis (a. konovalov, ﬁproject zero,ﬂ blog, may 10, 2007, https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/ undertakes security analysis and publishes regularly on weaknesses in vendor projects). 3 p.e. black, l. badger, b. guttman, and e. fong, dramatically reducing software vulnerabilities: report to the white house ofce of science and technology policy, national institute of standards and technology, 2016, http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/nistir8151/nistir8151draft.pdf.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 foundational cybersecurity researchcommon errors4 that lead to security vulnerabilities, how can their wide adoption be incentivized? managed languages and compilers have been explored and developed through research. understanding which class of errors they prevent is related to the scientic foundations discussed in chapter 1. understanding how to incentivize their adoption would draw on social science knowledge and research. an additional challenge is that developers of systems frequently reuse software components developed by others, including components affecting security. vulnerabilities in these components can result in common vulnerabilities across many systems.5 even when the developers of the components x vulnerabilities, the revisions may not result in updates to all the systems that depend on them. it would be worth understanding how often this occurs, especially in the internet of things (iot) and other embedded devices. one might reverseengineer the software in many different devices to estimate the distribution of shared components and how current they are. another operational challenge is virtualization. as the use of virtualization increases, it is important that security is addressed as an integral part of the technology and the architecture that is being virtualized. this spans the use of various hypervisors in infrastructures to the container approaches to application security. as security is increasingly integrated into virtualized environments, a recurring research challenge is how to assess and measure the effectiveness, completeness, and effective integration of the security measures. lessons from realworld deploymentssystem administrators and other practitioners are often on the front lines of securing systems. it is important to develop mechanisms whereby 4 for instance, in the defense advanced research projects agency™s cleanslate totalsystem architecture research and development effort on a new capabilitybased hardware, new operating systems and lowlevel compartmentalization kernels, and extensions of common programming languages that re˚ect the capability mechanism, it is the llvm compiler extensions that address the hardware and inherently prevent buffer over˚ows and numerous other common security ˚aws. see d. chisnall, c. rothwell, b. davis, r.n.m. watson, j. woodruff, s.w. moore, p.g. neumann, and m. roe, ﬁbeyond the pdp11: architectural support for a memorysafe c abstract machine,ﬂ 20th international conference on architectural support for programming languages and operating systems, asplos 2015, istanbul, turkey, march 1418, 2015; and r.n.m. watson, j. woodruff, p.g. neumann, s.w. moore, j. anderson, d. chisnall, n. dave, b. davis, b. laurie, s.j. murdoch, r. norton, m. roe, s. son, and m. vadera, ﬁcheri: a hybrid capabilitysystem architecture for scalable software compartmentalization,ﬂ ieee symposium on security and privacy, san jose, calif., may 1820, 2015.5 one example is the continued use of windows xp in some embedded applications. openssl is another.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engineering, operational, and lifecycle challenges 37researchers can learn about the real problems being experienced in the eld by practitioners. example areas of overlap include work on resilient architectures, composition of components and properties, logging systems, variability, and conguration. researchers in these areas benet hugely from industry contacts and trust relationships with practitioner colleagues. in cybersecurity, however, knowledge transfer can be difcult, since so much is sensitive, including information about vulnerabilities, threats, events, data affected, organizational impacts, roles of human actors, and so on. in addition, understanding industry norms and expectations, and how they are evolving, is important. for instance, requirements for improved measurement and evaluation regimes will likely have an impact on practices and will need to be accounted for in research. related to the topic of observation, vulnerability research is an area that examines existing, deployed computer systems and networks with the aim of discovering new vulnerabilities. (see box 3.1 for background on how this community developed.) the vulnerability ﬁhackerﬂ research ecosystem is often considered distinct from academic research, but it is clearly not. there are opportunities for academic researchers to learn from vulnerability research and to collaborate with vulnerability researchers. there are also open research questionsštechnical questions regarding the science of vulnerability nding (e.g., codefocused research based on binaries, directed fuzzing,6 and lowlevel analysis as well as such research based on sourcelevel considerations, design of runtime application programming interfaces [apis], and so on) as well as social science questions regarding motivating and rewarding vulnerability researchers to maximize the likelihood that newly found vulnerabilities or classes of vulnerabilities will be mitigated or eliminated from systems rather than being exploited. for instance, how effective are socalled bug bounties in terms of improving the security of systems? how do results from bug bounty efforts compare to other efforts? in terms of communications and reporting, vulnerability research results could be strengthened by including an estimate of the practical effect of what has been discovered. more generally, how can threat information play into this part of the process? there is a set of questions related to understanding attackers and deriving attack trees.7 deriving attack trees can be helpful in considering whether an artifact satises its specication and how complete the specication itself is. for instance, are there implicit assumptions that lead to 6 fuzzing or fuzz testing is a way of testing software by providing large amounts of  random or unexpected data to a system to try to make it crash. directed fuzzing is a variation by which key parts of wellformed input are determined, and those are modied (fuzzed)šfor instance, to ensure that fuzzed input can get past basic checksums.7 an attack tree is a diagram used to describe how a target might be attacked. it can be used to show the many different paths that could lead to a successful attack. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 foundational cybersecurity researchbox 3.1 vulnerability research communityalthough the computing research community has a long history of studying syscomputer systems has enlisted an expanding community of individuals who search and sale to vulnerable individuals or organizations. while some of these vulnerability magazine phrackof buffer overruns in programs written in the programming languages c and c++. the number of vulnerability researchers grew with the importance of protecting internetconnected systems and ongoing discoveries of vulnerabilities that protect users from exploitation of the vulnerabilities they had discovered or their services could help to root out vulnerabilities in products or systems. collaboration and sharing of techniques and results has always been encourtheir products mobilize the vulnerability research community with ﬁbug bounties.ﬂ to use bug bounties to improve product security by paying bounties for discoveries and other organizations pay bounties for discovery of vulnerabilities in shipping bug bounties expand the supply of zeroday exploits available to malicious actors vulnerabilities before they can be exploited. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engineering, operational, and lifecycle challenges 39vulnerabilities? this sort of analysis connects vulnerability and lifecycle analyses with formal verication approaches to yield a more complete understanding of the security of a system. challenges of cybersecurity metricsone crosscutting technical challenge involves metrics.8 developing a metric of the ﬁoverall cybersecurityﬂ of a system is very difcult to do, not least because what is meant by ﬁsecurityﬂ can vary signicantly.9 at a minimum, such a global metric would require a comprehensive model of the system in question. but adversaries can exploit vulnerabilities in deployed systems, whose detailed characteristics may not all be captured by a model, meaning that a global cybersecurity metric dened on a model may not capture all possible attacks. moreover, as herley observes, the fact that there is no single observation that would allow an arbitrary system to be declared secure shows that claims of necessary conditions for security are unfalsiable.10 instead, one can exclude various vulnerabilities. one can think in terms of what sorts of failures are allowed. for example, is the goal to minimize maximum regret, minimize average regret, maximize time between successful attacks of any sort, or something else? regardless of the attack vector, is the goal to have a system where the attack surface is relatively large but where damage of a successful attack is limited, or a system where the attack surface is relatively small but where damage is catastrophic if an attack succeeds? put another way, given xed resources, should one set up a highly regimented, centrally controlled homogeneous infrastructure that is well administered or a federated heterogeneous infrastructure that may not be as well administered? the latter obviously has a larger attack surface, assuming appropriate independence, but the former is more susceptible to complete compromise once penetrated. the larger observation is that security is not only nonbinaryšit does not lend itself to a linear ordering. this makes the concept of security metrics even more difcult.8 see s.m. bellovin, on the brittleness of software and the infeasibility of security metrics, ieee security and privacy, 2006.9 p˚eeger and cunningham have written at length about why security is difcult to measure. see s.l. p˚eeger and r. cunningham, why measuring security is hard, ieee security and privacy 8(4):4654, 2010, http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/msp.2010.60.10 c. herley, unfalsiability of security claims, proceedings of the national academies of sciences 113(23):64156420, 2016. the ideas in this paper were followed up and expanded on in c. herley and p. van oorschot, ﬁsok: science, security, and the elusive science of  security,ﬂ proceedings of the 2017 ieee symposium on security and privacy, forthcoming, http://people.scs.carleton.ca/~paulv/papers/oakland2017science.pdf.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 foundational cybersecurity researchthere are properties of systems and of organizations that can be measured and can serve as a useful proxy against known classes of attacks. proxy measures can be valuable as a way to distinguish between the cybersecurity equivalent of biomarkers (e.g., elements of blood chemistry) and health states (e.g., vision problems related to diabetes). good biomarkers can be valuable, even essential, for monitoring latent conditions and monitoring conditions that are difcult to assess directly (whereas bad ones can be distractions or misleading in dangerous ways). metrics to measure capabilities of organizations could be developed. examples of such metrics include the following: does the organization use publicly available indicators of compromise? for what fraction of its systems and network? does the organization collect data ˚ows on its internal network and external connections? another aspect that might be subject to measurement is commitment to continuous improvement. does the organization learn from its own (and others™) mistakes and adapt? over what kind of time frame?research is needed on metrics that make clear what could be done in terms of organizational practices. in many cases, which practices enhance security in a given context is not known. most organizations have limited resources to devote to security. researchers have an opportunity to investigate the degree to which each security practice is successful in a given context. one goal would be to provide practitioners with an understanding of what improvements and returns on investment an organization could expect for given security practices (and for how long and under what conditions). this kind of research needs the involvement of social scientistsšand especially organizational psychologists, who can characterize the organizations, the people in them, and their practices and offer ways to assess the impacts of new practices. another benet would be to publicly describe the measures practiced by the most successful organizations in a way that makes them available for use as metrics by others. further, this work would need to be kept uptodate. adversaries change tactics and approaches frequently, and the organizations who successfully defend themselves adapt continuously. moving toward better ways to describe and measure security and securityrelated properties of a system and of organizations will involve understanding how science, models, attacks, and defenses interact; how systems are engineered, deployed, and maintained; and how organizations decide to invest in, develop, and promulgate technologies, practices, and policies regarding security. additional research topicsachieving effective outcomes stems from a combination of understanding models of systems, communicating that understanding well foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.engineering, operational, and lifecycle challenges 41across the research community, applying research results, highquality engineering, understanding deployed systems, and a host of social, organizational, and behavioral considerations. in addition to development practices and engineering that prioritize security in the features and functionality of a system, designing systems for a complete life cycle that includes secure procurement, use, maintenance, operations, system administration, and aftermarket activities (such as notications, updates, and repairs) is an important consideration. legacy systems exist and will continue to be usedšthere is a research opportunity regarding how  better to secure them and technical challenges that range from systemlevel reverse engineering to sandboxing to serviceoriented architectures. in addition to the ideas discussed above, potential topics of research and exploration include the following: ł improving the inspectability of trusted subsystemsšfor example, by incorporating security checks (e.g., checksums of common software components across an enterprise) into regular operations and administration to watch for unexpected changes.ł establishing and maintaining a root of trust and conguration integrity. ł exploring architectural considerations such as coupling and minimization of the trusted computing bases, api and framework design issues, resiliency, pervasive monitoring and logging, and so on. ł using a ﬁdevopsﬂ approach where developers and operators are collaborating to improve the security of cloudbased services. (the increased use of cloudbased software services has some security advantagesšfor instance, it is much easier to update the software as needed. on the other hand, the capability to roll out updates and changes rapidly can lead to mistakes that happen at scale, and the security and privacy risks at scale may weigh against cost savings.) ł continuing to improve the ecosystem by which (sanitized) data sets from industry can be shared with cybersecurity experts in academia such that longterm empirical studies can be conducted that will allow a wide range of cybersecurity metrics to be tracked and for formal experiments that test particular research hypotheses to be conducted.ł increasing the resilience of upfront engineering for embedded systems, scada systems, and the iot. in these cases, updates are infrequent, if they are ever done. what incentives are available to make such engineering happen? or, if these systems are made more easily ﬁupdateable,ﬂ how can their use as an attack channel foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 foundational cybersecurity researchbe prevented? and how can users be provided with a high level of condence that updating will not negatively impact their systems? ł developing scientic models that incorporate assumptions about anticipated longevity and usage expectations. ł designing and evaluating the usability of systems (readable user messages, careful selection of the options presented, careful design and selection of the metaphors through which policies and status are communicated to humans, and so on).ł developing effective ways for cybersecurity experts, system administrators, and others who operate the systems to share insights and learn from each other regarding, for instance, designing and testing security protocols, data logging and analysis, and so on. ł working with the operations and engineering communities to begin to understand ﬁground truthﬂ about what is actually deployed and operating in the real world. for instance, to what extent do embedded systems or the iot share securityrelevant components and code? this would require systematic surveys, analysis, and reporting, and possibly include the need to reverseengineer code. ł developing better linkages between research and standards and evaluation criteria for cybersecurity. ł considering observation itself as a fundamental scientic approach and developing an ongoing, realistic understanding of what the universe of deployed systems looks and behaves like through the use of monitoring, logging, and data analysis (realtime, lagged, and forensic) to inform ongoing cybersecurity research efforts and priorities.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.43numerous research agendas for cybersecurity have been developed and promulgated. for instance, a decade ago the national research  council report toward a safer and more secure cyberspace1 argued that both traditional and unorthodox approaches to research are needed in order to create new knowledge and to make that knowledge usable and transferable. that report also emphasized the importance of breadth and diversity in research agendas, because the risks will be on the rise for the foreseeable future, and a broad, diverse research agenda will increase the likelihood that a useful approach to address some future threat can be found. that approach is still relevant today, as cybersecurity challenges have only increased over time. more recently, the federal networking and information technology research and development program issued its federal cyber security research and development strategic plan.2 that plan rests on four assumptions related to adversaries, defenders, users, and technology; outlines a number of near, mid, and longterm goals; spotlights four defensive elements: deter, protect, detect, and adapt; outlines six critical areas, the rst three of which are most relevant to this report: scientic foundations, enhancements in risk management, and human aspects; and offers ve 1 national research council, toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2007. 2 national science and technology council, federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan: ensuring prosperity and national security, networking and information technology research and development program, february 2016. 4foundational research topicsfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 foundational cybersecurity researchrecommendations for the federal government, the rst of which is to prioritize basic and longterm research. this report is intended to complement the strategic planšit emphasizes and elaborates on several specic components of the plan and offers a distinctive framework through which to view research efforts. this section offers a research agenda that can be mapped to components of the strategic plan. however, as per the charge and statement of task for this study, the committee offers a set of research questions to consider that align with its suggested approach for foundational cybersecurity. these are not, however, intended to supersede other agendas. this chapter offers a substantive research agenda to complement and work in tandem with the efforts toward a science of security described in chapter 1. it includes a set of foundational technical problems, an outline of a set of questions that research in the social and behavioral sciences could address, and notes on crosscutting topics, including metrics, assessments of criticality, and evaluation. a brief overview of other recent research agendas is available in appendix c. the committee outlines a foundationally oriented technical research agenda clustered around three broad themes that correspond to those in the strategic plan: detect (detection and attribution of attacks and vulnerabilities), protect (defensible systems that are prepared for and can resist attacks), and adapt (resilient systems that can recover from or cope with a wide range of adversarial behavior). many familiar technical topics fall within these clusters. of course, many challenges span these themes, and understanding how they interact with each other (for instance, protect systems with a design that supports both protection and adaptation) is important. attack detection and attribution the original concept of intrusion detection, as put forth by j.p.  anderson in the 1970s3 and further advanced by dorothy denning in the 1980s,4 was to examine activity in the context of a computer system with the intent of detecting deviations from the norm that indicated malice or attack. the government invested signicant resources in ﬁintrusiondetection systemsﬂ during the late 1980s and 1990s with the aim of building systems that could accomplish the objective set out by anderson. the 3 j.p. anderson, ﬁcomputer security threat monitoring and surveillance,ﬂ april 15, 1980, http://seclab.cs.ucdavis.edu/projects/history/papers/ande80.pdf.4 see d.e. denning, an intrusiondetection model, ieee transactions on software engineering se13(2):222232, 1987; and d.e. denning and p.g. neumann, requirements and model for idesša realtime intrusion detection system, sri international, 1985, http://www.csl.sri.com/papers/9sri/. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational research topics 45task of detecting new or previously unseen attacks is difcult because the wide variety of activities observed in a typical computer system can lead to a high number of false positives.while many current information technology (it) installations incorporate commercial ﬁintrusiondetectionﬂ systems, most of those systems operate by recognizing the signatures of previously observed attacks. new attacks that do not replicate previously seen malicious code, data, or network trafc patterns may not be detected because their activity fails to ﬁlook like an intrusion.ﬂ some highend intrusiondetection systems are capable of characterizing the normal activity on a network and reporting deviations from ﬁnormalﬂ with an acceptably low falsepositive rate.the challenge is to detect behavior in a system that could lead to a ﬁbadﬂ situation. but dening ﬁbadnessﬂ is difcult and contextsensitive and can range from reductions in availability (denial of service) to information theft to corruption of data. for one thing, bad situations can result from the inadvertent mistakes of known good actors, not just from the behavior of attackers. and, attackers can often understand the workings of systems (including intrusiondetection systems themselves) and craft their attacks so as to appear ﬁnormal enoughﬂ to evade detection. effective intrusion detection in the future will need to encompass more than technical signaturebased pattern matching and machine learningbased classiers. it also needs to include early detection of insider misuse,  denials of service, and situational anomalies at many layers of abstraction. organizations can employ redteaming (running attacks against themselves) to help assess their own response and detection and capabilities. an additional difculty is that in the era of big data, the data collected to protect against intruders may grow very large, and managing that data will become its own challenge. with the increasing prominence of cyberattacks (especially in the military, diplomatic, and political spheres), attribution will be increasingly important once attacks are detected. attributionšidentifying with an understood degree of condence who is responsible for a  cyberattackšhas increasing geopolitical signicance. there are both technical questions (e.g., with what condence can attribution be done, of what sorts of activities, and how quickly?) and questions related to trust and evidence. what constitutes evidence, and how can its context (including systemstate parameters) and provenance be effectively conveyed? in addition, there are questions related to how to characterize uncertainty in attribution in ways that decision makers could use. attribution demands both technical approaches and knowledge about adversaries and their capabilities and intentions. moreover, attribution is used for different purposes depending on contextšsometimes to serve as a deterrent and sometimes to serve as the basis for holding foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 foundational cybersecurity researchattackers accountable. depending on the need, there may be different requirements for certainty, precision, and accuracy. improving prospects for attribution and accountability is a research area that should integrate technical and social and behavioral approaches to be most effective. given the limitations of purely technical attribution, attribution is ultimately an allsource activityšthat is, knowledge from multiple domains (not all technical) is brought to bear. although attribution based on characteristics of attacks is in part a technical problem, devising effective ways to hold attackers accountable in a military, diplomatic, or political context is more of an issue for political or behavioral science. there are challenges, for instance, around the nature of the evidence, determining what kinds of evidence are both meaningful and persuasive, and how to convey that evidence in a convincing way to those who need to know. in cases that involve public condence in systems, national security and geo political factors may come into play regarding how much to disclose, making what once might have seemed an esoteric technical challenge into a vexing political problem. finally, transparency and sharing of information related to detected attacks and their attribution would increase the value of attack detection for the infrastructure as a whole. in addition to exploring technical means that might enable organizations to more readily share information, this also relates to social and decision sciences that could help inform how to incentivize such sharing and how to make it effective. defensible design, architecture, and technologiessystems need to be designed to be more defensible. foundational research opportunities in this space range from cleanslate approaches,5 to highassurance computing, to secure software development, to innovations in supporting technologies such as cryptography. specic areas that can help improve the security of software include understanding what classes of vulnerabilities can be detected automatically; research into languages that are more secure by default; support for endtoend security policies along with analysis, synthesis, and compiler technology for automatic derivation of implementations of those policies; improvements in secure enclaves; tools for proving the absence of classes of errors; and virtualizationšas part of a security infrastructure and as a 5 ﬁclean slateﬂ typically refers to efforts to escape legacy constraints and see what can be accomplished using stateoftheart modern approaches that will help us understand existing systems and their constraints as well as point the way toward systems of the future. see, for example, defense advanced research projects agency, ﬁcleanslate design of resilient, adaptive, secure hosts (crash),ﬂ 2015, http://opencatalog.darpa.mil/crash.html, or the qubes os team™s effort to develop a securityoriented operating system, https://www.qubesos.org/intro/. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational research topics 47mitigation. in addition, ever larger systems will generate ever more data, necessitating research into how to manage increasingly large volumes of data, what data to collect and log, what sorts of analytics to apply, and how to do effective analytics in close to realtime. connecting data and analytics to operational needs would also be fruitful. architectural concepts meriting continued investigation include resiliency, information hiding, sandboxing, monitoring and logging, internal analytics, and so on. cryptography is key to many aspects of secure systems and their networked connections and interactions. specic areas that would contribute to improving foundational cybersecurity include the following: cryptographic agility and futureproong (e.g., quantumresistant cryptography and other replacement options), compositional cryptographic protocols, integration of the possibility of sidechannel attacks in algorithm and protocol design, making assumptions more realistic, improving the prospects and performance of homomorphic encryption, estimating not just upper bounds (how hard systems are to break) but lower bounds (to provide a sense of expected longevity), and connecting proofs of cryptographic security to the actual code in veriable ways.also, importantly, improvements in hardware security help make systems more defensible. research opportunities in this space range from techniques for verication of hardware designs to the development of securityenhanced architectures that take full advantage of new hardware capabilities. integrating hardware security efforts with efforts elsewhere in the stack, toward an endtoend approach, can lead to improvements. but understanding interactions between hardware and other components is also important. resilience and adaptabilitynot all attacks can be detected, and even the most defensible systems will have vulnerabilities. thus, deploying systems that are resilient and adaptable is important for improving cybersecurity, and, more importantly, ensuring that work can continue. resilience is an attribute of system operations and is critical to the functioning and operation of networks and the internet itself. resilience needs to be assessed and viewed as a systems operational capability. it is achieved by combinations of many different system features, not only the security components. research is needed on how to operate through cyberattacks and on what it means to operate in a degraded mode and how to develop a system such that degraded operations are valid and sufcient to meet mission needs.66 for one opinion on prioritization and reducing risks of dependence, see r. danzig, ﬁsurviving on a diet of poisoned fruit: reducing the national security risks of  america™s cyber dependencies,ﬂ july 21, 2014, center for a new american security, https://www.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 foundational cybersecurity researchadditional research opportunities include the following: designing for adaptability, recovery, and graceful failover; developing the ability to assess the impact of a compromise and roll back to a precompromise state; physical protection and/or redundancy of key hardware components against electromagnetic pulse or other physical attack; increasing the utility of logging; understanding the tension between updateable (patchable) components and immutable components; and exploring ways to improve operational security. an additional opportunity is the design of systems that incorporate sufcient redundancy or consistency checks to help withstand or detect ﬁsupply chain attacksﬂ (both software supply chain and hardware supply chain) that are conducted (possibly by  insiders) during the development or maintenance process and the problems are far from solved.7 a fundamental tool both for detecting attacks and recovering from them is discovering unexpected changes. one key aspect is inspectability. if something can be changed by an attacker but cannot be inspected by a defender, the defender cannot detect the change except by its effects. even then, the defender may not be able to deduce what component was changed and needs to be xed. detecting the change is critical, even if the effect of the change is completely obscure. for instance, some intel cpus load a specic chunk of data when starting. an unexpected change in that data would be an alerting signal, as would the discovery that one of a batch of otherwise identical cpus is loading a different chunk. this is analogous to what is done to assess software artifacts and compare hashes of them with known good hash values. despite the attractiveness of the concept, it is an open question to nd all the components in a complex system that need to be inspected, and it is not obvious how to implement a complex system in which all changeable components can be inspected. cnas.org/publications/reports/survivingonadietofpoisonedfruitreducingthe nationalsecurityrisksofamericascyberdependencies.7 the defense science board is undertaking a study on the cyber supply chain that will review dod supply chain risk management activities and consider opportunities for improvement (see ofce of the under secretary of defense for acquisition, technology and logistics, ﬁterms of referencešdefense science board task force on cyber supply chain,ﬂ november 12, 2014, http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/tors/tor20141112cybersupplychain.pdf). there is also a defense advanced research projects agency program exploring how to eliminate counterfeit integrated circuits from the electronics supply chain (see k. bernstein, ﬁintegrity and reliability of integrated circuits (iris),ﬂ defense advanced research projects agency, http://www.darpa.mil/program/integrityandreliabilityofintegratedcircuits, accessed september 2016).foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational research topics 49illustrative topics in the social, behavioral, and decision sciencesresearch efforts that link social and behavioral sciences and cybersecurity should be positioned to encourage advances in cybersecurity practices and outcomes. as an example of the importance of the linkage to social, behavioral, and decision sciences, the federal cyber security research and development strategic plan,8 mentioned earlier, also emphasized the concept of deterrence (in addition to detection, protection, and adaptation, discussed above). in the strategic plan, key challenges for deterrence include economic, policy, and legal mechanisms, as well as technical efforts. below are several focus areas where insights from the behavioral and social sciences could prove useful. small examples of how these topics could connect with and inform more traditional cybersecurity topics are offered after each. these are just examples, however, not a comprehensive list. ł how individuals interact with and mentally model systems, risk, and vulnerabilityšimplications for defaults, user interfaces, development tools, enterprise security practices.ł work group activities, knowledge sharing, and norm setting related to cybersecurity policies and practicesšimplications for how enterprise security tools are designed and deployed.ł incentives and practices in organizations; how to manage organizations to produce desired outcomes (in this case appropriate cybersecurity outcomes)šimplications for how enterprise security tools are designed and deployed and which defaults are chosen and promulgated.ł adversary assessment, attribution, interruption, deterrence, and managed engagementšimplications for cyber attribution research.ł understanding and mitigating insider threatšdetecting and stopping the malicious insider remains a hard problem. having the benet of the best thinking from social scientists will certainly help make advances on this problem. for example, what is known about what leads to security or safety infractions not being reported, and to what extent do results from other domains apply in a cybersecurity context? similarly, what is understood about the causes of insider betrayal (such as greed, blackmail, or revenge), and are there demonstrated ways organizations can mitigate these risks?8 national science and technology council, federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan: ensuring prosperity and national security, networking and information technology research and development program, february 2016. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 foundational cybersecurity researchł why and how cybersecurity measures are adopted by individuals, groups, organizations, institutions, and adversariesšimplications for the design of tools and practices and for dissemination, prioritization, and implementation.ł assessing and understanding acquisition practices, business norms, and evaluation practices when software and systems are acquired and what impacts those norms and practices have on cybersecurity requirements and outcomes. ł what effect will the emerging market for cybersecurity insurance have on outcomes? what models of insurance are most appropriate? (options may include approaches similar to insurance for natural disasters, shared risk pools such as for climate change, occupational safety, or some other approach.) ł what makes ﬁhoneypotsﬂšsystems designed to simulate targets and act as decoy to attackersšeffective? ł how can public trust in cybersecurity warnings be enhanced? for example, how has the centers for disease control and prevention maintained the credibility of its warnings, despite some false alarms, and what can be learned from that experience?9ł economics of technology adoption and transition in companies and institutions and in developer communitiesšimplications for the design of tools and practices and for prioritization. for people who do not want new or updated technology, under what conditions are new technology or practices likely to be acceptable? ł understanding the market for zeroday exploits. does the market rely on exclusivity? if so, what mechanisms are used to enforce it? to what extent are intermediaries at work? how could intermediaries be disrupted, discredited, coopted, imitated, or punished?ł cybersecurity skills gap. there is currently a shortage of wellqualied people entering the eld of cybersecurity. the gap is large and growing. a longterm approach will be needed to get more students interested in pursuing careers in cybersecurity. social scientists and educational  researchers can help understand and make progress in closing this skills gap.ł sectoral and intersectoral analysesšhow can coordination be improved? what role does protecting the commons play?šimplications for deployment and prioritization.9 a forthcoming report of a workshop on building communication capacity to counter infectious disease threats from the forum on microbial threats considers the challenge of public trust and warnings in the public health context. for more information, see http:// nationalacademies.org/hmd/activities/publichealth/microbialthreats/2016dec13.aspx. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational research topics 51ł managing con˚icting needs and values at policy, organizational, and technical levelsšimplications for prioritization.ł assessing and overcoming barriers to collaboration and effective practicešimplications for deployment and adoption.ł risk analysisšrisk analyses that gather relevant data and carefully represent all stakeholders can provide guidance on how to communicate across the enterprise about appropriate expectations of system behavior and performance. ł criticality analysisšhow to decompose and assess the criticality of components or capabilities and dependencies among them in large, complex systems.efforts in these areas will be helpful to the cybersecurity challenge if they are connected to systems design, tooling, engineering, and deployment. it will be important to integrate research results from the areas above to ensure that, for example, organizations are more likely to implement effective practices and policies and that developer communities understand how users of tools and systems are likely to behave when confronted with options. one topic that could tie together both organizational science and the cybersecurity research community is the issue of adoption of policies and practices and understanding how major improvements are adopted. the research community has had many signicant ideas over time, but only some of these have been widely adopted. how did this happen? how were these chosen and promulgated? is, for instance, most of the improvement because of adoption by a few highleverage organizations?10 interdisciplinary work of the sort described above can also provide foundational principles of cybersecurity to help inform both research and practice. for example, a foundational discovery from social science work is that diversity in membership can sometimes improve the performance of problemsolving groups.11 this principle reinforces the argument for including social scientists in cybersecurity projects. another example of a foundational principle is that there is a tradeoff between sharing information widely in an organization to improve performance and restricting information sharing to reduce damage if one part of the organization is 10 c.e. landwehr, d. boneh, j.c. mitchell, s.m. bellovin, s. landau, and m.e. lesk,  privacy and cybersecurity: the next 100 years, proceedings of the ieee 100:16591673, 2012; c.e. landwehr, ﬁhistory of us government investments in cybersecurity research: a personal perspective,ﬂ pp. 1420 in proceedings of 2010 ieee symposium on security and privacy, may 2010; c.e. landwehr, ﬁcomputer security,ﬂ tutorial paper, international journal on information security 1(1):313, 2001.11 see, for example, s. page, the difference: how the power of diversity creates better groups, firms, schools, and societies, princeton university press, princeton, n.j., 2008. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 foundational cybersecurity researchhacked. research could be done on how best to make this tradeoff, as well as on how an organization can be designed to function well in the face of local breaches of security. another foundational principle is from the 2016 strategic plan: ﬁusers . . . will circumvent cybersecurity practices that they perceive as irrelevant, ineffective, or overly burdensome.ﬂ as noted above, interdisciplinary research on how to cope with this and produce more usable security tools and practices is needed. criticality and evaluationfinally, there are two overarching challenges that will draw on both social, behavioral, and decision sciences research and the technical research outlined here. one is the question of how to assess and determine the criticality of a particular capability or application in a given context. literature regarding mission assurance and requirements engineering is relevant to criticality. the techniques of contextual inquiry, requirements modeling, and even ethnography are also appropriate to this topic. how can we determine or identify missioncritical aspects of a capability so as to better connect research results and outcomes to missioncritical applications? put another way, what are the essential capabilities for a given mission, and what are those that could be deprecated, if needed? for instance, in some circumstances, maintaining an accurate location at all times might be essential; in others, maintaining the ability to collect and store data is essential. those sorts of analyses and prioritizations require knowledge about the mission and its goals. related to these issues is the question of how systems can be architected so that overall security can be improved at minimal cost. this will entail both deep technical understanding and social, behavioral, and decision science understanding, since the mission criticality of any given system is dependent on the context within which it is deployed. another overarching challenge is nding better ways to evaluate the results of technical research and prioritize the implementation of potentially highimpact results. the basic question of how to transition from research to practice is difcult. and, it is important to support a research community that can do advance work that is long horizon, high uncertainty, possibly nonappropriable, and potentially disruptive of current practices. can we learn from social and organizational theory about how to drive focused change (e.g., leveraging new research results) to improve an organization™s cybersecurity posture and outcomes? the challenge of technology transfer and adoption relates to markets as well; thus, expertise found in business schools and experience found in the venture capital community can also help inform priorities and emphasis. competition foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational research topics 53has both positive and negative aspects. in some cases, breakthroughs in the research community are gamechanging ideas that would, in fact, disrupt industry incumbents, forcing them to innovate at a faster pace. these incumbents might prefer to inhibit the unwanted disruption and the consequent market uncertainty. scholars in business schools and venture capitalists can both offer perspectives on, for instance, how and why particular technologies have succeeded, as well as on how the structures and assumptions of markets and organizations affect technology adoption and penetration. in the federal acquisition context, for instance,  government acquisition efforts can have effects on markets. the federal government obviously has some market power with its prime contractors and their immediate supply chain, although it is a challenge for it to be a smart customer in this regard. but it may have relatively less market in˚uence with enterprise system vendors and opensource foundations. research into how large organizations signal their needs, and thus in˚uence the market, could be helpful. two important issues with respect to both criticality analysis and evaluation are cost and personnel. some laudable approaches to security, such as the u.s. government™s ﬁrainbow seriesﬂ of requirements for government systems, failed to achieve their goals.12 this was in part due to the time and cost of constructing the assurance argument required for such systems, the lack of personnel sufciently trained in formal methods to construct an adequate assurance argument, the limited usability of the fundamental model underlying the approach, and the lack of trained personnel who could evaluate systems that were intended to be the most secure. 12 these were a series of computer security guidelines and standards published by the u.s. department of defense and the national computer security center in the 1980s and 1990s. the most relevant here was the trusted computer system evaluation criteria, nicknamed ﬁthe orange book.ﬂ see s. lipner, ﬁthe birth and death of the orange book,ﬂ ieee annals of computing history, apriljune 2015. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54attaining meaningful cybersecurity presents a broad societal challenge. its complexity and the range of systems and sectors in which it is needed mean that any approaches are necessarily going to be multifaceted. moreover, cybersecurity is a dynamic process involving human attackers who continue to adapt, and it is not possible to guarantee security. instead, we might think in terms of mitigations and continually improving resilience in an environment of continuous attack and compromise. the research cultures that have developed in the security community and in afliated disciplines will increasingly need to adjust to embrace and incorporate lessons and results not just from a wider variety of disciplines, but also from practitioners, developers, and system administrators who are responsible for securing realworld operational systems. this chapter rst explores opportunities to improve research practices, structural approaches that can help in interdisciplinary environments, and ways to address security science in federal research programs. a brief discussion of how to assess and evaluate research and how foundational efforts in cybersecurity research bear on mission criticality follows. opportunities to improve research practice and approachin 2015, the computing research association (cra) committee on best practices for hiring, promotion and scholarship published a best practice memo, ﬁincentivizing quality and impact: evaluating scholar5institutional opportunities to improve security sciencefoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 55ship in hiring, tenure, and promotion.ﬂ1 in it, they recommended an increased emphasis on scholarship and quality over quantity: sheer numbers of publications (or derivative bibliometrics) should not be a primary basis for hiring or promotion, because this does not encourage researchers to optimize for quality or impact. other proxy measures are similarly problematic. for example, whether program committee service indicates an individual™s stature in the eld depends on the conference.that memo also urged changes in the publication culture in the eld: systemic changes throughout the publication culture would help to support better scholarship. with new technology and digital delivery, publishers could remove page limits for reference lists and could allow appendices for data, methods, and proofs. editors, as appropriate, could consider longer submissions with the understanding that, in such cases, a longer review period would be likely. in addition to conferences with published proceedings, other professional gatherings (that do not publish proceedings) might be held where workinprogress could be presented. although this memo was aimed at the computing research community broadly, similar challenges exist in cybersecurity research. beyond negative impacts on scholarship and quality, incentives that reward frequent publication also end up draining time and energy from the pool of reviewers (who are themselves researchers). more generally, looking for ways to improve institutional incentives broadly is important. the cra memo also emphasizes scientic and realworld impact, which has implications for cybersecurity research, since a focus on those impacts can help motivate researchers to do the hard work that is often required to support validity and transition to practice. this work can include prototyping, partnering, and persistence in resolving issues. given the dynamic and rapidly evolving nature of the cybersecurity problem, the research community itself has struggled to develop a sustained science of security. the cra memo above suggests that computing research in general suffers from counterproductive incentives related to publication quantity and an emphasis on shortterm results.2 of course, 1 b. friedman and f.b. schneider, ﬁincentivizing quality and impact: evaluating scholar ship in hiring, tenure, and promotion,ﬂ computing research association, washington, d.c., 2015, http://cra.org/resources/bestpracticememos/incentivizingqualityandimpactevaluatingscholarshipinhiringtenureandpromotion/.2 these problems are not unique to the eld of cybersecurity research. the economist recently discussed challenges of replication and reproducibility in the psychological sciences: ﬁultimately, therefore, the way to end the proliferation of bad science is not to nag people to behave better, or even to encourage replication, but for universities and funding foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 foundational cybersecurity researchsuch problems are endemic across science. the incentives for program managers at funding agencies, for researchers, for journal reviewers, and for conference organizers unfortunately too often skew against the development and practice of solid science. funding agencies are under pressure to achieve shortterm results; the cybersecurity research landscape is multi faceted, making it a challenge to choose focus areas. academic researchers are incentivized to publish as often as possible; a secondary effect of this is the impetus to avoid longerterm efforts and infrastructure work. another side effect of the emphasis on quantity is that the peerreview process itself becomes overloaded, making it hard to nd highquality reviewers. as the community™s intellectual and oversight resources are stretched, incentives to submit rejected work to another venue without making improvements can also increase. in addition to reducing the quality of the literature, that tends to waste the time and energy of the reviewers who had provided comments. another challenge arises due to the nature of academic prototypes. such tools and systems do not, understandably, focus on all of the details that would need to be addressed in a productionquality artifact, which can result in vulnerabilities. but it is important to take care that the innovation being represented in the prototype does not itself interfere with getting details right later (including details related to social and behavioral assumptions). transparency is another challenge in the practice of research. an effective security science demands (among other things) replication of studies in different contexts, not only to verify the results stated in alreadypublished papers, but also to help determine in which other contexts the results hold. but in cybersecurity studies, the realworld participants may be loath to allow publication of research data, for fear of revealing intellectual property (as with testing proposed new security approaches), giving up competitive advantage, or compromising customer or employee privacy. simply demanding openness is unlikely to succeed. if researchers are to devise ways to evaluate others™ work and to perform replications, they will rst have to listen carefully to realworld concerns. given the importance that society attaches to making progress in cybersecurity, it seems valuable to try to address these counter productive incentives and pressures and to help put the community in a better position to make progress. there are opportunities to improve how research is conducted, reported, and evaluated. to situate research within a develagencies to stop rewarding researchers who publish copiously over those who publish fewer, but perhaps higherquality papers.ﬂ in the economist, ﬁincentive malus,ﬂ september 24, 2016, http://www.economist.com/news/scienceandtechnology/21707513poorscienticmethodsmaybehereditaryincentivemalus. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 57oped scientic framework suggests that reports of research results would have to clearly articulate how the research builds on previous efforts: what models of attacks, defenses, and/or policies the research is meant to address; and how it is informed by existing knowledge and integrates with other disciplines. this would serve to advance security science by enabling independent evaluation and assessment of past claims and pointing the way to eventual impacts on realworld systems. with regard to experimental methods and investigational approaches, there are opportunities for cybersecurity researchers to learn from the ways that other disciplines communicate about methodology. for instance, if a project involves human subjects, then make clear the characteristics of the subject pool from which the subjects were drawn, what the selection mechanism was, and what the pool™s general demographics were.3 other questions to consider are the following: how are the subjects compensated for their time? what were the instructions that the subjects were given? what was the design of the study? what were the statistics used? there are wellunderstood ways to perform case studies and surveys when experiments are impractical or impossible. there are also observational studies using wellaccepted techniques from anthropology, sociology, and psychology. in many cases, it is the documentation of steps toward consistency and collaboration that are difcult to do but essential both to the science of security and to enabling crossdisciplinary investigation. identifying threats to the validity of the study and its results can also be helpful. in many cases, the act of having to write that kind of section can bring fresh insights to the problem and also help the reviewers and others who need to evaluate the work. in systems research in computing, there are sometimes empirical components (e.g., the use and analysis of the behavior and performance of specic artifacts) that, although not involving human subjects, could be reported in ways that explicitly draw from the list above to better position the work in the literature and clarifyšto both the original researchers and to ultimate consumers of the researchšthe potential impact and reproducibility of the results. one specic action that researchers and those who evaluate research results could take would be to shift the standards and expectations for how results are presented, especially for research involving human 3 relying on collecting data through mechanical turk studies (in which very low paid workers click through a questionnaire or carry out tasks) may not yield highvalue data. a separate issue is trials carried out on live systems by companies with or without the participation of academic researchers. concerns about ethical and scientic integrity have been raised about some studies where customers may not know they are participating. (for example, a study facebook conducted to examine how emotions spread on social media resulted in controversy over the ethics of experimentation on humans.) foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 foundational cybersecurity researchsubjects.4 social science disciplines have standard ways of reporting  studiesšthe problems, constraints, data, methods, limitations, and results. cyber security research involving human subjects can readily follow those conventions. cybersecurity research in other domains can learn from these disciplines and develop comparable conventions. lack of such structure can impede comprehension and create opportunities for errors of omission (e.g., inadequacies in describing designs, in justifying decisions, in sampling, and so on). for some types of research, structured reporting can help focus the design and conduct of the research that will eventually be reported. the committee identied the seemingly prosaic function of publication practices as the following potentially effective leverage points: ł encourage structured abstracts5šstructured abstracts facilitate rapid comprehension, are easier to read, facilitate effective peer review, are more easily evaluated and comprehended, and lend themselves more readily to metaanalyses. ł encourage clear statements of the research questions and how results relate to improving the understanding or management of realworld problems.ł encourage cybersecurity researchers to become trained in experimental research methods and in explaining how they have been usedšboth to benet their own work, when appropriate, and to inform their work as reviewers and evaluators of others™ work.ł emphasize reporting on methodologies and expect that researchers make explicit any experimental and evaluation methodologies used in their work.ł expect that results be appropriately contextualized, both within the broader scientic literature and with regard to the particular problem domain.ł develop ways to track studies and outputs from projects that encourage researchers to take advantage of reviewer comments and suggestions even when papers are not accepted for publication.ł expect that researchers explain what models of attacks, defenses, and/or policies a particular result is meant to address.ł encourage replication of experiments and results.ł encourage open publishing of data and software.4 see r. maxion, ﬁstructure as an aid to good science,ﬂ proceedings of the ifip working group, workshop on the science of cyber security, 2015, bristol, u.k., http://webhost.laas.fr/tsf/ifipwg/workshops&meetings/67/workshopregularpapers/maxion bristol012315.pdf.5 a structured abstract is an abstract with explicit, labeled sections (e.g., problem, method, results, data, discussion) to allow for ease of comprehension and clarity. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 59ł be explicit about what criteria are used to assess scientic contributions.there have been some efforts to emphasize more structured approaches in reporting and communications by cybersecurity  researchers themselves, including organizing a workshop on this topic,6 but there are opportunities to do more here as well. in particular, emphasizing reporting of this sort can have impact in two ways: it can, as discussed above, help buttress and elaborate the emerging science of security, and it can connect research results to outcomes in the real world. the considerations described above are relatively standard in sciences used to dealing with human subject experiments. although much of this might be seen as processoriented, in the committee™s view, looking for opportunities to encourage these sorts of activities in the research enterprisešon the part of both funders and researchersšcan help induce increased care with respect to how problems are framed and more thoughtfulness with regard to potential impact and leverage of the eventual results. care also needs to be taken to ensure that overly rigid criteria are not used; excessive rigidity runs the risk of excluding categories of relevant and highquality research. the assessment process itself should be under ongoing scrutiny to prevent this. structural approaches toward improved interdisciplinarityto achieve effective interdisciplinary outcomes, work will need to be done across disciplinary boundariesšincorporating experts from many disciplines as well as individuals with deep expertise in more than one discipline.7 there are often institutional impediments related to the difculties of interdisciplinary workšfor instance, regarding the respect members of one discipline give members of other disciplines; ensuring that cultural differences across disciplines re˚ecting conventions for documenting studies and their results are respected; and appropriate incorpo6 proceedings of the ifip working goup, workshop on the science of cyber security, 2015, bristol, u.k.7 at the doctoral level, the university of bochum in germany is pioneering tandem dissertations in the sechuman doctoral training centre. a technical and a social science doctoral student and their primary advisors are paired in ﬁtandemsﬂ and carry out research on the same topic, formulating interrelated research questions and tackling them with knowledge and methods from their background, reaching conclusions within each discipline rst, and then re˚ecting on what emerges when they put the results together. this way, each doctoral student produces a thesis that can be examined and understood by members of their own discipline, but then also provides an additional layer of insight.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 foundational cybersecurity researchration of each discipline™s perspective in each step of the research. a recent national research council effort looked more broadly at the challenges of ﬁteam scienceﬂ and the particular challenges of collaboration. the resulting report, enhancing the effectiveness of team science,8 offers policy recommendations for science research agencies and policy makers along with recommendations for individual scientists and universities. a separate effort explored the challenge of interdisciplinary research specically at the intersection of computing research and sustainability. that report, computing research for sustainability, offered a number of examples9 of opportunities to enhance interdisciplinary approaches that could also be applied to the interdisciplinary challenge in cybersecurity. a revised and extended version of those opportunities that focuses on cybersecurity research follows: ł scholarships and fellowships both for computer science graduate students and for earlycareer professors that provide nancial support for taking the time to develop expertise in a complementary discipline.ł the development of crossagency initiatives that encourage interdisciplinary collaboration in relevant elds.ł support for a regular series of workshops for graduate students and junior faculty on research methods and quality scholarship.ł support for the development of new crossdiscipline structures (perhaps departments or institutes) between cybersecurity and other elds that can create a new generation of students who are agile both in technical aspects of cybersecurity and in one of the social, behavioral, or decision sciences.ł involvement of academic administrators and others who in˚uence the context in which tenure and promotion decisions are made. for instance, incentives could be devised to include providing a pathway for publication in social science venues that can lead to tenure and promotion, as well as framing projects so that graduate students can be involved and use the results for doctoral dissertations. ł community meetings and other opportunities for collaborative and informal intellectual exchange focused on improving methods and approaches separate from the publication pipeline and review process prior to publication and the review process. the national 8 national research council, enhancing the effectiveness of team science, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2015. 9 see ﬁprogrammatic and institutional opportunities to enhance computer science for sustainabilityﬂ in national research council, computing research for sustainability, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2012.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 61security agency™s lablets advance this approach, and much activity at conferences is of this sort. ł institutional structures that support multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary teams focused on a problem or set of problems over an appropriately long period of time.ł the possibility of funding and support for one or more years for individuals to work in small teams on specic topics.ł coordination between academic research in cybersecurity and nontraditional industrial partners in sectors beyond the large information technology companiesšto scope problems, help train students, and crossfertilize ideas.ł regular, highlevel summits involving cybersecurity and social science expertsšpractitioners and researchersšto inform shared research design, assess progress, and identify gaps and opportunities.another role that funding agencies can play is to fund longerterm projects and to be tolerant of uncertainty, particularly in these multidisciplinary and crossdisciplinary, potentially highimpact research areas. in addition to applying knowledge from other disciplines to the cybersecurity challenge, foundational cybersecurity efforts would also benet from a deeper understanding of methods from other disciplines and how they might apply to cybersecurity. applying methods of social, behavioral, and decision sciences in cybersecurity research, where appropriate, is a way to enhance foundational approaches and also to open up potentially fruitful areas of insight and inquiry that more traditional technically focused agendas might overlook. in the committee™s view, there are fundamental research directions in the social sciences that could help increase understanding of and help solve some cybersecurity problems. however, these directions are not well explored and are typically not treated as a rstclass area of research in either the social sciences or in computer science and cybersecurity research. areas from which cybersecurity research efforts might benet include the following: ł predictive modelsšintegrating behavioral science in formal models; elicitation of expert knowledge;ł failure analysisšpredicting the scope and impact of a component compromise in a largescale system;ł policy analysisšespecially the role of regulation and uncertainty analysis;ł program evaluationšcriteria setting and standards of evidence; andł communicationšfor education of decision makers, researchers, and users and deployers of technologies.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 foundational cybersecurity researchaddressing foundational cybersecurity research in federal programsthe committee was asked to consider gaps in the federal research program. in the committee™s view, the security community and funders understand the breadth of the challenge. the networking and information technology research and development program™s 2016 federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan (summarized brie˚y in appendix c) lays out a broad approach to addressing it. and, as an earlier national research council report10 noted, emphasizing progress on all fronts along with experimentation in terms of programmatics is still importantša diversity evident in the different approaches and strategies among the federal agencies supporting cybersecurity research. the gaps that the committee identies are not strictly topics or problems that are not being addressed. instead, the committee recommends shifts in approaches to how programs and projects are framed, and an emphasis on seeking evidence of connections with and integration of science of security; relevant social, behavioral, and decision sciences; and operational and lifecycle understandings. cybersecurity poses grand challenges that require unique collaborations among the best people in the relevant core disciplines, who typically have other options for their research. sponsors of cybersecurity research need to create the conditions that make it worth their while to work on these issues. if successful, cybersecurity research will benet not only from the substantive knowledge of the social, behavioral, and decision sciences, but also from absorbing their research culture, with respect to theory building, hypothesis testing, method validation, experimentation, and knowledge accumulationšjust as these sciences will learn from the complementary expertise of the cybersecurity community. thus, these collaborations have transformative potential for the participating disciplines, as well as the potential to address the urgent practical problems of cybersecurity.the traditional decoupling of academic research from engineering, quality control, and operations leaves gaps in a domain like cyber security, where solutions are needed for systems deployed at scale in the real world. these gaps spotlight the importance of not just technology transfer, but of incorporating a lifecycle understanding (from development to deployment, maintenance, administration, and aftermarket activities) into proposed foundational research approaches. this incorporation can lead 10 national research council, toward a safer and more secure cyberspace, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2007. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 63to better outcomes as well as improvements in communicating how and why certain things should be done. many of the technical research questions this committee highlights above are addressed in various funding portfolios and in the recent strategic plan. the committee urges an emphasis on situating research efforts in security science within the framework outlined in this report, which can help spotlight highleverage opportunities for impact, and on thinking about how those opportunities can be translated into practice and deployed at scale. this goes beyond a traditional technology transfer challengešwhich is hard enoughšto connecting research results with anticipated social, behavioral, and organizational implications and with what practitioners understand about managing the full life cycle of deployed technologies. assessment and evaluationwith regard to all of these efforts, agencies that sponsor research in cybersecurity will continue to face a signicant challenge in assessing the effectiveness of their investments. in part, that is the nature of research, where the ultimate payoffs can be quite large but are usually unpredictable and often come long after the research was carried out.11 even so, successful technology transfer and the implementation of realworld systems or subsystems that apply research results provide some measures of research quality and effectiveness. there are extrinsic impediments related to industry practices and norms that thwart the transition of promising research ideas into practice. for example, some industry norms and expectations can hinder the adoption of ideas and may even create counterincentives. these norms, many of which are unique to softwarebased systems, relate to license 11 the computer science and telecommunications board™s (cstb™s) recently revised ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram links government investments in academic and industry research to the ultimate creation of new information technology industries with multibilliondollar markets. used in presentations to congress and executive branch decision makers and discussed broadly in the research and innovation policy communities, the tire tracks gure dispelled the assumption that the commercially successful it industry is selfsufcient, underscoring through long incubation periods of years and even decades. the gure was updated in 2002, 2003, and 2009 reports produced by the cstb and more recently in 2012 (national research council, continuing innovation in information technology, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2012). in 2016, the cstb issued a summary of presentations by leading academic and industry researchers and industrial technologists describing key research and development results and their contributions and connections to new it products and industries, illustrating these developments as overlays to the ﬁtire tracksﬂ graphic (national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine, continuing innovation in information technology: workshop report, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2016).foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 foundational cybersecurity researchterms (e.g., as is, no warranty, and limits on acceptance evaluation with respect to security), process compliance, anticipated risk and reward (and associated measurement difculties), and intellectual property protection. technical advances can help address these challenges. these norms are well established and may not evolve in ways that enhance incentives for improved security. but research leaders need to be aware of these extrinsic factors as they develop ideas and plan for potential transition into practice. and, of course, advances in the technology might possibly result in adaptation of the norms to enhance the ability to develop, evaluate, and evolve improvements in security. this space itself offers opportunities for research efforts that may reveal the interplay of these norms with the potential transition and acceptance of new technologies. unfortunately, technology transfer can be a process of years for some research results. moreover, a rigid focus on traditional technology transfer could drive sponsors to support only advanced development or research that leads to incremental improvements in technology, while the current state of cybersecurity clearly calls for more extensive changes.thus, in addition to monitoring technology transfer of applied or incremental results, sponsors can consider the following ways of assessing research:ł publication of research results in highquality journals or conference proceedings is the canonical indicator of research quality. to the extent that journals or conferences include editors, reviewers, or program committee members from development organizations and from other disciplines, their selections may be an especially useful indication of the longterm value of research (see also the next point). ł creating opportunities for and then examining results of experimental prototype deployments can be instructive. experimentation with prototypes offers the opportunity to expose hidden assumptions about reality and to demonstrate (or fail to demonstrate) scalability and feasibility. ł technology transfer ultimately requires that results be adopted by development organizations that build real systems, by security vendors, and by organizations and institutions that deploy systems. many development organizations and security vendors monitor research results with the aim of identifying potentially useful ideas or techniques. feedback on research from such organizations, either in the form of informal reactions at conferences or in response to surveys or questions by sponsors, will give the sponsors a sense of research quality. similarly, other positive signals to look for are when technical research results explicitly take foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 65into account the behavioral and organizational considerations that in˚uence adoption, or when the primary focus is on social and behavioral aspects of cybersecurity practices and policies and those results are recognized within a multidisciplinary research community. it is important to note that adoption is only one signal, however, and relying too much on it may inadvertently neglect disruptive approaches (e.g., socalled cleanslate efforts) that would likely have a longer path to impact and recognition. ł to the extent that research results lead to the formation of startup companies or the hiring of researchers by commercial enterprises, sponsors should consider that a positive sign for the research effort. however, these are steps along the way, not outcomes of better security. citations of research results by publications and researchers that are themselves successful at technology transfer (or in descriptions of successful products) are an indication of research quality, though a ﬁlagging indicatorﬂ that will likely be available only years after the initial research has been completed.none of these approaches is likely to be a surprise to research funders, nor a panacea that guarantees accurate assessment of results. however, all may be worth sponsors™ consideration as they evaluate their research programs and associated projects they have chosen to sponsor and  researchers they have chosen to support. mission criticalitythe committee was also asked to consider how foundational efforts in cybersecurity bear on missioncritical applications and challenges, such as those faced by agencies in the special cyber operations research and engineering (score) interagency working group (often in classied domains). first, whatever the application in whatever domain (from protecting systems that contain information on an intelligence agency™s sources and methods, to preventing the servers running the latest bestselling augmented reality mobile game from being compromised, to general deterrence efforts), the same fundamental assumptions about the nature of technological systems and about human nature apply. thus, foundational efforts, in cybersecurity as described in this report, could yield results that are broadly applicable. second, one signicant distinction that may bear on what research problems are tackled and how well solutions apply across classied and unclassied efforts in cybersecurity involves the nature of threat and what is known and by whom about that threat. even so, as privatesector companies and enterprises are increasingly seeking to secure themselves generally against ﬁnationstateﬂlevel foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 foundational cybersecurity researchattacks, that distinction may be less critical. third, people and processes need to be taken into account. in classied environments whose systems need to be secured, different kinds of security training might be done and different controls in terms of conguration and processes put in place than are likely in most privatesector organizations. this could have an impact on how effective certain security approaches and tools arešbut the general point that social, behavioral, and decision sciences in tandem with technical cybersecurity research can help inform better choices in terms of people, processes, and institutional policies still holds. there are undoubtedly research efforts in the classied and unclassied domains that leverage similarities in basic technologies, the nature of humans interacting with systems, and the nature of organizations.  making those connections is not always done, however. it falls to funders, the researchers, and the consumers of research to ask for and seek out those connections. in both directions, problems and assumptions may need to be translated across the classied/unclassied boundary, but foundational results should be applicable in each. in some cases, experts in a classied environment can develop study problems and data sets that are accessible to unclassied researchers. if this is accomplished well, then results can be translated into the classied setting. it will be particularly important to nd and develop people who are skilled at developing and communicating these translations. specic areas of inquiry that could have direct applicability to score missions include attribution and defense against and recovery from attacks by insidersšprogress on both would benet from the fourpronged approached recommended here. how can investments in foundational work of the sort the committee urges here be useful to those defending and supporting our nation™s most critical infrastructures and defense systems? the committee believes that increasing emphasis on a deep understanding of general classes of attacks, policies, and defenses, and carefully mapping where particular research results or technology solutions t within that understanding, can provide decision makers a more thorough and grounded understanding of likely effectiveness for their situations. similarly, improved integration of social, behavioral, and decision science methods, results, and inputs on particular research projects will enable a more nuanced understanding of cybersecurity challenges. and score agencies are likely to benet, especially from work that helps them understand where the leverage points for improvement are likely to bešwhich may not always be solely technical in nature. * * *foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional opportunities to improve security science 67the challenge of cybersecurity and the urgent nature of risks to  society posed by insecure systems and a dynamic and fastchanging environment understandably promotes an emphasis on moving fast. paradoxically, however, the eld is still so comparatively new and the nature of the challenge is so hard, that indepth scientic research is needed to understand the very nature of the artifacts in use, the nature of software, the complexity and interdependencies in these humanbuilt systems, and importantly, how the humans and organizations who design, build, use, and attack the systems affect what can be known and understood about them. encouraging research to address these challenges will require sustained commitments and engagements. thus, programs that encourage longhorizon projects where these connections can be worked out will be important. the fact that these systems are designed, developed, deployed, and used by humans, and that humans are also the adversaries behind attacks on them, means that the work done in the social, behavioral, and decision sciences will be critical. deepening our understanding of humans and human organizations, and linking that understanding to more traditional research in cybersecurity, is necessary to develop a robust security science and to deploy systems most effectively so that they do what they were designed to do, to say nothing of securing them against human adversaries. cybersecurity can be viewed as a cutting edge of computing that demands a broad, multidisciplinary effort. addressing the global cybersecurity challenge needs not just computer science, engineering science, and mathematics, but also draws on what we know and understand about human nature and how humans interact with and manage systemsšand each other. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71susan alexander, iarpaross anderson, university of cambridgel. jean camp, indiana universitydeanna caputo, mitrecharles clancy, virginia techdave clark, massachusetts institute of technologyjerry davis, university of michigandrew dean, defense advanced research projects agencydonna dodson, national institute of standards and technologyjeremy epstein, national science foundationmike fisk, los alamos national laboratoryerica fuchs, carnegie mellon universityrobert herklotz, air force ofce of scientic researchlee holcomb, cyber security research alliancesteve king, department of defensestuart krohn, national security agencyjohn manferdelli, intelbrad martin, special cyber operations research and engineering interagency working groupkeith marzullo, national science foundationdoug maughan, science and technology directorate, department of homeland securitytyler moore, southern methodist universitybill newhouse, national institute of standards and technologyabriefers to the study committeefoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72 foundational cybersecurity researchedward rhyne, department of homeland securitychuck romine, national institute of standards and technologyangela sasse, university college londonsami saydjari, cyber defense agencywilliam scherlis, carnegie mellon universityfred schneider, cornell universityhoward shrobe, defense advanced research projects agencygary tartanian, uscybercom operationscliff wang, department of energyyul williams, national security agencyneal ziring, information assurance directorate, national security agencyfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.73baruch fischhoff, cochair, is howard heinz university professor, department of engineering and public policy and the institute for politics and strategy, carnegie mellon university. a graduate of the detroit  public schools, he holds a b.s. (mathematics, psychology) from wayne state university and a ph.d. (psychology) from the hebrew university of  jerusalem. he is a member of the national academy of medicine and has served on many committees of the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. he is past president of the society for judgment and decision making and of the society for risk analysis. he has chaired the food and drug administration risk communication advisory committee and been a member of the eugene commission on the rights of women, the department of homeland security (dhs) science and technology advisory committee, and the environmental protection agency scientic advisory board, where he chaired the homeland security advisory committee. his books include acceptable risk, risk: a very short introduction, judgment and decision making, a twostate solution in the middle east, counting civilian casualties, and communicating risks and benets. he has cochaired three national academies™ sackler colloquia on the science of science communication. peter j. weinberger, cochair, has been a software engineer at google, inc., since 2003, working on software infrastructure. he has a ph.d. in mathematics (number theory) from the university of california, berkeley (uc berkeley). after a stint at the university of michigan, ann arbor, he bcommittee biographiesfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 foundational cybersecurity researchmoved to bell labs. at bell labs, he worked on unix and did research on various topics before moving into research management, ending up as information sciences research vice president. after at&t and lucent split, he moved to renaissance technologies, a technical trading hedge fund, as head of technology. he has been on the army science board, and for the national academies he served on the computer science and telecommunications board and participated in a number of studies, including one that produced asking the right questions about electronic voting and one that produced bulk collection of signals intelligence: technical options. from 2008 to 2016, he was on the information security and privacy advisory board, the last 2 years as chair.jandria s. alexander is principal director of the cyber security subdivision, the aerospace corporation. ms. alexander has been with the aerospace corporation since 1992 and leads cyber and information assurance architecture denition, technology assessments, vulnerability and countermeasures experiments, cyber command and control, and security engineering and acquisition for the department of defense, the intelligence community, and civil customers. she has a b.s. in computer science from brandeis university and an m.s. in technology management from american university.annie i. antón is a professor in and chair of the school of interactive computing at the georgia institute of technology. she has served the national defense and intelligence communities in a number of roles since being selected for the institute for defense analyses (ida)/defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) defense science study group in 2005 and 2006. her current research focuses on the specication of complete, correct behavior of software systems that must comply with federal privacy and security regulations. she is founder and director of theprivacyplace.org. dr. antón currently serves on various boards and committees, including the following: the dhs data privacy and  integrity advisory committee, an intel corporation advisory board, and the future of privacy forum advisory board. she is a former member of the computing research association (cra) board of directors, the national science foundation (nsf) computer and information science and engineering directorate advisory council, the distinguished external advisory board for the trust research center at uc berkeley, the darpa information science and technology study group, the u.s. association for computing machinery public council, the advisory board for the electronic privacy information center in washington, d.c., the georgia tech alumni association board of trustees, the microsoft research university relations faculty advisory board, the craw, and the georgia tech advisory foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 75board. prior to joining the faculty at georgia tech, she was a professor of computer science in the college of engineering at north carolina state university. dr. antón is a threetime graduate of the college of computing at the georgia institute of technology, receiving a ph.d. in 1997 with a minor in management and public policy, an m.s. in 1992, and a b.s. in 1990 with a minor in technical and business communication.steven m. bellovin is a professor of computer science at columbia university, where he does research on networks, security, and especially why the two do not get along. during the 2012œ2013 academic year, he was on leave from the university and serving as the chief technologist of the federal trade commission. he joined the faculty in 2005 after many years at bell labs and at&t labs research, where he was an at&t fellow. he received a b.a. degree from columbia university and an m.s. and a ph.d. in computer science from the university of north carolina, chapel hill. while a graduate student, he helped create netnews; for this, he and the other perpetrators were given the 1995 usenix lifetime achievement award (the flame). he is a member of the national academy of engineering (nae) and is serving on dhs™s science and technology advisory committee and the technical guidelines development committee of the election assistance commission. he has also received the 2007 national institute of standards and technology/national security agency (nsa) national computer systems security award. dr. bellovin is the coauthor of firewalls and internet security: repelling the wily hacker and holds a number of patents on cryptographic and network protocols. he has served on many national academies™ study committees, including those on information systems trustworthiness, the privacy implications of authentication technologies, and cybersecurity research needs; he was also a member of the information technology subcommittee of a study group on science versus terrorism. he was a member of the internet architecture board from 1996 to 2002; he was codirector of the security area of the internet engineering task force from 2002 through 2004.seymour e. goodman is a regents™ professor, professor of international affairs and computing, and adjunct professor of history at  georgia tech. he also serves as a codirector of the center for international  strategy, technology, and policy and was founding director and now director  emeritus of the sam nunn security program (nunnmacarthur program). dr. goodman studies international developments in the information technologies and technological innovation and its effective implementation and deployment in largescale con˚icts. he has over 150 publications and has served on many academic, government, and industry editorial, study, and advisory committees, including the computer science and telecomfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 foundational cybersecurity researchmunications board of the national academies. he is a lifetime national associate of the national academy of sciences. prior to coming to georgia tech he was the director of the consortium for research in information security and policy, with the center for international security and cooperation at stanford university. he has held a variety of appointments at the university of virginia (applied mathematics, computer science, soviet and east european studies), the university of chicago (economics), princeton university (the woodrow wilson school of public and international affairs, mathematics), and the university of arizona (mis, soviet and russian studies, middle eastern studies). dr. goodman was an undergraduate at columbia university and obtained his ph.d. from the california institute of technology in 1970, where he worked on problems of applied mathematics and mathematical physics.ronald graham currently holds the irwin and joan jacobs endowed chair in computer and information science in the computer science and engineering department at the university of california, san diego (ucsd). he is also chief scientist of the california institute for telecommunications and information technology at ucsd. he joined the ucsd faculty in 1999 after a 37year career with at&t. dr. graham received his ph.d. in mathematics from uc berkeley in 1962. from 1962 to 1995, he was director of information sciences at at&t bell labs, and from 1996 to 1999 he was chief scientist at at&t labs. he has held visiting professorships at rutgers university, princeton university, caltech, stanford university, and the university of california, los angeles, and holds six honorary doctorates. dr. graham is a member of the national academy of sciences and has served as its treasurer for 12 years. he is a past president of the american mathematical society and the mathematical association of america. he is a fellow of the american association of arts and sciences, the society for industrial and applied mathematics, the association for computing machinery (acm), and the new york academy of sciences. dr. graham has won numerous awards in the eld of mathematics, including the polya prize in combinatorics, the euler medal in combinatorics, the allendoerfer award, the ford award, and the steele prize for lifetime achievement in mathematics (from the american mathematical society).carl landwehr is lead research scientist at the cyber security and privacy research institute at george washington university and an independent consultant. he received his b.s. degree in engineering and applied science from yale university and m.s. and ph.d. degrees in computer and communication sciences from the university of michigan, where he helped implement the merit packetswitched network. from foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 771976 to 1999, he conducted research in what would now be called cybersecurity at the naval research laboratory. from 1999 to 2001, while at mitretek systems, he assisted several of darpa™s information assurance programs. from 2001 to 2005 and again from 2009 to 2011, he headed the nsf™s research programs to advance trustworthy computing, receiving the nsf director™s award for meritorious service in 2012. from 2005 to 2009, he managed programs in both defensive and offensive cyber operations at iarpa (the intelligence advanced research projects activity) and its predecessor organizations. he has been active in the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee), including two terms as editorinchief of ieee security and privacy magazine, in the acm, and in international federation for information processing (ifip) working groups 11.3 and 10.4, and he has received a variety of awards for research and service from these organizations. he has served on several national academies™ study committees and has advised darpa, nsa, sandia national laboratories, massachusetts institute of technology lincoln laboratories, australia™s defence science and technology organisation, israel™s council for higher education, and similar institutions. he has taught courses in computer science at purdue university, georgetown university, the university of maryland, and virginia tech. in 2012, he was in the rst class of 11 individuals inducted into the cyber security hall of fame. in 2015œ2016, he served as visiting mcdevitt professor of computer science at lemoyne college, where he developed and taught a new course, ﬁcybersecurity for future presidents.ﬂ in 2016, he was elected to the board of directors of the nonprot center for democracy and technology.steven b. lipner is executive director of safecode, a nonprot organization dedicated to increasing trust in information and communications technology products and services through the advancement of effective software assurance methods. he retired in 2015 as partner director of software security in trustworthy computing at microsoft corporation. his expertise is in software security, software vulnerabilities, internet security, and organization change for security. he is the founder and longtime leader of the security development lifecycle (sdl) team that has delivered processes, tools, and associated guidance and oversight that have signicantly improved the security of microsoft™s software. mr. lipner has over 40 years of experience as a researcher, development manager, and general manager in information technology security. he served as executive vice president and general manager for network security products at trusted information systems and has been responsible for the development of mathematical models of security and of a number of secure operating systems. mr. lipner was one of the initial 12 members of the u.s. computer systems security and privacy advisory board (now foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 foundational cybersecurity researchthe information security and privacy advisory board) and served two terms and a total of 10 years on the board. he is the author of numerous professional papers and has spoken on security topics at many professional conferences. he is named as inventor on 12 u.s. patents in the elds of computer and network security and has served on numerous scientic boards and advisory committees, including as a current member of the national academies™ committee on future research goals and directions for foundational science in cybersecurity and the committee on law enforcement and intelligence access to plaintext information in an era of widespread strong encryption: options and tradeoffs. mr. lipner was elected in 2015 to the national cyber security hall of fame and in 2017 to the national academy of engineering.roy maxion is a research professor in the computer science, machine learning and electrical and computer engineering departments at carnegie mellon university (cmu), and director of the cmu dependable systems laboratory. his general research interests are rooted in system dependability and reliability, recently turning toward information assurance, behavioral biometrics, and selected aspects of computer security. he has been program chair of the international conference on dependable systems and networks and a member of the executive board of the ieee technical committee on fault tolerance, the u.s. defense science board, and various professional organizations. he has consulted for the u.s. department of state as well as for numerous industry and government bodies. he is presently on the  editorial boards of the international journal of biometrics and ieee security and privacy and is past associate editor of ieee transactions on dependable and secure computing, the ieee transactions on information forensics and security, and international journal of security and networks. he is an elected member of the ifip working group 10.4 on dependable systems. dr. maxion is a fellow of the ieee.greg morrisett is the dean of computing and information sciences (cis) at cornell university, which houses the departments of computer science, information science, and statistical sciences. from 2004 to 2015, he held the allen b. cutting chair in computer science at harvard university. at harvard, he also served as the associate dean for computer science and electrical engineering and as the director of the center for research on computation and society. before harvard, dr. morrisett spent 8 years on the faculty of cornell™s computer science department. he received his bachelor™s degree from the university of richmond and both his master™s and doctorate degrees from cmu. his research focuses on the application of programming language technology for building secure, reliable, and highperformance software systems. a common theme is foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 79the focus on systemslevel languages and tools that can help detect or prevent common vulnerabilities in software. past examples include typed assembly language, proofcarrying code, software fault isolation, and control˚ow isolation. recently, his research focuses on building provably correct and secure software, including a focus on crypto graphic schemes, machine learning, and compilers. dr. morrisett is a fellow of the acm and has received a number of awards for his research on programming languages, type systems, and software security, including a presidential early career award for scientists and engineers, an ibm faculty fellowship, an nsf career award, and an alfred p. sloan fellowship. he served as chief editor for the journal of functional programming and as an associate editor for acm transactions on programming languages and systems, information processing letters, and the journal of the acm. he currently serves as coeditorinchief for the research highlights column of communications of the acm. in addition, dr. morrisett has served on the darpa information science and technology study group, the nsf computer and information science and engineering advisory council, the max planck institute for software systems advisory board, the cra board, microsoft research™s technical advisory board, microsoft™s trustworthy computing academic advisory board, and the fortify technical advisory board. brian snow is an independent security advisor. as a mathematician/computer scientist, mr. snow taught mathematics and helped lay the groundwork for a computer science department at ohio university in the late 1960s. he joined the nsa in 1971, where he became a cryptologic designer and security systems architect. dr. snow spent his rst 20 years at the nsa doing and directing research that developed cryptographic components and secure systems. many cryptographic systems serving the u.s. government and military use his algorithms; they provide capabilities not previously available and span a range from nuclear command and control to tactical radios for the battleeld. computer security, network security, and strong assurance were major aspects for these systems. he created and managed the nsa™s secure systems design division in the 1980s. he has many patents, awards, and honors attesting to his creativity. his later years at the nsa were the model for what it means to be a senior technical director at the nsa (similar to a chief scientist or senior technical fellow in industry); he served in that capacity in three major mission components: the research directorate (19941995), the information assurance directorate (19962002), and the directorate for education and trainingšthe nsa™s corporate university (20032006). he was the rst technical director appointed at the ﬁkey componentﬂ level at the nsa, and the only ﬁtechieﬂ at the nsa to serve in such a role across three foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80 foundational cybersecurity researchdifferent directorates. throughout those years, his credo was as follows: ﬁmanagers are responsible for doing things right; technical directors are responsible for nding the right things to do.ﬂ in all of his positions, he insisted that the actions the nsa took to provide intelligence for our national and military leaders should not put u.s. persons or their rights at risk. he was a leading voice for always assessing the unintended consequences of both success and failure prior to taking action. mr. snow retired in 2006 and is now a security consultant and ethics advisor. he received his b.s. and m.s. in mathematics from the university of colorado in 1965 and 1967, respectively, and did additional graduate course work in computer science at ohio university from 1969 to 1971 and in mathematics at the university of maryland from 1972 to 1973.philip venables is the chief operational risk ofcer at goldman sachs. he is a member of the firmwide risk committee. previously, mr. venables served as chief information risk ofcer and head of technology risk. he joined goldman sachs as a vice president in london in 2000 and transferred to new york in 2001. mr. venables was named managing director in 2003 and partner in 2010. prior to joining the rm, he was chief information security ofcer at deutsche bank and also functioned as the global head of technology risk management for standard chartered bank. before that, mr. venables served in various technology, network management, and software engineering roles at a number of nance, energy, and defense organizations. he serves on the executive committee of the u.s. financial services sector coordinating council for critical infrastructure protection and is a member of the boards of the center for internet security and the new york university tandon school of engineering. he is also an advisor to the ida and a u.s. intelligence agency. mr. venables is a member of the council on foreign relations. he earned a b.sc. (hons.) in computer science from the university of york and an m.sc. in computation from queen™s college at oxford university. he was awarded the designation of chartered engineer in 1995 and chartered scientist in 2002 and was elected a fellow of the british computer society in 2005.steven wallach was a founder of convey computer. micron technology bought convey in 2015. at micron, mr. wallach is a design engineering director. previously, he served as vice president of technology for chiaro networks, ltd., and as cofounder, chief technology ofcer, and senior vice president of development of convex computer corporation. after hewlettpackard co. (hp) bought convex, mr. wallach became chief technology ofcer of hp™s enterprise systems group. he served as a consultant to the u.s. department of energy™s advanced simulation and computing program at los alamos national laboratory from 1998 to foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 812007. he was also a visiting professor at rice university in 1998 and 1999, and was manager of advanced development for data general corporation. his efforts on the mv/8000 are chronicled in tracy kidder™s pulitzer prizewinning book, the soul of a new machine. mr. wallach, who has 39 patents, is a member of the national academy of engineering, an ieee fellow, and a founding member of the presidential information technology advisory committee. he is the 2008 recipient of ieee™s seymour cray award and the 2002 charles babbage award.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82computers at risk: safe computing in the information age (1991)national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c.the system security study committee was charged with developing a national research, engineering, and policy agenda to help the united states achieve a more trustworthy computing technology base by the end of the century. in order to advance an endtoend systems approach, this report committee also brought together two groups that did not interact much before: communications security (comsec) and computer security (compusec).the committee delivered a total of six recommendations: (1) promulgate comprehensive generally accepted system security principles, (2) take specic shortterm actions that build on readily available capabilities, (3) gather information and provide education, (4) clarify export control criteria and set up a forum for arbitration, (5) fund and pursue needed research, and (6) establish an information security foundation. under the fth recommendation, the committee highlighted a security research agenda that would include research regarding the following: (1) security modularity, (2) security policy models, (3) cost/benet models for security, (4) new security mechanisms, (5) increasing effectiveness of assurance techniques, and (6) alternative representations and presentations. this list was not meant to be complete, but illustrated the importance and scope of a possible research agenda moving forward. the committee highlighted that progress was needed at many fronts, chighlights from other research agendasfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 83including management, deployment, research, legal enforcement, and institutional support, and that the reliability of computers and communications would be essential to the united states taking advantage of the information age. trust in cyberspace (1999)national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c.the committee on information systems trustworthiness was convened to assess the nature of information systems trustworthiness and prospects for technology that will increase trustworthiness. part of its task statement was to ﬁpropose a research agenda that identies ideas for relevant longterm research and the promotion of fundamental or revolutionary (as opposed to incremental) advances to foster increased trustworthiness of networked information systems.ﬂ the central recommendations it made concerned the agenda for research. these recommendations included the following: (1) research to identify and understand networked information systems vulnerabilities, (2) research in avoiding design and implementation errors, (3) new approaches to computer and communication security, and (4) research in building trustworthy systems from untrustworthy components. these recommendations were aimed at federal funders of relevant  researchers, such as the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) and the national security agency (nsa), while also highlighting that policy makers should take interest in the research agenda as they formulate legislation. the committee believed that increased funding was warranted for both darpa and the nsa for information security research and networked information systems trustworthiness research in general. in addition to the central recommendations relating to the research agenda, the committee highlighted a number of ndings and recommendations related to security and trustworthiness (box c.1). embedded, everywhere:  a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers (2001)national research council, the national academies press, washington, d.c.the committee on networked systems of embedded computers was convened to conduct a study of networked systems of embedded computers (emnets) and examine the kinds of systems that might be developed and deployed in the future and identify areas in need of greater foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84 foundational cybersecurity researchbox c.1 findings and recommendations from  trust in cyberspace related to security and trustworthinessmodels that focus on protecting information from unauthorized access by specifychallenge this paradigm of ﬁabsolute securityﬂ and move toward a model built on three axioms of insecurity: insecurity exists; insecurity cannot be destroyed; and improved trustworthiness may be achieved by the careful organization of unbeen vigorously pursued. ﬁtrustworthiness from untrustworthy componentsﬂ is a research area that deserves greater attention. (p. 251)imperfect information creates a disincentive to invest in trustworthiness for both problem are needed. (p. 251)(p. 252)and therefore deserve special attention. (p. 252)trust in cyberspaceinvestigation. the overall objective was to develop a research agenda that could guide federal programs related to computing research and inform the research communities (in industry, universities, and government) about the challenging needs of the emerging research area. the committee found eight key areas in which concerted research efforts were needed: predictability and manageability; adaptive selfconguration; monitoring and system health; computational models; network geometry; interoperability; the integration of technical, social, ethical, and public policy issues; and enabling technologies. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 85for embedded computers, the committee noted that the users of networked systems were going to demand reliability, safety, security, privacy, and ease of usešall of which were bundled together in the term ﬁtrustworthiness.ﬂ given the amount of information that can be gathered by these systems, the committee highlighted that there needed to be ways that information could be veried to ensure that it was not compromised, misused, or accessed by an outsider. the committee noted that security in the context of embedded networks needs to assume that an adversary will actively try to abuse, break, or steal from the system. it also highlighted that security analysis in embedded systems would be difcult because embedded networks expand the number of possible points of failure, tampering, or attack and homogenous embedded networks would need different security than heterogeneous embedded networks. for example, traditional network security techniques will sufce along with policy and protection methods in homogeneous embedded networks, but heterogeneous embedded networks will rely more heavily on trust management and security policies/methods at individual nodes and applications. creating boundaries for these systems would be a problem, just taking into account their size and span as noted earlier, in addition to potential vulnerabilities that could be found in remote updates or mobile code. these boundaries would also protect these systems from denialofservice attacks that may pose challenges to highintegrity networks, such as those found in the military. in order to address some of the security issues noted above, the committee highlighted a few research topics that it believed could use more attention to improve the overall trustworthiness of a system, including the following:ł fault models and recovery techniques for embedded networks that take into account their scale, long life, open architecture, distributed control aspects, and the replaceabiity of their components (reliability)ł embedded network monitoring and performancechecking facilities (reliability)ł verication of embedded networks™ correctness and reliability (reliability)ł designing embedded networks with safety incorporated into the design, including the humanœcomputer interface and interaction (safety)ł hazard analysis for embedded networks (safety)ł validating requirements (safety)ł verifying safety (safety)ł ensuring safety in upgraded software (safety)foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86 foundational cybersecurity researchł network access control (security)ł enforcement of security policies (security)ł critical infrastructure selfdefense (security)ł preventing denialofservice attacks (security)ł energy scarcity (which can signicantly challenge security) (security)ł flexible policy management (privacy)ł informed consent (privacy)ł accountability research (privacy)ł anonymitypreserving systems (privacy)ł design for users and interaction (usability)ł appropriate conceptual models (usability)toward a safer and more secure cyberspace (2007)national research council, the national academies press, washington, d.c.the committee on improving cybersecurity research in the united states was charged with developing a strategy for cybersecurity research in the 21st century. the committee built upon a number of previous computer science and telecommunications board reports. the committee™s action agenda for policy makers had ve elements. the rst was to create a sense of urgency about the cybersecurity problem, as the cybersecurity policy failure is not so much one of awareness as of action. the second, commensurate with a rapidly growing cybersecurity threat, was to support a broad, robust, and sustained research agenda at levels which ensure that a large fraction of good ideas for cybersecurity research could be explored. the third was to establish a mechanism for continuing followup on a research agenda that would provide a coordinated picture of the government™s cybersecurity research activities across the entire federal government, including both classied and unclassied research. the fourth was to support research infrastructure, recognizing that such infrastructure is a critical enabler for allowing research results to be implemented in actual information technology products and services. the fth was to sustain and grow the human resource base, which will be a critical element in ensuring a robust research agenda in the future. in regards to highlighting the necessities in research, the committee identied ve principles that should shape the research agenda: (1) conduct cybersecurity research as though its application will be important, (2) hedge against uncertainty in the nature of the future threat, (3) ensure programmatic continuity in the research agenda, (4) respect the need for breadth in the research agenda, and (5) disseminate new knowledge and artifacts. the committee highlighted that there is no silver bullet for ﬁxingﬂ foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 87cybersecurity, as cybersecurity will continue to grow and evolve. this means that gaining ground will require broad and ongoing societywide efforts that focus on cybersecurity vulnerability. it also noted that earlier reports had identied research investments in a number of important areas consistent with the recommendations reiterated in its report. it clearly stated that cybersecurity needs to be made a priority by society so that research could be moved forward.science of cybersecurity (2010)jsr10102, jason, the mitre corporation, mclean, virginiajason was tasked by the department of defense (dod) to perform a study on the interplay of science with cybersecurity. as a part of the study, dod posed a number of questions to be answered by jason, including the following: ł what elements of scientic theory, experimentation, and/or practice should the cyber security research community adopt to make signicant progress in the eld? how will this benet the community? are there philosophical underpinnings of science that the cybersecurity research community should adopt?ł are there ﬁlaws of natureﬂ in cyberspace that can form the basis of scientic inquiry in the eld of cyber security? are there mathematical abstractions or theoretical constructs that should be considered?ł are there metrics that can be used to measure with repeatable results the cyber security status of a system, of a network, of a mission? can measurement theory or practice be expanded to improve our ability to quantify cyber security?ł how should a scientic basis for cyber security research be organized? are the traditional domains of experimental and theoretical inquiry valid in cyber security? are there analytic and methodological approaches that can help? what are they?ł are there traditional scientic domains and methods such as complexity theory, physics, theory of dynamical systems, network topology, formal methods, mathematics, social sciences, etc., that can contribute to a science of cyber security?ł how can modeling and simulation methods contribute to a science of cyber security?ł repeatable cyber experiments are possible in small closed and controlled conditions, but can they be scaled up to produce repeatfoundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88 foundational cybersecurity researchable results on the entire internet? to the subset of the internet that supports dod and the intelligence community?ł what steps are recommended to develop and nurture scientic inquiry into forming a science of cyber security eld? what is needed to establish the cyber security science community?ł is there reason to believe the above goals are, in principle, not achievable, and if so, why not?jason acknowledged that the challenge in dening a science of cybersecurity is that it is an ﬁarticially constructed environmentﬂ that does not have strong ties to the physical realm and the challenges created from this environment dynamic in nature. they highlighted that there is not one area of science that covers all the issues related to cybersecurity; however, they found other elds that they believed were analogous to cybersecurity, such as epidemiology, economics, and clinical medicine. they noted that there were specic subelds in computer science that were especially relevant to examine as well, including model checking, cryptography, randomization, type theory, and game theory. they stated that model checking could provide frameworks for examining security issues; cryptography could  provide useful lessons relating to communication in the presence of an adversary and the capabilities adversaries are assumed to have; randomization or use of obfuscation could help to construct defenses; and game theory could help to prioritize cyber defense activities. in addition, they noted that machine learning and event processing would be subelds of importance when trying to correlate anomalies in systems to actual attacks. jason reported that although there had been a lot of reports on the need for r&d for cybersecurity, there was a universal agreement that more work was needed and that there was no agreement that it was being managed well. to move forward, one key observation by jason was the need to accelerate the process of turning research results into tools that can be used by developers. to make signicant progress in the eld of cyber security, jason highlighted that the most important rst steps should be the creation of a common language and basic concepts that the cyber security community can use as a foundation, while also understanding that adversaries, threats, and practices will change over time since there are no intrinsic ﬁlaws of natureﬂ for cybersecurity as there are in other scientic elds.in addition to contributing their own conclusions and recommendations, jason endorsed the ida report cybersecurity technology initiatives, which had recommended the establishment of cybersecurity sciencebased centers and projects within universities and other centers. jason highlighted the following advantages of having dod sponsor those programs:foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 891. the dod would have access to the best ideas and people.2. the dod would be able to ﬁbias the work towards their versions of common problems.ﬂ3. universities and other research centers would be able to leverage resources internal to the dod (including internal networks).they also highlighted that universities and centers would be able to bridge the gap between the dod and the software industry in order to accelerate the transition of new ideas into useful tools for developers. federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan (2016)executive ofce of the president, washington, d.c.the federal cybersecurity research and development strategic plan released in february 2016 expands on the strategic plan trustworthy cyberspace: strategic plan for the federal cybersecurity research and development program released in december 2011. the strategic plan is built upon four assumptions related to adversaries, defenders, users, and technology (box c.2) and expands on the priorities set in 2011. the strategic plan also introduces a heavy focus on research and development not discussed in the 2011 strategic plan. the strategic plan uses the four fundamental assumptions to outline nearterm, midterm, and longterm goals that together will probox c.2 four assumptions upon which the plan is foundedadversaries. adversaries will perform malicious cyber activities as long as they quences for themselves.defenders. valuable and critical systems with limited resources and despite evolving technologies and threat scenarios.users. usersšlegitimate individuals and enterprisesšwill circumvent cyberburdensome.technology.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90 foundational cybersecurity researchvide the tools needed to improve cybersecurity. these goals include the following: ł nearterm goal (13 years): achieve s&t advances to counter adversaries™ asymmetrical advantages with effective and efcient risk management. ł midterm goal (37 years): achieve s&t advances to reverse adversaries™ asymmetrical advantages through sustainably secure systems development and operation. ł longterm goal (715 years): achieve s&t advances for effective and efcient deterrence of malicious cyber activities via denial of results and likely attribution. in order to achieve these goals, the plan focuses on developing science and technology to support what the report identies as four defensive elements. the four defensive elements are as follows: deter, protect, detect, and adapt. the plan wants to deter malicious attacks by measuring and increasing the costs to adversaries carrying out such activities, diminishing the spoils, and increasing risks and uncertainty for potential adversaries. the plan wants components, systems, users, and critical infrastructure to have the ability to efciently resist malicious cyber activities while also ensuring condentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability. the plan wants the ability to efciently detect, or even anticipate, adversary decisions based on the assumption that systems should be assumed to be vulnerable since perfect security is not possible. the plan wants defenders, defenses, and infrastructure to dynamically adapt to malicious cyber activities by efciently reacting to disruption, recovering from damage, maintaining operations while completing restoration, and adjusting to thwart similar future activity.the four defensive elements, which ultimately support the overall plan, are dependent on six areas deemed critical to a successful cybersecurity r&d effort: (1) scientic foundations, (2) enhancements in risk management, (3) human aspects, (4) transitioning successful research into pervasive use, (5) workforce development, and (6) enhancing the infrastructure for research.the plan highlighted five recommendations for the federal government that would help support and achieve the plan in its entirety: ł recommendation 1. prioritize basic and longterm research in federal cybersecurity r&d. ł recommendation 2. lower barriers and strengthen incentives for public and private organizations that would broaden participation in cybersecurity r&d. foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c 91ł recommendation 3. assess barriers and identify incentives that could accelerate the transition of evidencevalidated effective and efcient cybersecurity research results into adopted technologies, especially for emerging technologies and threats. ł recommendation 4. expand the diversity of expertise in the cybersecurity research community. ł recommendation 5. expand diversity in the cybersecurity workplace.foundational cybersecurity research: improving science, engineering, and institutionscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.