detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4755realizing the information future: the internet and beyond320 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309050449 | doi 10.17226/4755nrenaissance committee, national research councilrealizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.realizing theinformation futurethe internet and beyondnrenaissance committeecomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1994iabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation (under grant no.ncr9223810). any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this materialare those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the national science foundation.library of congress catalog card no. 9465572international standard book number 0309050448additional copies of this report are available from: national academy press 2101 constitutionavenue, nw box 285 washington, dc 20055 8006246242 2023343313 (in the washingtonmetropolitan area)b321copyright 1994 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americafirst printing, may 1994second printing, march 1995iiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nrenaissance committeeleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angeles, chaircynthia h. braddon, mcgrawhill publishing companydavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologywilliam j. emery, colorado center of astrodynamics research,university of coloradodavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniaa.g. fraser, at&t bell laboratoriesrussell d. hensley, christian brothers universitylawrence h. landweber, university of wisconsin at madisonrobert w. lucky, bell communications researchsusan k. nutter, north carolina state universityradia perlman, novell corporationsusanna schweizer, digital equipment corporationconnie danner stout, texas education networkcharles ellett taylor, university of california at los angelesthomas w. west, california state universityrobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiatives, special advisorstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorleslie wade, project assistantiiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunicationsboardwilliam wulf, university of virginia, chairruzena bajcsy, university of pennsylvaniajeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems inc.james gray, digital equipment corporationjohn l. hennessy, stanford universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleyken kennedy, rice universitybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyrobert l. martin, bell communications researchdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyabraham peled, ibm t.j. watson research center (until august 13, 1993)william press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, california institute of technologyedward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex inc.lawrence t. tesler, apple computer inc.leslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames mallory, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria bemah, administrative assistantleslie wade, project assistantivabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofscience, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studyjohn a. armstrong, ibm corporation (retired)sylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyavner friedman, university of minnesotasusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationhans mark, university of texas at austinclaire e. max, lawrence livermore national laboratorychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyjames w. mitchell, at&t bell laboratoriesjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratorynorman metzger, executive directorvabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of the national academy of sciences. the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. robert m. white is president of the national academy of engineering. the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine. the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robert m. white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council. www.nationalacademies.orgviabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein winter 1990œ1991, the national science foundation (nsf) approachedthe computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) and asked it toconsider undertaking a second study of issues relating to networking for theresearch and education communities. a new study would revisit issuesaddressed by cstb in a 1988 report, toward a national research network(national academy press, washington, d.c.), and more importantly it wouldaddress the more complex set of issues that has arisen subsequently, includingthose associated with nsf plans to recast its role and resources in the nationalresearch and education network (nren) program, a component of the highperformance computing and communications initiative. due in part to thecontroversy triggered by nsf's original ideas for recasting nsfnet and itsattentions to revising its plans, it was not until late 1992 that nsf's requestbecame an approved and funded project.the computer science and telecommunications board convened a studycommittee for this project that chose to call itself nrenaissance, reflectingthe fundamental concern with the nren program and the challenge of meetingresearch, education, and library community needs in a context marked by muchbroader information infrastructure concerns. many of the authors of the 1988cstb report are among the authors of this present report, which benefits fromtheir unique insights into both the internet and other elements of informationinfrastructure. the committee met in march, june, september, and october1993 to frame and deliberate over issues; it met again in january 1994 todevelop responses to a large number of reviewer comments and a strategy forrevising and enhancing its draft report. over the course of the project thecommitteeprefaceviiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.received a number of inputs from outside itself, most notably several briefingsfrom and consultations with federal officials and representatives of commercialand nonprofit organizations.the period between the conceptualization and the actual launch of theproject in early 1993 saw many changes, most notably a rise in governmental,business, and popular interest in electronic networking and informationinfrastructure, interest epitomized by the launch of the federal nationalinformation infrastructure initiative. in the face of these developments, thecommittee expanded its mission from an examination of issues relating to thenren program, per se, to an examination of architectural and deploymentissues relating to the larger national information infrastructure context in whichthe nren program now fits. consistent with its original charge, the committeepaid special attention to the insights, concerns, and needs of the research,education, and library communities. given the broader focus, however, therecommendations made by the committee are addressed to a broadergovernmental audience than the national science foundation.nrenaissance is grateful to the many individuals that contributed toits deliberations, including individuals who briefed the committee and otherswho contributed materials and insights, generally over the internet. theseindividuals include prudence adler and ann okerson, association of researchlibraries; g. ernest anderson, university of massachusetts; larry anderson,mississippi state university; eric m. aupperle, merit inc.; williamblumenthal, kelley drye & warren; hans bolli, northern telecom; panayotbontchev, university of sophia; laura breeden, (then farnet) nationaltelecommunications and information administration; david c. carver andkaren sollins, massachusetts institute of technology; john cavallini androbert aiken, department of energy; jill charboneau, cornell university;annette b. church, california school teacher; richard civille, center for civicnetworking groups; robert collet, cix and sprint; janos csepai, budapestuniversity of economic sciences; andrzej dabrowski, polish ptt; brucedaley, elaine wynne elementary school, las vegas, nevada; linda delzeit,california school teacher; d'ann douglas, sallie curtis elementary school,beaumont, texas; michael einhorn, department of justice; robert gosse andmichael pollak, federal communications commission; robert r. gotwals, jr.,microelectronics center of north carolina; john gravelle, merrill senior highschool, merrill, wisconsin; daniel hartl, harvard university; dale hatfield,hatfield associates inc.; michael jeffrey, nova scotia department ofeducation; ioan jurka, technical university of timisoara, romania; stanleykabala and simon pritikin, at&t; thomas kalil, national economic council;donald lindberg, hpcc national coordinating office and national library ofmedicine; jack mccue and howard palmes,prefaceviiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bellsouth; steven metalitz, information industries association; paulmockapetris, information sciences institute, university of southern california;mark neibert and janet dewar, comsat corporation; michael nelson, office ofscience and technology policy; roger noll, stanford university; antoninowakowski, technical university of gdansk; zoltan pap, hungariantelecommunications company, budapest; paul evan peters and joanlippincott, coalition for networked information; gary ragsdale, federalexpress; michael roberts, educom; david ruth, cornell university; stevenruth, george mason university; anthony rutkowski, internet society;theodore schell and ronald bracewell, sprint; richard snelling, u.s. olympiccommittee; thomas spacek, bellcore; steve stephenson, waiakee intermediateschool, hilo, hawaii; eric swanson, john wiley & sons; randy sweeney,jordan high school, los angeles, california; frank withrow, council of chiefstate school officers; stephen wolff and jane caviness, national sciencefoundation; and anthony villasenor, nasa.it is also extremely grateful to the anonymous reviewers who challenged itto sharpen and focus its arguments. the committee gratefully acknowledges thetruly outstanding contributions to this report by marjory blumenthal, director ofthe computer science and telecommunications board, whose efforts wereindispensable to the creation of this report. we also acknowledge the assistanceof her staff, notably project assistant leslie wade, and of the editor, susanmaurizi. responsibility for the report, of course, remains with the committee.leonard kleinrock, chairnrenaissance committeeprefaceixabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents summary and recommendations 1 committee and its tasks 2 the vision of an open data network 3 developing an open data network architecture 4 configuring the components 4 defining nii compliance and setting standards 6 factoring in the international aspect 7 deploying the open data network 7 research and education concerns 7 infrastructure financing: investments for research andeducation 8 the government role 10 longterm strategy, management, and wise investment 10 leadership in education 11 technology research and development 12 recommendations 12 the vision of an open data network 12 recommendation 1: leadership and guidance 13 recommendation 2: technology deployment 14 recommendation 3: transitional support 14 recommendation 4: k12 education 15 recommendation 5: network research 151 u.s. networking: the past is prologue 17 where we are today 18 existing communications networks and increasing focuson infrastructure 18 how we got here 22 today in transition 27contentsxiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. visions of the information future: what might it be? 30 the internetbased vision 30 the entertainmentbased vision 31 the clintongore administration's vision 32 possible scenarios for development of a national information infrastructure 32 the committee's vision: an integrated national information infrastructure 34 converging the visions of the future 35 technology impetus 35 benefits to the nationlastmile economics 36 how can we converge the visions? 38 structure and content of this report 38 notes 402 the open data network: achieving the visionof an integrated national informationinfrastructure 43 the open data network 44 criteria for an open data network 44 technical, operational, and organizational objectives 44 benefits of an open data network 46 open data network architecture 47 an architectural proposal in four layers 47 the centrality of the bearer service 51 characterizing the bearer service 53 middleware: a new set of network services 55 defining the higherlevel services 59 basic higherlevel services 59 more demanding higherlevel services 60 quality of service: options for the odn bearer service 65 besteffort and reserved bandwidth service 65 assuring the service 66 nii compliance 67 standards 70 role of network standards 70 factors that complicate setting standards 71 network function has moved outside the network 71 it is hard to set standards without a recognized mandate 72 a bottomup process cannot easily set longtermdirection 72contentsxiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. a topdown approach no longer appears workable 73 commercial forces may distort the standardssettingprocess 73 setting standards for the niišplanning for change is difficult but necessary 73 issues of scale in the nii 74 addressing and naming 74 mobility as the computing paradigm of the future 76 management systems 77 measurement and monitoring 77 security and the open data network 78 securing the network, the host, and information 78 developing a security architecture 79 security objectives and current approaches for reachingthem 80 computer system protection 81 protection of information in the host 81 protection of information in the network 82 authenticating users 83 control of authorized users 83 taking a comprehensive approach to ensuring security 84 finding and balancing opportunities to build toward convergence 84 development of standards for televisionšan example 85 reengineering of the nation's access circuits 86 cost and function in access circuits 87 options for incorporating the odn bearer service 88 need for government action in balancing objectives 89 acting now to realize a unified nii 90 recommendation: technology deployment 91 research on the niišensuring necessary technical development 91 research to develop network architecture 92 defining the bearer service 93 issues for the lower levels: scale, robustness, and operations 94 addressing and routing 94 quality of service 95 new approaches to transport protocols 96 network control functions 96 mobility as the computing paradigm of the future 97 management systemsšmonitoring and control 98 new technology for access circuits 98 middleware and information services support 99 navigation and filtering tools 99contentsxiiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. intellectual property rights 100 computer and communications security 101 research in the development of software 102 experimental network research 102 experimental research in middleware and applicationservices 103 rights management testbed 104 research to characterize effects of change 105 recommendation: network research 1053 research, education, and libraries 112 research 113 higher education 119 k12 education 122 lifelong education 133 libraries and the broadening of public interest networking 133 crosscutting observations 142 notes 1434 principles and practice 148 equitable access 149 flow of information 153 government information 154 privacy 156 first amendment 158 intellectual property protection 160 broader consideration of ethics 165 notes 1665 financial issues 172 federal and other funding for networking to date 172 cost of network infrastructure 176 paying the price 183 imminent shortterm increases 186 recommendation: transitional support 186 costs of local infrastructure and access to services 186 usagebased pricing 189 flatfee pricing 191 covering user charges (subsidies and mechanisms) 193 deriving specific funds 195 equity 196contentsxivabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 government roles and opportunities 204 leadership and vision 205 leadership in development and deployment of infrastructure 207 leadership in education 209 recommendation: k12 education 210 balancing of interests 211 diverse and fragmented public and private interests 211 coordination and management 213 uncertain technical expertise 214 crossagency and uncertain structure 215 recommendation: leadership and guidance 216 influencing the shape of the information infrastructure 217 influence on architecture and standards 218 influence through procurement 220 influence on future oversight of the internet 221 influence on network deployment and technology development 223 support for experimental networks 224 approach to operational networks and intermediatetechnologies 224 research and development 226 conclusion 228 notes 228 appendixes a federal networking: the path to the internet 237b sample principle sets 254c user support services 262d state and regional networks 265e international issues 269f key terms 282 index 287contentsxvabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents  xviabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.realizing the information future theinternet and beyond xviiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. xviiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendationsthe potential for realizing a national information networking marketplacethat can enrich people's economic, social, and political lives has recently beenunlocked through the convergence of three developments: the federal government's promotion of the national informationinfrastructure through an administration initiative and supportingcongressional actions; the runaway growth of the internet, an electronic network complexdeveloped initially for and by the research community; and the recognition by entertainment, telephone, and cable tv companiesof the vast commercial potential in a national information infrastructure.a national information infrastructure (nii) can provide a seamless web ofinterconnected, interoperable information networks, computers, databases, andconsumer electronics that will eventually link homes, workplaces, and publicinstitutions together. it can embrace virtually all modes of informationgeneration, transport, and use. the potential benefits can be glimpsed in theexperiences to date of the research and education communities, where accessthrough the internet to highspeed networks has begun to radically change theway researchers work, educators teach, and students learn.to a large extent, the nii will be a transformation and extension of today'scomputing and communications infrastructure (including, for example, theinternet, telephone, cable, cellular, data, and broadcast networks). trends ineach of these component areas are already bringing about a nextgenerationinformation infrastructure. yet the outcome ofsummary and recommendations1about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these trends is far from certain; the nature of the nii that will develop ismalleable. choices will be made in industry and government, beginning withinvestments in the underlying physical infrastructure. those choices will affectand be affected by many institutions and segments of society. they willdetermine the extent and distribution of the commercial and societal rewards tothis country for investments in infrastructurerelated technology, in which theunited states is still currently the world leader.1994 is a critical juncture in our evolution to a national informationinfrastructure. funding arrangements and management responsibilities are beingdefined (beginning with shifts in nsf funding for the internet), commercialservice providers are playing an increasingly significant role, and nonacademicuse of the internet is growing rapidly. meeting the challenge of ''wiring up" thenation will depend on our ability not only to define the purposes that the nii isintended to serve, but also to ensure that the critical technical issues areconsidered and that the appropriate enabling physical infrastructure is put inplace.committee and it's tasksto help meet the challenge of building an nii with lasting value andutility, the national research council's computer science andtelecommunications board assembled a committee to study issues raised by theshift to a larger, more truly national networking capability. the committee thatauthored the report brings unique competence derived from members whodeveloped and pioneered the use of the internet from within the research andeducation communities and who have researched, built, financed, and operatednetworks generally.at the request of the national science foundation (nsf), the committeefocused on how best to continue to meet the needs of the research and educationcommunities in the midst of the policy and program transition from a nationalresearch and education network (nren) to an nii focus. drawing on thelessons of the internet experience, the committee addressed the structuralquestions of how to build a working nii and considered also the key enablingactions that must be taken by the federal government to achieve an integratedinfrastructure that will benefit u.s. society as a whole.the report that resulted presents a vision of the nii based on an open datanetwork (odn), whose essential technical components it outlines; points outthe potential of the odn for meeting current and future u.s. networking needs;characterizes the nature of the transition to such an infrastructure; examineshow the transition to a larger information infrastructure will affect thosecommunities that have come or will comesummary and recommendations2about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to depend on the internet; identifies barriers to and tradeoffs in achieving anodn; and suggests approaches and actions the federal government can take tocatalyze and guide the realization of this vision. a main purpose of this report isto express the perspectives of the research and education communities and thevision they generate for an integrated nii.the vision of an open data networkthere are many possible visions for an nii. members of the internetnetworking communities, for example, look forward to an nii that will continueto provide a laboratory for discovering innovative applications for informationtechnology in research, education, and commerce. major players in theentertainment, telephone, and cable tv (etc) sector see movies, games, andhome shopping offered over the nii as promising commercial ventures.motivating the administration's support of the nii are broad social andeconomic policy considerations basic to improving the quality of life in theunited states. included in the mix of expectations and approaches are the viewsof various trade, public interest, and professional organizations about the nii'spotential for meeting their diverse needs.the committee's vision of the nii gives form to these diverse expectationsas a data network with open and evolvable interfaces. such a network should becapable of carrying information services of all kinds, from suppliers of allkinds, to customers of all kinds, across network service providers of all kinds, ina seamless accessible fashion. moreover, the user of an open data networkshould be able to access this capability as he or she moves from place to place.the network should be scalable in the many dimensions of size, load, services,reach, and utility; should integrate a range of network technology and endnodedevices; and should provide a framework for security.the committee's vision of the nii is based on a 25year legacy of computernetworking in the united states. the current manifestation of that legacy is theworldwide internet that serves more than 15 million people. its success is basedlargely on the internet's openness, which allows interoperability of all of itsattached networks.indeed, an open data network includes the following characteristics: open to users: it does not force users into closed groups or deny accessto any sectors of society, but permits universal connectivity, as doesthe telephone system. open to service providers: it provides an open and accessible envisummary and recommendations3about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ronment for competing commercial or intellectual interests. forexample, it does not preclude competitive access for informationproviders. open to network providers: it makes it possible for any networkprovider to meet the necessary requirements to attach and become apart of the aggregate of interconnected networks. open to change: it permits the introduction of new applications andservices over time. it is not limited to only one application, such as tvdistribution. it also permits the introduction of new transmission,switching, and control technologies as these become available in thefuture.the ability to evolve is a key property of the nii envisioned by thecommittee. currently, both the internet and the telephone network are runningout of addresses for their subscribers. in the case of the internet, a likelyoutcome is a major change in the protocol suite that will affect millions ofcomputers. providing the ability to evolve gracefully in any of a number ofdimensions is essential to the successful commercialization of the internet andits integration into a larger nii.although the internet is a clear example of a network with an openarchitecture, the concept of openness is not universally accepted at present.witness, for example, the numerous communications networks that deal withclosed services (e.g., the cable tv industry, the radio pager industry) or thosethat have attempted to maintain captive user communities via a proprietarynetwork architecture (usually, users of such networks eventually demandinteroperability of heterogeneous equipment). in any case, an open networkshould certainly allow closed user groups to offer their services on the opennetwork if they so choose.developing an open data network architectureconstructing an open data network translates into a number of technicalgoals and considerations for planning the nii: there is a need for a certainminimum level of physical infrastructure to be provided; for a minimum set ofservices to be made available; for nii compliance to be defined, to ensureprovision of the basic services and to illuminate what is and is not compatiblewith the open architecture; for supporting standards to be set; for securityprovisions to be developed; and for oversight and management.configuring the componentsachieving an open network hinges on articulating and maintaining anappropriate architecture. without a unifying architecture, multiplesummary and recommendations4about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disparate networks will not only have to replicate common services, but mayalso implement them in incompatible ways. the open data network proposedin this report involves a fourlevel layered architecture configured as follows:(1) at the lowest level is an abstract bitlevel service, the bearer service, whichis realized out of the lines, switches, and other elements of networkingtechnology; (2) above this level is the transport level, with functionality thattransforms the basic bearer service into the proper infrastructure for higherlevelapplications (as is done in today's internet by the tcp protocol) and withcoding formats to support various kinds of traffic (e.g., voice, video, fax); (3)above the transport level is the middleware , with commonly used functions(e.g., file system support, privacy assurance, billing and collection, and networkdirectory services); and (4) at the upper level are the applications with whichusers interact directly. this layered approach with welldefined boundariespermits fair and open competition among providers of all sorts at each of thelayers.in particular, the concept of a distinct bearer service contributes to meetingthe key objective of separating the information service provider from thenetwork service provider in order to allow all potential service providers theopportunity to flourish in an odn environment. to provide for this separation,the committee has structured the protocol stack of its architecture such that itnarrows down considerably at the interface to the (open) bearer service layer.above this narrow "waist" the stack broadens out to include the broad range ofoptions for the transport, middleware, and applications layers. below thisnarrow waist, the stack again broadens out to include the many possibletechnologies for implementing network access, local area networks,metropolitan area networks, and wide area networks. such an arrangementreinforces the principle of separation and is intended not to prevent the samesupplier from acting in two roles, but rather to ensure that individualcompetitors can enter into the marketplace at either level.the minimum set of higherlevel application services, which builds on thebearer, transport, and middleware services, includes electronic mail, fax, remotelogin, database browsing, digital object storage, and financial transactionservices. as the nii matures, this minimum set should evolve to become morecomprehensive. beyond this minimum set are more demanding services, whichinclude audio and video servers, both broadcast and interactive.the committee believes it is imperative to develop at the outset a securityarchitecture that will lay the foundation for protections of privacy, security, andintellectual property rightsšsafeguards that cannot be supplied as effectivelyon an addon basis.summary and recommendations5about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.defining nii compliance and setting standardsan niicompliant network would provide a set of core servicesimplemented in a standard fashion so as to provide for interoperability. for purposes of this report, the committee defines the concept as follows: an niicompliant network must provide a technologyindependent bearer service andthe minimum set of applicationlevel services listed above, that is, electronicmail, fax, remote login, database browsing, digital object storage, and financialtransaction services. if an additional service, such as video, is provided thatconforms to nii standards, then such a service will also be said to be, forexample, nii videocompliant.as the concept of nii compliance makes clear, standards are critical toachieving an odn composed of components and services supplied, owned, andused by a wide range of parties. establishing standards for an odn will be achallenge. the networks that will underlie the nii are extremely large, andneither a small group (like the one that shaped early internet standards) nor thegovernment has either a mandate or the control to set standards.the forces that bear on the standardssetting process are significant andmultidimensional. among them are competing approachesšthe development ofa unilateral standard by a dominant vendor versus development in an open,multiparty environmentšand the tension between the simple, shorttermsolution and the longerterm, general and flexible solution. although in thecontext of the computer industry standards have evolved through vendorsimplementing unilateral standards as well as marketplace adoption of ad hocstandards, neither approach necessarily supports development of the standardsneeded for a sufficiently general and flexible odn architecture of the scoperequired for an nii. the shortterm profit motive of a commercial providerconfronting the uncertain prospects of new etc service offerings, for example,may not encourage commercial applications that meet open standards. openinterfaces (which can involve some proprietary elements) may increase costsinitially or be perceived as offering less competitive advantage than a moreproprietary approach. indeed, there will be considerable pressure to developclosed networks (closed in the sense that only a limited set of services can passover the network, or only a limited class of users can access the network).an open architecture does not preclude groups that may choose to operatein a closed mode from doing so. at present, however, the private sector has fewincentives to opt on its own for a very general and flexible architecture, and,absent government action, the possibly limited architecture that does emerge,from, say, the etc community, may be thesummary and recommendations6about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.default architecture for the other constituencies, not least because standards forconsumer service interfaces tend to be relatively stable.factoring in the international aspecta final issue affecting development of an odn is its international scope, afact that the mere label "nii" can tend to obscure. both the internet andinformation infrastructure generally are fundamentally international. theinternational nature of infrastructure will have to be addressed in whatevertechnical, market, and legal measures are taken to assure smoothcommunication and interaction between most countries. internationalconnectivity must be maintained and expanded as foreign networks develop andproliferate. beyond physical access, one or more bodies may be needed todevelop and monitor bilateral and multilateral agreements on standards,transborder data flow problems, and transborder legalities generally. inaddition, both to assure the maximum usefulness of international connectionsand to support u.s. vendors, export control restrictions on the sale anddeployment of u.s. infrastructure technology should continue to be reviewedand, as appropriate, revised.deploying the open data networkthe difficulties of developing an open data network architecture extendto such aspects of deployment as financing the infrastructure, designing anddeploying services, regulation, funding of specific uses, determining the breadthand nature of access, establishing features such as protection of privacy, and soon. the number, nature, complexity, and interrelatedness of these issues arguethe need for oversight in the development of the nii and raise questions aboutthe appropriate level of government involvement to direct and guide theachievement of a viable odn.research and education concernsrealizing an odn that benefits the economy and society broadly presentsmany challenges, several of which are recognized by administration andcongressional efforts under the nii aegis. while those efforts address meetingthe broadest possible set of needs, the research and education communitiespresent specific sets of needs that should also be recognized and addressed aspart of nii planning and policymaking. financial considerations dominate thoseconcerns, since the research and education communities depend primarily onpublic funding and generally have very tight budgets.summary and recommendations7about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how the needs of the research and education communities (which aretreated here in the aggregate but differ among and within themselves) areaddressed will bear on some of the more difficult issues relating to achieving atruly national scale within the nii, including the extent to which access tonetworks and services can be truly individualized. choices will have to be madešand their consequences assessedšregarding dimensions that are commonlydiscussed as principles for infrastructure access and use (equitable access,protection of key rights, and responsibilities). whereas a goal of the nii isready access to the network by individuals wherever they may be, beginningwith their homes and places of work, the goals of research and educationalnetworking programs have centered on access by an institution (e.g., a school, alibrary, or a laboratory), which would in turn support access by individualswithin the institution.infrastructure financing: investments for research andeducationa major concern for the research and education communities is financingaccess to and use of the nii. to date, access to the internet has been obtainedlargely through institutions (such as a university), and those institutions havebenefited from federal funding of the nsfnet backbone. although theimminent elimination of that funding will raise costs far more modestly thanmany fear (costs will be distributed across user institutions), the change infunding has prompted a more general concern about the possibility of directcharges to individual users. these concerns are magnified among those (notablyin the k12 and smaller highereducation institutions) who have not so far hadeasy access to the internet.user charges are desirable when costs vary with use; in theseenvironments, users are able to assess their investment with respect tocompeting alternatives. the seemingly "free" nature of internet use has clearlyfostered growth in that use; by the same token, the marginal costs of supplyingsuch common applications as electronic mail have been very low, justifying anegligible price except when congestion is experienced.financial burdens are not homogeneous across research and educationusers, although there has been little systematic analysis of the variation.researchers with extraordinary demand for network bandwidth are among thosewho raise questions about the prospect of user charges, and the expectedincrease in video and audio applications suggests that pricing as a mechanismfor rationing access to infrastructure will become more generally needed overtime. the committee expects that a variety of pricing schemes will emerge withthe broader commercialization ofsummary and recommendations8about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the internet and its integration with other networks. for purposes of fosteringcontinued experimentation in the evolving infrastructure and to assist in fiscalmanagement in the research and education communities, some flatrate(subscription) charging alternatives are desirable.the work of research, education, and other social institutions must often befunded with public monies because it produces substantial spillover benefits forthe rest of society that cannot be supported directly by the institutionsthemselves. given the government's fundamental interest in the missions of theresearch, education, and associated library communities, support forinformation infrastructure access and use is consistent with the overall provisionof funding for these communities. however, the allocation of support forinformation infrastructure calls for a weighing and balancing of competinginvestment alternatives relating to research and education (e.g., for differentkinds of inputs to the processes of research and education). this committee endorses the singling out of information infrastructure in research andeducation for targeted support. the commercialization of the internet and theintegration of applications into research and education suggest that relatedspending will inevitably be integrated into general research and educationbudgets, as is the case for telephone and computing costs. in the short term,however, there are a number of transitional issues.some researchers and educators who depend on the internetšfor example,individuals with large amounts of use related to their work and those withlimited institutional supportšmay need some assistance in adjusting toincreased infrastructure prices. infrastructure support should be a function ofthe overall research funding process: agencies underwriting research thatrequires high bandwidth, for example, should either provide access to thenecessary infrastructure (e.g., nsf's new very high speed backbone networkservice (vbns) or doe's esnet) or expect to cover extraordinary costsšnot onthe basis of entitlement but as a function of the work being done and itsrequirements. the critical concerns are avoiding disruption from a sudden andsharp imposition of new user charges, minimizing administrative burdens, andassuring equitable access to public support. over the long term, moregeneralized mechanisms may evolve, as discussed in the body of this report.the power of networking has totally changed the way much of science andtechnology development is conducted in this country, and a generation ofscientists has now emerged who depend on that capability. yet as regards thebenefits of networking, the science research community and portions of thehighereducation community have had almost a decade head start on the k12schools, smaller highereducation institutions, and public library institutions. itis time to allow these latter communities to conduct the experiment and reap thebenefits that uppertiersummary and recommendations9about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.higher education and research have enjoyed. movement toward broaderdeployment and some scheme for ensuring equitable access, with targetedmechanisms such as vouchers, may support that objective.the government rolethe federal government has an opportunity to alter, enrich, and extendexisting elements of the u.s. communications and information infrastructureand to guide their integration into a more powerful whole. the broadening offocus implicit in moving from a narrower nren orientation to a broader niiorientation suggests that the federal government can play a variety of roles,each lending itself to expression through a variety of mechanisms. key roles,which are not mutually exclusive, include: providing leadership and vision, balancing interests and airing competing perspectives, and influencing the shape of the information infrastructure.decisions made to meet u.s. needs will bear on international connectivity,which is essential for the nii to fulfill its potential.longterm strategy, management, and wise investmentin promoting the nii, the administration has taken a number of steps thatdemonstrate the impact that leadership and vision can have. at the same time,sustaining that leadership and establishing the mechanisms needed toimplement the vision require additional actions aimed at ensuring both thedevelopment of an architecture for an open data network and the deploymentof an infrastructure built from that architecture. the federal government needsto establish and maintain a longrange strategy and program responsible foroverseeing the evolution of the nii and its applications and for addressingfunding needs over the long term. that strategy and program must incorporatethe technical competence needed to develop and deploy the odn architectureand should, in addition, involve a mechanism for addressing the needs,preferences, options, and constraints of all stakeholders, making sure, inparticular, that the transitional and longterm needs of such public interestcommunities as research, education, and libraries are addressed.the need for a program drawing on multiple constituencies is shaped inpart by a recognition that the federal role in information infrastructure isinherently limitedšthe federal government will never be able to invest ininfrastructure facilities and services a meaningful fraction of the multisummary and recommendations10about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.billiondollar privatesector investment plus the growing investments by stategovernments in statebased information infrastructure and by all manner ofindividuals and organizations in local computing, communications, andinformation access infrastructure. what the federal government can do is focusits own investments and policymaking to gain the maximum leverage and assurethe necessary balancing of interests to make sure that the public interest is met.as part of that balancing, it will be important that nsf and other agencies notback away from the research and education communities in terms ofcommitment to their needs for and contributions to information infrastructure.despite limited resources for actually building information infrastructure,the federal government has several mechanisms for influencing its shape, interms of both architecture and deployment. notable among them are standardsand procurementrelated activities, as well as research and development,activities on which this report focuses. although the federal government cannotset all of the standards required for an odn architecture, it can (through thenational institute of standards and technology and other agencies) participatemore effectively in standardssetting processes; it can continue to drive internetrelated standards activities and help to stabilize those aspects of the internetenvironment that permit the internet to function; and it can use its ownprocurement and informationand servicedelivery activities to implement andinfluence the market for key standards. of course, it can complement suchactivities with changes in regulations and tax incentives, options for which areanalyzed elsewhere.although the nsfnet transition signals a pulling away from the use ofprocurement to explore infrastructure technologies, the committee notes thatthere remains value to government procurement of and support for trulyexperimental networks.leadership in educationthere is a wonderful opportunity to use the nii to extend what has beenone of the more exciting developments in the internet, namely, stimulation ofcuriosity and an increased interest in learning and support for teaching in k12education. in those few schools where access to the internet has been madeavailable, there has been a tremendous influence for the good. unmotivatedstudents are "turning on"; teachers are networking to share ideas and resources;collaboration among students across the world is taking place; and new modesof learning and of seeking information are developing. indeed, the use ofnetworking for k12 education is perhaps one of the hopes we have in thiscountry for repairsummary and recommendations11about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ing what is now accepted as a ''broken" educational system. large though itmay be, the cost of providing our youth access to the nii's capabilities must bemeasured in terms of our increasing need for an educated, highly motivatedu.s. work force.limited use to date of the current network infrastructure by the k12 andother education communities indicates a need for more effective governmentalleadership. needed is a specific locus of responsibility and accountability forinfrastructure development and use, building on a stronger base of technologicalcompetence, within the department of education, and the setting of a nationalagenda for local, state, and federal efforts.technology research and developmentthe successes of the nren program worldwide and the strengthsexhibited by the u.s. network infrastructure demonstrate clearly this country'stechnological leadership in networking and information infrastructure.however, that lead is fast shrinking. it is therefore essential to expand the u.s.research effort into the information infrastructure domain itself, to addressissues relating to the representation, transfer, and protection of information aswell as to data communications per se. in addition, although network supplyand operation will be increasingly commercial, the federal government shouldmaintain its role as a sponsor of both experimental and other, more advancedbut still transitional, networks and testbeds. as the history of u.s. networkdevelopment has shown, sustained support is needed for the timely achievementof true innovations. during the past and current period of government andindustrial support and growth, the technology of networking has advanceddramatically. now, the advance of new technology is accelerating asasynchronous transfer mode (atm) systems, fiber optics, wireless, mobileaccess, and other networking developments appear. to maintain this position,the federal government should continue to make funding for research in supportof information infrastructure a priority.recommendationsthe vision of an open data networkthe committee believes that the appropriate future communications infrastructure for the nation will come into existence only if its development isguided by a continuing and overarching vision of its purpose and architecture.described here in terms of an open data network, this open and extensibleinfrastructure is characterized by the following technical principles:summary and recommendations12about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. open to all users, open to all service providers, open to all network providers, and open to change.recommendation 1: leadership and guidancethe vision of a national information infrastructure (nii) as articulated bythe administration emphasizes significant u.s. social and economic concernsbut leaves largely unaddressed a number of critical technical issues. thetechnical roots associated with the national research and education networkprogram and other components of the larger high performance computing andcommunications initiative must be effectively and consistently factored intothat vision.the committee recommends that the federal government expand its nii agenda to embrace the open data network (odn) architecture as a technical framework for the design and deployment of the nii. required is a stablemechanism to provide the following: continued federal leadership in stimulating the development and deployment of an odn architecture for the nii, integrating thetechnical, economic, and social considerations basic to achieving atruly national u.s. networking capability. continued federal involvement in the development of standards for thenii. the committee does not conclude that the government should setthe standards, but rather that it should support and participate in theongoing standardssetting processes more effectively, bringing to thoseprocesses an advocacy for the public interest and for realization of anopen and evolvable nii.to this end, the committee further recommends that the federalgovernment designate a body responsible for overseeing the technical andpolicy aspects of the evolution of the nii and its applications.the information infrastructure task force (iitf), which focuses on policyissues, is not sufficient for this role; from the perspective of realizing the odnarchitecture, it raises three concerns: (1) by design, the iitf focuses onnontechnical issues and is dominated by nontechnical perspectives; (2) it hasthe strengths and weaknesses of a crossagency entity; and (3) it is an evolvingconstruct with an uncertain future. the national science and technologycouncil (nstc), and its component committee on information andcommunication r&d, which oversees the high performance computing andcommunications information technology activity, is also not sufficient for thisrole; it raises these consummary and recommendations13about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cerns: (1) its mission is to coordinate r&d programs, and (2) it, too, has thestrengths and weaknesses of a crossagency entity.what appears to be needed is a body that will effectively blend the technical competence of the nstc with the policy capabilities of the iitf andbe able to function for the extended period of time required to develop anddeploy an nii with an odn architecture.recommendation 2: technology deploymentthe committee recommends that the government work with the relevant industries, in particular the cable and telephone companies, to find suitableeconomic incentives so that the access circuits (connections to homes, schools,and so on) that will be reconstructed over the coming decade are engineered inways that support the open data network architecture.the term "engineering" refers to the process of choosing what equipmentto deploy, when to deploy it, and in what configuration to deploy it so thatcustomer needs are met at least cost. the committee concludes that a nationalinfrastructure capturing the odn architecture will not be widely deployed ifcompetitive forces alone shape the future; deregulation, along likely lines, willnot be sufficient to guide the development and deployment of the odnarchitecture. while anecdotal, numerous comments from inside the cable andtelephone industries suggest that the perceived costs of adding the features thatsupport openness are discouraging the necessary investment in the currentcompetitive climate. the committee therefore concludes that these features willnot be incorporated in the evolving national information infrastructure withoutpolicy intervention.needed now is direct action by government to ensure a planned,coordinated start to deploying the access circuit technology for the nii.recommendation 3: transitional supportthe committee recommends that temporary subsidies of education and research institutions be considered in cases where the commercialization of theinternet generates exceptional funding distortions.the last decade has seen a powerful transformation of the activities ofhigher education and research in those segments where networking has becomeintegral. side effects of the shift away from a federally funded nsfnetbackbone may include temporary disruption and financial hardship for somemembers of these communities, although overall the impact is expected to belimited.summary and recommendations14about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendation 4: k12 educationthe committee concludes that there is a clear and present opportunity toimprove k12 education by the integration of networking into the u.s.educational system. consistent with recent legislative proposals and theselection of education as one of the emphases in the national informationinfrastructure initiative, the committee recommends the following: the federal government, through the department of education, should take a leadership role in articulating to other federal agencies, statedepartments of education, and other members of the education community the objectives and the benefits of networking in k12education. it should define a national agenda that can guide efforts atthe state and local level. since this leadership requires technical competence, the department ofeducation should, in the short term, pursue collaborations with thenational science foundation and other research agencies, but in thelong term should acquire internal technical expertise at a sufficientlysenior level. the department of education should set an aggressive agenda for research on telecomputing technology in education. this research should address benefits and applications of highbandwidthcommunication and services and the transfer of related technologies toeducational applications. the federal government should continue, and if possible expand, federal funding through matching grants, leveraging state, local, andindustrial funds, to stimulate grassroots deployment of networks in theschools.recommendation 5: network researchthe committee recommends that the national science foundation, along with the advanced research projects agency, other department of defense research agencies, the department of energy, and the national aeronautics and space administration, continue and, in fact, expand a program of researchin networks, with attention to emerging issues at the higher levels of an opendata network architecture (e.g., applications and information management), inaddition to research at the lower levels of the architecture.the technical issues associated with developing and deploying an nii arefar from resolved. research can contribute to architecture, to new concepts fornetwork services, and to new principles and designs in key areas such assecurity, scale, heterogeneity, and evolvability. it is important to ensure that thiscountry maintains its clear technical leadership and competitive advantage ininformation infrastructure and networking.summary and recommendations15about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks are emerging as significant tools of social change, creating anew kind of free market for information services and connectivity, andextending the boundaries for research and education in both time and space.the experiences of the research and education communities show that theinternet and nren experiments are far from overšthey have only just begun.summary and recommendations16about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1u.s. networking: the past is prologuethe "information superhighway" is a constant topic on the evening news.the popular press is awash with comments about a network known as theinternet. telephone companies, cable tv providers, entertainmentconglomerates, and computer and communications hardware and softwarevendors are forming and dissolving alliances. these are all manifestations of amajor transition taking place in our society's communications infrastructure.a national information infrastructure (nii) now lies within strikingdistance of becoming a reality. academia has pioneered the pathways,technology is providing the capability, industry is deploying the networks, andgovernment has primed the funding engine and articulated broad goals.converging computing and communications technologies have advanced to apoint that they can now be deployed and integrated more effectively andeconomically than in the past; through routine and experimental uses much hasbeen learned about what is required for people to achieve the greatest benefitfrom these technologies. as a result, electronic communications andinformation resources are becoming essential to the conduct of business,research, and, increasingly, education, social and government services, and evenrecreation. decisions and actions taken today, many driving longlivedinvestments, will have farreaching consequences. it is thus imperative that weproceed wisely, drawing on past experience and the knowledge of those whohave participated so far in the evolution of this country's capability for networkcommunication.perhaps the most useful information to guide us in the current transitioncan be found in the internet experience. the internet has transu.s. networking: the past is prologue17about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.formed the conduct of research among those who have come to depend on it; itis a holy grail for others, notably the k12 education community, which shouldhave greater access to it but has not been able to afford that access. its success,reflected in its dramatic growth and the richness of its uses, is a handsomereturn on highly leveraged federal investments in the underlying technologiesand in access for large segments of the research and education communities forwhich the internet was originally built.1 it both exemplifies and showcases thesuccessful transfer of defenserelated technology to the civilian economy. yetthe internet's success may well be dwarfed by the promised returns from the farlarger, more complex, and more integrated nii.a truly national information infrastructure will be much harder to shapethan was the internet. the internet arose in a vacuum with little awarenessoutside the research community, the national science foundation (nsf), andother federal researchoriented agencies of what it was and what it could do.commercial telecommunications and information services, on the other hand,have developed as a result of both market forces and public policy influencesranging from the federal, state, and local regulations that affect telephone andcable television offerings and rates, all the way to the intellectual propertyprotections that affect electronic publication. the broader the conceptualizationof the information infrastructurešthe farther it extends to embrace informationgeneration and use as well as transportšthe greater the planning needed tomake it all work together and the broader the relevant policy framework. thescale, scope, and visibility of "wiring up" not only the education and librarycommunities, but also every home and public entity in the united states,present an enormous challenge. compounding domestic conditions is the factthat whatever measures are taken in the united states must anticipate andsometimes respond to conditions in the foreign networks and infrastructures towhich the u.s. infrastructure is and will continue to be interconnected. ongoinginvestment aimed at the future nii and the imminent rollout of infrastructure,together with the uncertainty surrounding the future of the internet, forceconsideration now of plans to be made, steps to be taken, and challengingpolicy issues to be confronted in the development of a broadly useful u.s.information infrastructure.where we are todayexisting communications networks and increasing focus oninfrastructurea network (box 1.1) is a communication system that connects togethergeographically distributed users by means of links and switches asu.s. networking: the past is prologue18about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.well as control software (i.e., sets of rules that govern the way messages travelamong users). a digital communications network communicates informationbetween users in fractions of a second using digital transmission technology.once information is converted to digital form, it can easily be processed,searched, sorted, enhanced, converted, compressed, encrypted, replicated,transmitted, and so on, in ways that are conveniently matched to today'sinformation processing systems. one of the more significant recentdevelopments in communications is fiberoptics technology, which has totallyrevolutionized the communications capabox 1.1 what is a network?networks support communication between programs running ongroups of two or more computers (hosts; figure 1.1). such programsimplement applications that may be "running" on behalf of one or moreindividuals (users). the interchange of data between hosts and userstakes place as character (or byte) streams that pass between them; thesestreams are often segmented into blocks called packets, and thesepackets flow across the network. one character typically requires 8 bits.within the network, there are circuits or links on whichcommunications traffic travels, suitably encoded as electrical signals, light,or radio waves. circuits may consist of copper cables, fiberoptic strands,or the ether (in the case of microwave, satellite, or radio). the rate atwhich communications traffic travels through a circuit, or, more precisely,the capacity of the communications circuit, is referred to as the bandwidthof the circuit and is expressed in terms of bits per second. at the ends ofcircuits are switches or routers that direct traffic from switch to switch on apath from the sending user (sender) to one or more receiving users(receivers). in some applications, such as interactive conferencing, eachuser may be both a sender and a receiver.to manage the flow of communications traffic from a sender to areceiver requires control software that generates a set of signals orconventions used by the network components to keep track of the statusof the traffic flow. these conventions, or rules, are called protocols,analogous to the meaning of the term "protocol" in diplomacy. protocolsperform many functions. for example, they may specify thecharacteristics of files to be transferred or provide tests to ensure thattraffic reaches the receiver unchanged.local area networks (lans) are networks that operate in a limitedgeographical area, such as a single building or campus. commonexamples are the ethernet and token ring networks. hosts usually areconnected to such lans. wide area networks (wans) connect computersor lans together over a larger geographical area. wans aggregate trafficfrom these sources and are often referred to as backbone networks.u.s. networking: the past is prologue19about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bility of the underlying links. a second significant development is the design ofvery fast digital switches based on integrated electronics (i.e., very large scaleintegrated circuit chips). these, in turn, have energized the development of highcapacity, broadband networks that soon will be capable of transmitting billionsof characters per second across our networks.figure 1.1 general network elements. local or wide area; satellite, landline, or undersea; fiber, copper, or wireless: all networking componentsinteroperate to provide connectivity among the community of users and hostcomputers.today several important networks are being used by society. thetelephone network is the most mature component of our communicationsinfrastructure, and the service it currently provides is stable and wellunderstood. a more recent but still quite widespread network is theinfrastructure for dissemination of television (and radio) programming, whichstarted with the broadcast networks and has more recently spawned the cabletv industry. the providers of both the telephone network and the cable tvnetworks (in various partnerships with the entertainment industry) havesubstantial plans to evolve both the technology of the infrastructure and therange of services provided over those networks.the internet (box 1.2; appendix a) is emblematic of a newer andu.s. networking: the past is prologue20about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.different kind of network. the purpose of the internet, the largest packetswitching network in the world, is to provide a very general communicationinfrastructure targeted not to one application, such as telephony or delivery oftv, but rather to a wide range of computerbased services, such as electronicmail (email), information retrieval, and teleconferencing. its roots lie in theresearch community, its original funding came from the department of defense,and its current constituency has extended to the commercial world.box 1.2 what is the internet?the internet is a network of networks. currently it consists ofapproximately 20,000 registered networks, some 2 million hostcomputers, and 15 million users. approximately half the networks arecommercial (and this fraction is growing) and half noncommercial; aboutonethird of the hosts are associated with research or educationalinstitutions. most of the internet connections are in the united states, but149 countries or national entities have connections of one sort or anotherto international computer networks, with about 63 countries possessingdirect connections to the internet.the internet emerged from the packet switching networks developedby the advanced research projects agency (arpa) in the late 1960s andearly 1970s. it was based originally on the tcp/ip protocol suite but hasexpanded to accommodate a multiprotocol architecture. in the late1980s, with the development of the nsfnet by the national sciencefoundation (nsf), the available backbone speed of the internet increasedfrom 56 kbps to 1.5 mbps and then to 45 mbps. backbone networkupgrades planned by nsf, the department of energy, and the nationalaeronautics and space administration will introduce even higher speeds,starting at the level of 155 mbps. with support from arpa and nsf,gigabit network testbeds have been implemented that are enablingapplications that run at enduser speeds in the range of a billion bits persecond and more. operational network capabilities at these speeds likelywill follow in a few years.each component network is a backbone network that providesconnections from hosts and users to the internet. host computers areconnected to local area networks, some of which are campuswide, thatthemselves are connected to metropolitan and/or regional networks. theregional networks are connected to a widearea backbone network, givingrise to a threelevel hierarchy in the united states (figure 1.2).in discussions about how to meet national needs for the exchange ofinformation in the coming decade, the focus has now shifted from "netu.s. networking: the past is prologue21about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.work'' to "information infrastructure," which depends on, but involves muchmore than, networks. an information infrastructure is a framework in whichcommunications networks support higherlevel services for humancommunication and access to information. such an infrastructure has anarchitectural aspectša structure and designšthat is manifested in standardinterfaces and in standard objects (voice, video, files, email, and so on)transmitted over the interfaces. it specifically moves beyond the simple transferof unstructured data to encompass issues relevant to higherlevel applications.as important as the development of a network architecture is the deployment ofthat architecturešthe implementation of the design and its placement in thefield. innovation and leadership are needed in both.figure 1.2 internetworking elements. lan, local area network; man,metropolitan area network; wan, wide area network.how we got herethe history of the internet illuminates many issues important to thedevelopment of a national information infrastructure. the internet origu.s. networking: the past is prologue22about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inated when the first node of the arpanet (the first packet switchingnetwork), sponsored by the advanced research projects agency (arpa), wasinstalled at the university of california at los angeles in 1969. the evolutionof digital networkingšfirst within the computer science community, later as itexpanded into different segments of the research and highereducationcommunities (including research libraries), and more recently with its gradualentry into the k12 education community and public librariesšhas resultedfrom federal funding decisions that were both farsighted and, at the time, risktaking. the highrisk, highpayoff approach on the part of government wasessential to the acceleration of successful networking (see appendix a).when the nsf undertook the expansion of the internet in 1986, itrepresented the beginning of a grand experiment as part of the emergingnational research and education network (nren) program. although thecomputer science community had become enthusiastic users of the earlyinternet, the larger science research community had had only limited exposureto the technology, and it was far from clear that it would prove a critical pieceof research infrastructure. the nsf, with the support of other federal agenciesand the office of science and technology policy (ostp), concluded and actedon the wisdom that the correct undertaking was not to perform a small pilotproject for the support of science research, but rather to build and operate anetwork of a size to encompass the vast majority of the nation's researchcommunity (figure 1.3). the result was substantially greater, broader, andfaster communication, collaboration, and sharing of new data and insights, plusinnovations in the organization, presentation, and retrieval of information byresearchers. for much of the research community, that initial experiment hasbeen a resounding success. it has demonstrated the power of networking totransform a community, to change its operating paradigms, and to build a baseof enthusiastic and committed users.over this same period individuals and groups within the education andlibrary communities began to participate in and benefit from access to theinternet. now increasing numbers of k12 schools and school systems,community colleges and universities, plus continuing, vocational, and technicaleducation programs across the country are beginning to reach a level ofawareness about networking that was achieved by the computer sciencecommunity 10 years ago. they are initiating a cycle of experimentation,acceptance, and transformation. meanwhile, demand for access to and capacityon the internet has mushroomed to professional and personal uses byindividuals in all sectors of the economy and society (figures 1.4 and 1.5).u.s. networking: the past is prologue23about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1.3 nsfnet backbone service, 1993. figure courtesy of the national science foundation.u.s. networking: the past is prologue24about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1.4 traffic on the nsfnet backbone, march 1991 to march 1994. graph courtesy of the internet society, reston, va.u.s. networking: the past is prologue25about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1.5 internet diversification: washington, d.c.area connections to the ans t3 backbone that underlies nsfnet. diagram courtesy ofadvanced networks and services inc.u.s. networking: the past is prologue26about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.today in transitiontoday the evolution of the u.s. information infrastructure is marked by arapidly growing and diversifying user population, an increase in privateinvestors, varied information providers, an almost universal set of stakeholdersfrom many different constituencies, and enormous growth of infrastructureapplications and services. it is also shaped by a volatile government policyenvironment with pressures for deregulation of telecommunications providers,conflicting views of the ideal role for government at all levels, and increasedpolitical activity by a broad range of stakeholders.several of the issues surrounding the future of the internet and the nrenprogram were anticipated in the computer science and technology board's1988 report toward a national research network,2 which addressed continuingtechnology needs, the importance of closer interaction with commercialproviders of underlying and related services, and the implications of broadeningand enlarging the user community. key changes since the 1988 report includethe broadening of attention to education issues and institutions, the growingcommercialization of the internet, the planned withdrawal of nsf from directprovision of internet backbone service, and the introduction of a more explicitfocus on architecture, information resources, and midand highlevel services.another change is that, until very recently, the major transition to gigabitpersecond network technology was discussed as something far down the roadand in need of "revolutionary" developments; this was the "phase iii" networkof the original nren program. however, the nren activities launchedfollowing the 1988 cstb report included the fielding and testing of gigabitpersecond technology and applications in a number of testbeds.3 these testbedshelped to clarify that, indeed, the move to gigabitpersecond speeds could beaccomplished in a manageable, evolutionary fashion. hence, this committeedoes not warn of a needed revolution, but rather, assumes that the transition canbe made smoothly, if continued resources are provided for research anddevelopment in gigabit technology, architecture, and applications.at the same time, the committee points out that the history of networkingprovides cause for concern about how network transitions are managed:ostensibly simple transitions within the internet environment have provedawkward in practice. for example, as part of "phase ii" of the nren program,the backbone network service was upgraded from t1 (1.5mbps) service to t3(45mbps) service, with unpleasant disruptions experienced in networkoperations. beginning in 1988, arpa support for the internet was reduced,causing confusion among some sets of users and individuals involved ininternet operations. in 1989, theu.s. networking: the past is prologue27about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1.3 the nextgeneration nsfnetnow that basic network services are readily and economicallyavailable commercially, nsfnet will, beginning in 1994, evolve into a farsmaller but very high speed national backbone network for researchapplications requiring high bandwidth (figure 1.6). in a recent solicitation,the national science foundation (nsf) requested proposals to:ł establish an unspecified number of network access points (naps)where regional and other service providers (route servers) will be ableto exchange traffic and routing information; establish a routing arbiter to ensure coherent and consistent routing oftraffic among nap participants; establish a very high speed backbone network service (vbns) linkingthe nsfsupported supercomputer centers; and allow existing or realigned regional networks to connect to naps ornetwork service providers, which will connect to naps, for interregionalconnectivity.the naps will provide connectivity to midlevel or regional networksserving both commercial and research and education customers and willalso provide access to the vbns.with respect to regional networks, the solicitation addressed onlyinterregional connectivity. ongoing complementary intraregional supportwill continue and will be funded at constant or rising levels. these effortsinclude the connections program, which provides grants either toindividual institutions or to more effective or more economical aggregates.a separate effort is anticipated to address intraregional connection of highbandwidth users to the vbns.interconnecting the nsf supercomputer centers, the vbns will bepart of the internet. it is expected that the vbns will run at a minimumspeed of 155 mbps and that lowspeed connections to naps will berouted elsewhere.source: adapted from committee on physical, mathematical, andengineering sciences, federal coordinating council for science,engineering, and technology, office of science and technology policy.1994. high performance computing and communications: toward anational information infrastructure. office of science and technologypolicy, washington, d.c., p. 37.u.s. networking: the past is prologue28about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.arpanet was decommissioned, in some cases with abrupt termination ofcircuits and connectivity. these experiences provoke anxiety within theresearch and education network communities about any kind of transition,beginning with the currently contemplated shifts in nsfnet (box 1.3). thenature and pacing of a variety of transitions have become real and pressingissues; getting there is at least as important as the nature of the destination.figure 1.6 elements of the nextgeneration nsfnet called for in thesolicitation outlined in box 1.3. nap, network access point; ra, routing arbiter;rs, route server; vbns, very high speed backbone network service. diagramcourtesy of the national science foundation.the concept of the nren and its research and education applications,which were built on the premise of governmentfunded specialpurposenetworks, must now be integrated into a construct built on commercial networksoffered in an emerging competitive marketplace. this is part of a process ofmaturation, which will have many dimensions, including the need for moreprofessional management. the need for that integration is reflected in the recentevolution of the nren program. in particular, the nren program has beencomplemented by a new (fifth) component of the high performance computingand communications (hpcc) initiative, the information infrastructuretechnology and applications program, and the entire hpcc initiative has beenmade a component of the larger national information infrastructure initiative.4in view of the shift to a larger, more truly national nii context, it isu.s. networking: the past is prologue29about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.necessary to determine how to meet underlying needs of the research,education, and library communities reflected in the nren program. the federalgovernment has a historic and ongoing interest in the conduct of research, andthe internet experience makes clear that networking and informationinfrastructure are inextricably tied to the future of research in this country. atthe same time, both the recent nren program experience and its broadeningclientele show that achieving widespread and economical access to informationinfrastructure is difficult. moreover, the problem of access is much larger, interms of the number of needed access points and participants, for theeducational community than for the research community.a challenge, then, is to develop the leadership and the champions that willextend the implementation of networking to the education and public librarycommunities, building on and linking to the nsfdriven experiment for theresearch community. the expansion of information infrastructure into thesecommunities is the beginning of a broader expansion into the home implicit inan nii.visions of the information future what mightit be?the internetbased visionone vision of tomorrow's networking derives from the experience with theinternet. as an open network it has from the outset been a laboratory fordiscovering innovative ways to use information technology.5 for example,through its distributed and broadbased membership, the internet has given riseto a phenomenon in which services of all kinds spring up suddenly on thenetwork without anyone directing or managing their development. theseservices are offered free to anyone who asks. indeed, more generally there isanytoany connectivity of all kinds. for example, "newsgroups" abound on theinternet, covering thousands of subjects of interest to its members; these rangefrom topics on all aspects of computers and research to hobbies, travel, andpersonal advice, among many others. these newsgroups embody a new kind ofsocial interaction that no one had predictedšjust as the value of electronic mailhad not been predicted when the arpanet was conceived. furtherpopularizing the internet is the recent introduction and runaway growth of themosaic service, which allows delivery of pictures and graphics to users' screensfrom a variety of servers on the internet. hypertext documents can now containhighquality graphics and even moving picture clips, and through "hot links"users can navigate through a document inu.s. networking: the past is prologue30about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a highly customized fashion. this capability has the potential to changesignificantly the way we use stored knowledge.such spontaneous generation of unforeseen yet enormously popularservicesšwhich is encouraged by the internet as a distributed information andcommunications systemšis a constant source of pleasant surprise today andheralds future potential as we move into an era of truly interactive informationvia the nii. the success of the internet is such that commercial carriers andother private investors are not only offering but also demanding to be allowedto develop and manage the infrastructure and to provide information services tobe delivered over that infrastructure.6the entertainmentbased visionanother vision of the information future derives from the commercialopportunities that have been identified for new services in the entertainmentsector. it grows out of the video delivery services provided by the cable tvindustry and is receiving great attention. although a considerable market iscontemplated for infrastructure serving business needs,7 the entertainmentsector is concerned primarily with residential consumers and therefore ispopularly linked to the notion of universality. whereas the internet today servesapproximately 2 million host computers, the entertainment, telephone, and cabletv (etc) networks will likely serve 50 million to 100 million, and thosecomputers will, in many cases, look like cable tv settop boxes. the etccommunities are to some extent joining forces; cable tv networks will in thefuture be interactive, and telephone systems will have greater bandwidth inorder to accommodate video.the etc push reflects an industry agenda that is substantially independentof the internet, of its users (the research, education, and library communities),and of its directions. almost certainly it is from the etc industry complex thatthe major financial resources will come for the nii as we wire up to serve thecountry: it plans to infuse billions of dollars into the required infrastructure. themajor players who are currently trying to capture this market see movies,games, and home shopping as very large business and investment opportunities.8recently, uncertainties about market demand and payback have causedmany executives and financial analysts to moderate their expectations andplans. several business deals have collapsed, signaling both difficulty anddelay, which have been attributed to technical problems, lack of consensus onmarket trends, and regulatory pressures or uncertainty.9 morgan stanleyeconomist stephen roach, for example, questions the potential for growth indemand, estimating that u.s. houseu.s. networking: the past is prologue31about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.holds currently spend about $160 billion on all forms of ''multimedia"(including tvs, video cassette recorders, and video tapes; computers; audioequipment; tv and audio repair; telecommunication links; and applicationssuch as cable tv, video cassette rentals, and movie admissions), more thandouble the 1983 level of $74.4 billion. this spending level is about 3.3 percentof total disposable personal income and may account for 10 percent of all u.s.household discretionary outlays.10 differences in corporate culture, outlook, andexperience further cloud the nature and timing of etc interactions, raisingquestions about how much and what kind of private investment in informationinfrastructure will be made and when.11the clintongore administration's visionone barometer of the political forces that will help to shape a nationalinformation infrastructure is the set of efforts by the clintongoreadministration to frame the discussion by offering its own nii vision(box 1.4).12 the administration envisions an encompassing informationinfrastructure that integrates and rationalizes various ongoing networkdevelopments. motivated more by social and economic policy considerationsthan by technology advancement, the administration's view emphasizes accessby individuals regardless of means or location and use by industries and publicinstitutions in support of national goals ranging from competitiveness todelivery of government services. thus, for example, it combines goals ofuniversal access to broadband, interactive services with goals of connecting allclassrooms, libraries, hospitals, and clinics by the year 2000.possible scenarios for development of a nationalinformation infrastructureit is clear that the emerging nii will be a hybrid, rather than a lineardescendent, of the earlier technologies. what is not clear is how prevailingforces will interact and what the nature of the resulting infrastructure will be. itis difficult to predict the outcome of something that is changing so rapidly andseems to generate so many misconceptions as it evolves.one possible consequence of the diverse expectations for an nii is thatmany disjoint network technologies will be deployed, each dedicated to aparticular networking objective and each providing its own set of restrictedservices. another outcome is that the competencies and interests of theacademic and commercial communities may come together and drive aconcerted effort to create a network that can be the basis foru.s. networking: the past is prologue32about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commerce, education, and research but that is still insulated from theinfrastructure of the etc industry complex. a third alternative entails a fullerintegration, with the interests of the etc industries, the commercialcommunities, the education and research communities, and the general publicall being served by a common infrastructure (figure 1.7).box 1.4 selected tenets of the administration'snii vision encourage private investment. provide for and protect competition. provide open access to the network. avoid creating a society of information "haves" and "have nots." encourage flexible and responsive governmental action. protect privacy and copyright. ensure that the united states remains a leader of the information age. encourage the emergence of a new kind of communications serviceprovider that offers switched, broadband digital transmission servicesto the home and office. provide for interoperability. create new jobs, new companies, new technologies, new products,new services, new markets, and new business opportunities. improve delivery of health care. lower prices. create expanded diversity of choice for u.s. consumers. bring into millions of homes information that will enrich people'seconomic, social, and political lives. spur economic growth and increase competitiveness. democratize information, giving all americans access to the informationthey want and need, where and when they want it, for an affordableprice. provide educational opportunities created by longdistance learningand networks of schools and universities. provide community empowerment that comes from linking citizens withtheir governments.sources: office of the vice president, the white house. 1994."vice president proposes national telecommunications reform: bring theinformation revolution to every classroom, hospital, and library in thenation by the end of the century," press release, january 11, emailversion; office of the vice president, the white house. 1994."background on the administration's telecommunications policy reforminitiative," press release, january 11, email version; remarks preparedfor delivery by vice president al gore. 1994. royce hall, ucla, losangeles, calif., january 11, fax; "administration white paper oncommunications reforms,'' january 27, 1994, email version.u.s. networking: the past is prologue33about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1.7 a fully integrated communications and information networksupporting interoperability and a range of services, indicated by examples.the committee's vision: an integrated nationalinformation infrastructurefull integration of communications and information infrastructure (thethird alternative above) is supported by the committee, which believes thatintegration should be an explicit goal if the networks of today are to evolve to ageneral information infrastructure serving society with a broad range ofservices. the committee, in developing its vision of a future nii, has beenstrongly influenced by the internet's openness, a characteristic that has been keyto its unprecedented success. it therefore characterizes its vision in terms of anopen data network (odn).a national information infrastructure should be capable of carryinginformation services of all kinds, from suppliers of all kinds, to customers of allkinds, across network service providers of all kinds, in a seamless accessiblefashion. the longrange goal is to provide the capability of universal access touniversal service, but one that goes beyond a lowestcommondenominatorapproach. much of this report is shaped by the committee's belief in theimportance of defining and achieving such an overarching vision for tomorrow.u.s. networking: the past is prologue34about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.converging the visions of the futurealthough there are valid historical reasons that the entertainmentandinformation (i.e., internet)based visions have not yet been harmonized, thecommittee believes it is in the national interest to integrate these visions into amore comprehensive modelšone that will support diverse objectives and helpensure national wellbeing on many fronts. the internet, the commercialnetworks, the drive by the etc complex, the consumer marketplace, and theneeds of the research, education and library communities are all interrelated; theinfrastructure, deployment, and services of the nii can and should all be highlysynergistic.technology impetushistorically, the technical features of the networks underlying the internetand the networks for tv distribution have been very different, but broadbanddigital transmission and fast, inexpensive computing are diminishing some ofthe need for distinctive technological solutions. past networks for televisiondistribution have been characterized by specialization to that one single, highbandwidth data type and a lack of switching inside the network. standards fortelevision transmission over the air and over cable have been based on analograther than digital transmission. the standard for analog transmission oftelevision, ntsc (after the national television systems committee), is nowembedded in every television receiver, and these television sets are expected toreceive 30 or more frequencymultiplexed ntsc channels simultaneously andto select from these the one that is to be displayed on the tv screen. thus,currently, it is the tv set itself, not the broadcast or cable tv network, thatdoes the switching.the internet operates very differently. from the beginning, the internetwas designed to carry a range of higherlevel services, not just a singleapplication such as ntsc video. the information to be carried was digitallyencoded, and any digital data could be transported. instead of broadcasting alldata sources to all destinations on the network, the internet uses internalswitching to direct data only where it is needed. however, the high cost of longdistance circuits meant that the bandwidth of internet circuits was much lowerthan that of television networks; this limited transmission capacity could notsupport realtime transmission of video.that situation is now changing, and many, if not most, informationnetworks will soon have the capability to transport and switch video in digitalform along with other forms of digital information. the internet has increasedin speed to the point that small quantities of audio andu.s. networking: the past is prologue35about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lowquality video are now transported over its infrastructure. at the same time,the cable networks are evolving to support a more general range of services, notjust broadcast of ntsc video. in some cases, the cable service providers areplanning to carry digital signals, a circumstance that raises the question ofinteroperability among the various networks that transport electronicallyencoded information. the distinction among the infrastructure needs of these various services is rapidly disappearing; thus it is natural to consider anarchitecture that can, indeed, support interoperability among these networks.benefits to the nationšlastmile economicsat least three important benefits will accrue to the nation if differenttechnologies for providing video, audio (including telephony), and datacommunications services are interoperable, are linked by recognized interfacesand standards, and are capable of sharing a common infrastructure whenappropriate. these benefits, which will accrue because economics will probablydictate the use of different technologies in different service situations, are thefollowing: a more coherent, forwardlooking, and versatile reconstruction of thecircuits that connect homes, offices, and schools to the wide areanetworks (the "lastmile" circuits); economy and convenience to the end user resulting from having allforms of electronic information accessible through known,interoperable formats. information services in the future willincorporate combinations of audio, video, and computer data. it wouldbe best if all three could be delivered in a common framework withcommon conventions for representation and interfacing; and full connectivity between any two appliances attached to the network.already available are personal computers that support audiocommunication and display television signals. whether information isdistributed inside the home through one or several interfaces, thedevices themselves, such as televisions, computers, consumerelectronics, or telephones, can, if they have common signalingconventions and display formats, become a part of an integrated enduser networked environment.most u.s. homes have a telephone line that connects them to the localtelephone company's network, and in the street outside 90 percent of thesehomes there is a cable tv line. this connection, called the "last mile" in thecommunications industry, represents a tremendous investment that cannot beeasily replaced. we will be able to reconstruct the last mile only once in thenext decade or two (even though we may getu.s. networking: the past is prologue36about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.two or three such links into the home: one from the telecommunicationsindustry, one from the cable tv industry, and one from the electric powerutility industry). as noted above, in the vast majority of cases these inplacefacilities provide analog, not digital, service and do not provide the capabilitiesto support either the emerging entertainment sector or the advanced servicesbeing developed for the internet, much less the nii. the telephone link, withcurrent analog modems, can typically support speeds of 9,600 or 14,400 bits persecond (bps), or if converted to a digital service, 128,000 bps (the "2b + d"narrowband integrated services digital network service). these are not adequaterates for quality television. the cable tv line, while it has more raw bandwidth,does not permit any delivery other than ntsc video and does not in most casesprovide a reverse channel for traffic leaving the home.if existing telephone technology were used to provide a service with abandwidth sufficient for advanced information services, the costs with today'sprice structure would prove intolerable. at current commercial rates, theaverage fee for attachment to the internet at 56 kbps is about $15,000 per year.this rate will come down as usage grows and technology improvements reducethe cost, but $15,000 per year puts advanced internet use for out of the reach ofmost home owners.unless the price for access is reduced so that it is much more in line withthe price of telephone service, nii services to the home will not be widespread.cost reduction requires investment in new equipment for the access network(such as a multiplexer on the street corner and a shared fiber connection to thecentral office, as required to support the subscriber loop carrier systems beinginstalled in local exchange carrier access networks), and this, in turn, dependson sufficient, demonstrated demand for the service.telephone and cable tv companies are today preparing to makesubstantial upgrades to their equipment. trials of new systems, intended in partto gather market research and therefore not necessarily indicative of the costs offull commercial deployment, are being conducted in florida, california, newjersey, and many other states. directed toward the services of the entertainmentsector, these trials include interactive television and video on demand. manybillions of dollars will likely be spent on reconstructing cable tv and telephonelines before the end of this decade. that is, old plant will be updated, eitherbecause it is now providing poorquality service or because it cannot do whatcustomers want it to. cost reduction will require the development andinstallation of new communications equipment in central offices and otherpremises, if not the laying of new cable or fiber at subscriber locations.justifying this investment will require sufficient demonstrated demand for theresulting service. to ensure construction of a broadly useful nii, the upgradeu.s. networking: the past is prologue37about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plans now being developed should take into account the needs and services ofboth the entertainment and information sectors.consideration of the lastmile economics is the most important of theissues that impel a unified vision of the nii. however, two other points are alsoworth considering. one is that the boundary between entertainment andinformation is not absolute. video is becoming a part of stored information, andentertainment, as in interactive television and multiplayer games, depends onthe exchange of control information among participants. if there were a uniformcoding of video used for entertainment and information services, then thecommonality could easily be recognized and integration more easily focused.the other is that today the television and the computer cannot interact orexchange any sort of data. both have displays, and both attempt to providevisual information to the user, but there is no interplay between them. this lackof compatibility is an issue in terms of cost to the consumer, and in loss offlexibility to take advantage of new services.13 as we bring into the home a nextgeneration of networked devices, this problem will become more generallyrelevant: new devices for telephony, for entertainment, and for informationaccess should all interwork.how can we converge the visions?how can the various distinctive visions of a national informationinfrastructure be integrated to support interoperability and a common niiobjective? all have a large constituency and significant fixed investments intheir installed technology base. until recently, technical, economic, andregulatory barriers have yielded no reason to strive for interoperability, andstandards have been developed independently as well. it will be necessary tofind specific points at which the convergence can be encouraged, to takeaccount of the real economic issues, especially in the entertainment sector, andto take an active role in defining and fostering the overarching vision.structure and content of this reportthis report has three essential components. the first is the committee'spresentation of a detailed framework for an integrated informationinfrastructure, which it calls the open data network. chapter 2 explores thenature of the architecture essential to achieving true open informationnetworking, discusses the key actions needed to implement that architecture,and points out how achieving the goals advanced by various stakeholders,providing the desired benefits, and controlling costs will depend on continuingresearch and development.u.s. networking: the past is prologue38about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the report's second and third components concern deployment of an odnarchitecture, although it is difficult to totally separate development of thearchitecture from its deployment. chapters 3 through 5, the second component,address the planning needed to provide connectivity both within and betweenthe research, education, and library communities in the larger national contextand within the evolving framework of the nii.in chapter 3 the committee examines the history of the research,education, and library communities' use of information infrastructure, assessingdifficulties, benefits, and prospects in order to provide insights into the largerchallenge of deploying a true nii and to express the continuing needs ofcommunities that have so much to contribute to and gain from an nii.generating and sharing information are fundamental to the activities andmissions of these groups, which have innovated many of the informationinfrastructure elements now becoming more widely accessible. as a broaderrange of users develops, these three communities will shift from the majorityposition they hold today to a minority force in the evolution of national networkrelated initiatives. the challenge is how to balance and harmonize the varyingneeds and desires of the existing research, education, and library communitieswith those of the emerging communities of users while keeping in focus thegoals of serving the educational, professional, and social needs of society atlarge.chapter 4 discusses the experiences and perspectives of these communitiesas they relate to commonly advanced principlesšsuch as equitable access,protection of key rights, and responsibilitiesšfor the design and operation of annii. chapter 5 addresses the challenges confronted by the research, education,and library communities in financing access to and use of a commerciallyprovided information infrastructure.representing the third component of this report, chapter 6 considersemerging roles for the federal government, which has an opportunity to helpguide the expansion of the existing networking infrastructure in ways that willachieve an open data network architecture and an appropriate balancing ofinterests in deploying such an architecture. there are several options for andissues affecting how the federal government can act on that opportunity andhow effective the result will be.several appendixes provide complementary information. appendix aoutlines the federal government's history of involvement in networking as itrelates to the nren program and the internet, focusing on nsf's role anddescribing in some detail the internet's evolution and how it works today.appendix b provides illustrative sets of nii principles advanced by a variety ofgroups. appendix c characterizes user support needs. appendix d outlines stateand regional networking activities.u.s. networking: the past is prologue39about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e assesses international dimensions of the internet experienceand their ramifications for the international connections that are inevitable foran nii. appendix f defines key acronyms and terms.the committee's several recommendations, which are reproduced in thesummary, are presented in a different order in the body of the report in thecontext of the issues that occasion them.readers should keep in mind a number of distinctions made in this report.one is the distinction between the research, education, and library communitiesas opposed to the commercial and business communities. another is thedistinction between the internet and commercial networking communities andthe entertainment, telephone, and cable tv communities. a further breakdownwithin the research, education, and library communities distinguishes theresearch segments (i.e., universitylevel research in nonscience disciplines,science research, and the work of research libraries) from the nonresearchsegments (i.e., k12 education, most higher and continuing education, andpublic libraries). it is clear that these various communities differ in their needs(e.g., financing, scale of operation) and roles in society (e.g., population served,desirable breadth of access), as well as in the role that government should playin meeting these needs. as has been pointed out above, the development of anetwork architecture must be distinguished from its deployment. also, networkresearch must be distinguished from research in general (research in the varioussciences, engineering, and the humanities). another distinction to emphasize isthat between access to a network and access to a service. this distinction ismost relevant in considering varying possible levels of access, for example,access to basic telecommunications capabilities and access to informationresources available over a network; access to a network does not guaranteeaccess to information services.notes1. "in barely 12 months, the internet has gone from a tech novelty to a chic media cliche." seeschrage, michael l. 1993. "for time's 'man of the year,' consider the incredible internet,"washington post, december 24, p. d10.2. computer science and technology board, national research council. 1988. toward a nationalresearch network. national academy press, washington, d.c. (the computer science andtechnology board became the computer science and telecommunications board in 1990.)3. the gigabit testbed program is funded by nsf and arpa and involves industry contributionsand participation as well as participation by universities and government laboratories. seecommittee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinating council forscience, engineering, and technology, office of science and technology policy. 1994. highperformance computing and communications: toward a national information infrastructure.office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c.4. the original four components included nren, basic research and human resourcu.s. networking: the past is prologue40about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.es, highperformance computing systems, and advanced software technology and algorithms.5. although commercial networks are often installed in a closed manner for the individualcorporation, they share with the internet the objective of a general communications infrastructurethat supports a wide range of higherlevel services.6. the proliferation of business interest can be seen in the rise of special seminars aimed at businessuse of the internet and special newsletters, such as "the internet letter: on corporate users,internetworking & information services" (launched in october 1993), and the internet businessjournal (canada). washington, d.c., is the center of internetrelated business activity. "while theinternet has no corporate identity, it does have a center of gravity, and the netplex [approximately20 square miles across metropolitan washington, d.c.] is it. . . . here reside the dominant forprofitproviders of internet connections and two of the four biggest online services, which offersubscribers email, electronic versions of magazines, access to airline reservations and investmentservices, and the like. the internet society is here; so is the computer that houses the master registerof affiliated networks' electronic addresses, as well as a raft of internet services, software housesand hardware makers, and associations. well over half of internet traffic between the u.s. and othernationsšhundreds of gigabytes each dayšpasses through the netplex" (p. 100). see stewart,thomas a. 1994. "the netplex: it's a new silicon valley," fortune, march 7, pp. 98104.7. for example, revenues from electronic information services for financial management, research,marketing, purchasing, and general business administration were estimated at almost $14 billion in1993. u.s. department of commerce. 1994. u.s. industrial outlook 1994. government printingoffice, washington, d.c.8. for reference, basic cable subscription revenues in 1993 were on the order of $13 billion; motionpicture box office receipts, by comparison, were somewhat over $5 billion, and videocassette salesand rentals totaled between $13 billion and $18 billion. u.s. department of commerce, 1994, u.s.industrial outlook 1994.9. roach, stephen. 1994. "scoping out the information superhighway," u.s. investment research,morgan stanley, new york, february 25."none of the experts is suggesting that the information superhypeway won't get built, just that earlypredictions of its quick completion were grossly overstated." farhi, paul, and sandra sugawara.1994. "hurdles slow information 'superhypeway,'" washington post, april 7, pp. a1 and a15.10. roach, 1994, "scoping out the information superhighway."11. "not atypically for hollywood, the most compelling reason many gave for attending theconference was that everyone else was. for the last year, representatives of the communications andmedia industries have demonstrated an almost compulsive need to trade information highwaymetaphors at symposiums and conferences with titles such as 'digital world,' 'multimedia expo,'and 'digital hollywood.' although everyone agreed that the highway is comingšand soonštherewas little consensus about how it will evolve, how much it will cost or how quickly people will beable to access it through their computers, telephones or television sets. . . . yet members of thehollywood crowd seemed unsure of their place in the sparring between phone, cable and computerexecutives over how digital age entertainment and information will be delivered. 'i feel like anenglish major in an organic chemistry course,' said disney's [michael] eisner." lippman, john, andamy harmon. 1994. "gore presides at l.a. summit on info age," los angeles times, january 12,pp. a1 and a19.12. the ambitious goals and the level of activity initiated by this administration contrast with themore handsoff, marketoriented approach of previous administrations.13. for example, the requirements for highdefinition television (hdtv) to supportu.s. networking: the past is prologue41about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging nii services are not yet well established. it is known that interlaced displays (today's tvs)were designed for viewing programs at distances of about 8 picture heights (and the aspect ratio is 4units wide by 3 units high); these dimensions permit little eye scanning by the viewer, which leadsto a "disconnected" feeling on his part. on the other hand, hdtv screens have an aspect ratio of 16units wide by 9 units high, and the viewer is typically only 2 to 3 picture heights from the screen;this permits considerable viewer participation with the activity on the screen. this is consistent withthe likely nii applications requiring much closer interactions with the screen. it would be highlydesirable if a single hdtv receiver design could be used for hdtv as well as nii applications. toat least some extent, this principle is recognized by the industry partners in the hdtv "grandalliance," which contemplates an "entrylevel nii terminal" achievable by upgrading themicroprocessors anticipated for hdtv sets. see "national information infrastructure and grandalliance hdtv system interoperability," february 22, 1994.u.s. networking: the past is prologue42about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2the open data network: achieving thevision of an integrated nationalinformation infrastructurethe committee's vision for a national information infrastructure (nii) isthat of an open data network, the odn. having a vision of future networking,however, is not at all the same thing as bringing it to fruition. as a contributionto the ongoing debate concerning the objectives and characteristics of the nii,the committee details in this chapter how its odn architecture can enable therealization of an nii with broad utility and societal benefit, and it discusses thekey actions that must be taken to realize these benefits.an open network is one that is capable of carrying information services ofall kinds, from suppliers of all kinds, to customers of all kinds, across networkservice providers of all kinds, in a seamless accessible fashion. the telephonesystem is an example of an open network, and it is clear to most people that thiskind of system is vastly more useful than a system in which the users arepartitioned into closed groups based, for example, on the service provider or theuser's employer.the implications of an open network1 are that there is a need for a certainminimum level of physical infrastructure with certain capabilities to beprovided, for an agreement to be forged for a set of objectives for services andinteroperation, for relevant standards to be set, for research on enablingtechnology to be continued, and for oversight and management. the rolegovernment should take here is critical.the committee's advocacy of an open data network is based in part on itsexperience with the enormously successful internet experiment, whose basicstructure enables many of the capabilities needed in a truly national informationinfrastructure. the internet's defining protocols, tcp and ip, are not proprietaryšthey are open standards that can bethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure43about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implemented by anyone. further, these protocols are not targeted to the supportof one particular application, but are designed instead to support as broad arange of services as possible. moreover, the internet attempts to provide openaccess to users. in the long term, users and networks connected to such auniversal network benefit from its openness. but in data networking today, thisvision of open networking is not yet universally accepted. most of the corporatedata networking done currently uses closed networks, and most information andentertainment networks targeted to consumers are closed, by this committee'sdefinition.the open data networkcriteria for an open data networkthe open data network envisioned by the committee meets a number ofcriteria: open to users: it does not force users into closed groups or deny accessto any sectors of society, but permits universal connectivity, as doesthe telephone system. open to service providers: it provides an open and accessibleenvironment for competing commercial or intellectual interests. forexample, it does not preclude competitive access for informationproviders. open to network providers: it makes it possible for any networkprovider to meet the necessary requirements to attach and become apart of the aggregate of interconnected networks. open to change: it permits the introduction of new applications andservices over time. it is not limited to only one application, such as tvdistribution. it also permits the introduction of new transmission,switching, and control technologies as these become available in thefuture.technical, operational, and organizational objectivesthe criteria for an open data network imply the following set of verychallenging technical and organizational objectives: technology independence. the definition of the odn must not bindthe implementors to any particular choice of network technology. theodn must be defined in terms of the services that it offers, not theway in which these services are realized. this more abstract definitionwill permit the odn to survive the development of new technologyoptions, as will certainly happen during its lifetime if it is successful.the odnthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure44about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should be defined in such a way that it can be realized both over thetechnology of the telephone and the cable industries, over wire andwireless media, and over local and longdistance network technology. scalability. if the odn is to be universal, it must scale to globalproportions. this objective has implications for basic features, such asaddressing and switching, and for operational issues such as networkmanagement. new or emerging modalities, such as mobile computersand wireless networking today, must be accommodated by thenetwork. if the odn is to provide attachment to all users, it mustphysically reach homes as well as businesses. this capability impliesan upgrade to the "last mile" of the network, the part that actuallyenters the home (or business). further, the number of computers (ormore generally the number of networked devices) per person can beexpected to increase radically. the network must be able to expand inscale to accommodate all these trends. decentralized operation. if the network is composed of many differentregions operated by different providers, the control, management,operation, monitoring, measurement, maintenance, and so on mustnecessarily be very decentralized. this decentralization implies a needfor a framework for interaction among the parts, a framework that isrobust and that supports cooperation among mutually suspiciousproviders. decentralization can be seen as an aspect of large scale, andindeed a large system must be decentralized to some extent. but theimplications of highly decentralized operations are important enoughto be noted separately, as decentralization affects a number of points inthis chapter. appropriate architecture and supporting standards. since parts of thenetwork will be built by different, perhaps competing organizations,there must be carefully crafted interface definitions of the parts of thenetwork, to ensure that the parts actually interwork when they areinstalled. since the network must evolve to support new services overtime, there is an additional requirement that implementors mustengineer to accommodate change and evolution. these features mayadd to the network costs that may be inconsistent with shorttermprofitability goals. security. poor security is the enemy of open networking. withoutadequate protection from malicious attackers and the ability to screenout annoying services, users will not take the risk of attaching to anopen network, but will instead opt, if they network at all, forattachment to a restricted community of users connected for a specificpurpose, i.e., a closed user group. this version of closed networkingsacrifices a broad range of capabilities in exchange for a more reliable,secure, and available environment. flexibility in providing network services. if a network's lowleveltechnology is designed to support only one application, such as broadthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure45about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cast tv or telephony, it will render inefficient or even prohibit the useof new services that have different requirements, although it maysupport the target application very efficiently. having a flexible lowlevel service is key to providing open services, and to ensuring thecapacity to evolve. for example, the emerging broadband integratedservices digital network (bisdn) standards, based on asynchronoustransfer mode (atm), attempt to provide a more general capability forthe telephone system than was provided by the current generation oftechnology, which was designed specifically for transport of voice.the internet protocol, ip, is another example of a protocol thatprovides a flexible basis for building many higherlevel services, inthis case without binding choices to a particular network technology;the importance of this independence is noted above. accommodation of heterogeneity. if the odn is to be universal, it mustinterwork with a large variety of network and endnode devices. thereis a wide range of network infrastructure: local area and wide areatechnology, wireline and wireless, fast and slow. perhaps moreimportantly, there will also be a range of endnode devices, rangingfrom powerful computers to personal digital assistants to intelligentdevices such as thermostats and televisions that do not resemblecomputers at all. the odn must interwork with all of them, anobjective that requires adaptability in the protocols and interfacedefinitions and has implications for the way information is representedin the network.2 facilitation of accounting and cost recovery. the committee envisionsthe odn as a framework in which competitive providers contributevarious component services. thus it must be possible to account forand cover the costs of operating each component. because the resultingpricing will be determined by market forces, fulfilling the objective ofuniversal access may require subsidy policies, a point discussed inchapter 5.benefits of an open data networkcomparing the success of the open internet to the limited impact of variousclosed, proprietary network architectures that have emerged in the past 20 yearsšsystems that eventually either disappeared or had to be adjusted to allow openaccessšsuggests that the wisdom of seeking open networks is irrefutable.3many of the proprietary networks that have played to captive audiences ofvendorspecific networks for years are now rapidly losing ground as usersdemand and achieve the ability to interoperate in a world of heterogeneousequipment, services, and network operating systems. on the other hand, theinternet, and those networks that have "opened up," are enjoying phenomenalgrowth in membership.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure46about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it is important to note that achieving an open network does not precludethe existence of closed networks and user groups. first, there will always beproviders (such as current cable tv providers) that choose to develop closednetworks for a variety of reasons, such as control of revenues, support of closedsets of users, and missioncritical applications. it is unrealistic to believe thatsuch an approach either can or should be controlled. for this reason, it will benecessary to provide some level of interoperation with proprietary protocols,with new versions of protocols, and with networks that do emerge to deal withspecial contingencies or with special services. second, closed user groups willalways exist, for reasons of convenience and security. the open data networkcan be configured to allow closed groups to use its facilities to construct aprivate network on top of the odn resources. (see, for example, the discussionbelow under "security," which presents approaches, such as the use of securityfirewalls, to providing a restricted secure environment.)open data network architectureto realize the vision of an integrated nii, it is necessary to create anappropriate network architecture, that is, a set of specifications or a frameworkthat will guide the detailed design of the infrastructure. without such aframework, the pieces of the emerging communications infrastructure may notfit together to meet any larger vision, and may in fact not fit together at all. thearchitecture the committee proposes is inspired in part by examining theinternet and identifying those of its attributes that have led to its success.however, some important departures from the internet architecture must beincluded to enable an evolution to the much larger vision of an open nii.an architectural proposal in four layersdescribed below is a fourlayer architecture for the open data network.4the four layers provide a conceptual model for facilitating the discussion of thevarious categories of services and capabilities comprised by the odn.5 thelayers are the bearer service, transport, middleware, and the applications.61. at the lowest level of the odn architecture is an abstract bitleveltransport service that the committee calls the bearer service of theodn. its essence is that it implements a specified range of qualities ofservice (qos) to support the higherlevel services envisioned for theodn. at this level, bits are bits, and nothing more; that is, their role inexchanging information between applications is not visible. however,it should bethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure47about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stressed that there can be more than one quality of service; thedifferences among these are manifested in the reliability, timeliness,correctness, and bandwidth of the delivery. having multiple qos willpermit an application with a particular service requirement to make asuitable selection from among the qos provided by the bearer service.7the bearer service of the odn sits on top of the networktechnology substrate, a term used to indicate the range of technologiesthat realize the raw bitcarrying fabric of the infrastructure. included inthis set are the communication links (copper, microwave, fiber,wireless, and so on) and the communication switches (packet switches,atm switches, circuit switches, storeandforward switches, andoptical wavelengthdivision multiplexers, among others). this set alsoincludes the functions of switching, routing, network management andmonitoring, and possibly other mechanisms needed to ensure that bitsare delivered with the desired qos.the open data network must be seen not as a single, monolithictechnology, but rather as a set of interconnected technologies, perhapswith very different characteristics, that nonetheless permit interchangeof information and services across this set.2. at the next level, the transport layer, are the enhancements thattransform the basic bearer service into the range of endtoend deliveryservices needed by the applications. service features typically found atthe transport layer include reliable, sequenced delivery, flow control,and endpoint connection establishment.8 in this organization of thelevels, the transport layer also includes the conventions for the formatof data being transported across the network.9 the bit streams aredifferentiated into identifiable traffic types such as voice, video, text,fax, graphics, and images. the common element among these differenttypes of traffic is that they are all digital streams and are thereforecapable of being carried on digital networks. currently much of thework in the commercial sector is aimed at defining these sorts offormat standards, mostly driven by workstation and pc applications.the distinction between the bearer service and the transport layerabove it is that the bearer service defines those features that must beimplemented inside the network, in the switches and routers, while thetransport layer defines services that can be realized either in thenetwork or the end node. for example, bounds on delay must berealized inside the network by controls on queues. delay, onceintroduced, cannot be removed at the destination. on the other hand,reliable delivery is normally viewed as a transportlayer feature, sincethe loss of a packet inside the network can be detected and correctedby cooperating end nodes.since transport services can be implemented in the end node if theyare not provided inside the network, they do not have to be mandatedas a core part of the bearer service. this suggests that they should besepathe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure48about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rated into a distinct transport layer, since it is valuable, as thecommittee discusses, to minimize the number of functions defined inthe bearer service. while the service enhancements provided by thetransport layer are very important, this report does not elaborate furtheron this layer (as it does below for the other three layers), since theseservices are a wellunderstood and mature aspect of networking today.3. the third layer, middleware, is composed of higherlevel functions thatare used in common among a set of applications. these functions,which form a toolkit for application implementors, permit applicationsto be constructed more as a set of building blocks than as verticallyintegrated monoliths. these middleware functions distinguish aninformation infrastructure from a network providing bitlevel transport.examples of these functions include file system support, privacyprotection, authentication and other security functions, tools forcoordinating multisite applications, remote computer access services,storage repositories, name servers, network directory services, anddirectory services of other types. a subset of these functions, such asnaming, will best be implemented in a single, uniform manner acrossall parts of the odn. there is a need for one or more global namingschemes in the odn. for example, there may have to be a lowlevelname space for network end nodes, and a higherlevel name space fornaming users and services. these name spaces, since they are global,cannot be tied to a particular network technology choice but must bepart of the technologyindependent layers of the architecture. thesesomewhat more general service issues will benefit from a broadarchitectural perspective, which governmental involvement couldsustain.4. the uppermost layer is where the applications recognized by typicalusers reside, for example, electronic mail (email), airline reservationsystems, systems for processing credit card authorizations, orinteractive education. it is at this level that it is necessary to develop allthe user applications that will be run on the odn. the benefit of thecommon services and interfaces of the middleware layer is thatapplications can be constructed in a more modular manner, whichshould permit additional applications to be composed from thesemodules. such modularity should provide the benefit of greaterflexibility for the user, and less development cost and risk for theapplication implementors. the complexity of application softwaredevelopment is a major issue in advancing the odn, and any approachto reducing the magnitude and risk of application development is animportant issue for the nii.as a wider range of services is provided over the network, it will beimportant that users see a uniform interface, to reduce the learning necessary touse a new service. a set of common principles is needed for thethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure49about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.construction of user interfaces, a framework within which a new networkservice can present a familiar appearance, just as the macintosh or the xwindow interface attempts to give the user a uniform context for applicationswithin the host. a generation of computerliterate users should be able toexplore a new network application as confidently as they use a new televisionremote control today. much effort is under way in the commercial sector toidentify and develop approaches in this area, and it will be necessary to waitand see if market forces can produce a successful set of options in this case.a critical feature of the odn architecture is openness to change. since thecommittee sees a continuous evolution in network technology, in endnodefunction, and, most importantly, in uservisible services, the network standardsat all the levels must be evolvable. this requires an overall architectural viewthat fosters incremental evolution and permits staged migration of users to newparadigms. there must be an agreedupon expectation about evolution andchange that links the makers of standards and the developers of products. thisexpectation defines the level of effort that will be required to track changingrequirements, and it permits the maintainers to allocate the needed resources.the need for responsiveness to change can represent a formidable barrier, sincethe status quo becomes embedded in user equipment, as well as in the network.if standards are not devised to permit graceful and incremental upgrade, aswell as backwards compatibility, the network is likely either to freeze in somestate of evolution or to proceed in a series of potentially disruptive upheavals.the internet is currently planning for a major change, the replacement ofits central protocol, ip. this change will require replacing software in everypacket switch in the internet and in the millions of attached hosts. to avoid thedisruption that might otherwise occur, the transition will probably beaccomplished over several years. in a similar approach the telephone industryhas made major improvements to its infrastructure and standards (such aschanges to its numbering plan) in a very incremental and coordinated manner.part of what has been learned in these processes is the wisdom of planning forchange.the committee thus concludes that the definition of an odn architecturemust proceed at many levels. at each of these levels technical decisions willhave to be made, and in some cases making the correct decision will be criticalto the odn's success in enabling a true nii. the committee recognizes that ifthe government attempts to directly set standards and conventions, there is arisk of misguided decision making.10 there is also concern that if the decisionsare left wholly to the marketplace, certain key decisions may not be made in asufficiently timely and coherent manner. some overarching decisions, such asthe specificationthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure50about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the bearer service discussed in the next section, must of necessity be madeearly in the development process, since they will shape the deployment of somuch of the network.11 therefore, both the nature of the architecture's layersand the decision process guiding their implementation are important. in theinterests of flexibility, the committee emphasizes the architecture, services, andaccess interfaces composing an odn. it describes the characteristics theinfrastructure technology should have, leaving to the engineers and providershow those characteristics should be realized.the centrality of the bearer servicethe nature of the bearer service plays a key role in defining the odnarchitecture. its existence as a separate layeršthe abstract bitlevel networkservicešprovides a critical separation between the actual network technologyand the higherlevel services that actually serve the user.one way of visualizing the layer modularity is to see the layer stack as anhourglass, with the bearer service at the narrow waist of the hourglass(figure 2.1). above the waist, the glass broadens out to include a range ofoptions for transport, middleware, and applications. below the waist, the glassbroadens out to include the range of network technology substrate options.imposing this narrow point in the protocol stack isolates the application builderfrom the range of underlying network facilities, and the technology builder fromthe range of applications. in the internet protocols, the ip protocol itself sits atthis waist in the hourglass. above ip are options for transport (tcp, udp, orother specialized protocols); below are all the technologies over which ip canrun.the benefit of this architecture is that it forces a distinction between thelowlevel bearer service and the higherlevel services and applications. thenetwork provider that implements the basic bearer service is thus not concernedwith the standards in use at the higher levels. this separation of the basic bearerservice from the higherlevel conventions is one of the tools that ensures anopen network; it precludes, for example, a network provider from insisting thatonly a controlled set of higherlevel standards be used on the network, arequirement that would inhibit the development and use of new services andmight be used as a tool to limit competition.this partitioning of function is not meant to imply that one entity cannotbe a provider of both lowand higherlevel services. what is critical is that theopen interfaces exist to permit fair and open competition at the various layers.the committee notes that along with this open competition environment comesthe implication that the lowlevel and highlevel services should be unbundled.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure51about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.even if the providers of the bearer service are indifferent to the higherlevel standards, those standards should be specified and promulgated. if thereare accepted agreements among software developers as to the standards andservices at the middleware and application levels, users can benefit greatly byobtaining software that permits them to participate in the services of the network.characterizing the bearer serviceif the odn is indeed to provide an open and accessible environment forhigherlevel service providers, then there must be some detailed understandingof the characteristics of this underlying bearer service, so that higherlevelservice providers can build on that foundation. a precedent can be seen in thetelephone system's welldeveloped service model, which was initiallydeveloped to carry a voice conversation. other applications such as datamodems and fax have been developed over this service, precisely because thebasic "bearer service," the service at the waist of the hourglass, was well defined.in the case of data networks, defining the base characteristics of theunderlying service is not easy. applications vary widely in their basicrequirements (e.g., realtime video contrasted with email text). current datanetwork technologies vary widely in their basic performance, from modemlinks (at 19,200, 14,400, 9,600, or fewer bits per second) to local area networkssuch as the 10mbps ethernet, to the 100mbps fddi.a number of conclusions can be drawn about the definition of the bearerservice. the bearer services are not part of the odn unless they can be pricedseparately from the higherlevel services, since the goal of an open andaccessible network environment implies that (at least in principle)higherlevel services can be implemented by providers different fromthe provider of the bearer service. as long as two different providersare involved in the complete service offering, the price of each partmust be distinguished. the definition of the bearer services must notpreclude effective pricing for the service. the committee recognizesthat such pricing elements have been bundled together and that thishistory will complicate a shift to the regime advanced here in theinterest of a free market for entry at various levels.12 we must resist the temptation to define the bearer service usingsimplistic measures such as raw bandwidth alone. we must insteadlook for measures that directly relate to the ability of the facilities tosupport the higherlevel services, measures that specify qosparameters such as bandwidth, delay, and loss characteristics.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure52about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 2.1 a fourlayer model for the open data network.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure53about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the bearer service must be defined in an abstract way that decouplesthe service characteristics from any specific technology choice.network technology will continue to evolve, and the bearer servicemust provide the stable service interface that permits new technologyto be incorporated into the odn.this last point deserves further emphasis. it attempts to capture for theodn one of the key strengths of the internet, which is that the protocol suitewas defined in such a way that it could be realized across a wide range ofnetwork technologies with different speeds, capabilities, and characteristics.the analog of the bearer service in the internet suite is the ip protocol itself;this protocol is deliberately defined in a manner that is as independent from anyspecific technology as could be accomplished.this technology independence is accomplished by including in the ipprotocol only those features that are critical to defining the service as needed bythe higher levels, and leaving all other details for definition by whatever lowerlevel technology is used to realize ip in a particular situation.13 ip is thus a veryminimal protocol, with essentially two service features:14 the source and destination endnode address carried in the packet, and the behavior that the user may assume of the packet delivery service,namely, the "besteffort" delivery service discussed below in "qualityof service."the ip protocol's decoupling from specific technologies is one of the keysto the success of the internet, and this lesson should not be lost in designing theodn.there are several benefits to this independence of the bearer service fromthe technology. first, competition at the technology level will be greater the lessthe service definition constrains innovation. this competition can be expectedto lead to reduced cost and increased function. second, the standards of theodn will be widely deployed and will remain effective for a long time. theymust, if successful, outlive any particular technology over which they areimplemented. it is thus critical that every effort be expended to ensure that thebearer service is not technology dependent, but is defined instead in an abstractway that permits technology evolution and service evolution to proceed inparallel. the odn can thereby be enabled by managing change at a certainlevel in the protocol hierarchy; it is possible to create a platform (like ip in theinternet) that allows application vendors to operate without regard to changes inthe implementation of transmission lines, switches, and so onšalthough theplatform defines general requirements that designersthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure54about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of transmission lines, switches, and so on should meet. box 2.1 discusses aspecific issue in this context, which is the relationship between the bearerservice and a very important emerging technology standard, asynchronoustransfer mode.middleware: a new set of network servicesabove the bearer service and the transport level (layers 1 and 2 of theodn architecture), but below the application level (layer 4) itself, a new set ofservice definitions is needed to support the development of nextgenerationapplications. at this level, it is necessary to develop network services for thenaming and locating of information objects. also needed here are tools forbuying and selling products (goods and services), including a definition ofelectronic money, and an architecture for dealing with intellectual propertyrights. another necessary service is support for coordinating group activities.services of this sort have been called "middleware," since they sit above thetraditional network transport services but below the applications themselves.a transition to an environment characterized by an abundance ofinformation of all kinds, forms, and sources implies a need for services tolocate, access, retrieve, filter, and organize information. the foundation hasalready been laid for substantial personalization of information resources (e.g.,in the development of personal libraries and the conduct of personalizedservices). tools for users are especially important because of the expectationthat the provider community is not likely to organize information resourcessufficiently, if at all.15 see appendix c.development of middleware services is not as mature as development ofthe basic transport services or the specific application services such as thosefound on the internet. this area, layer 3, of the architecture is discussed in"research on the nii" at the end of this chapter.electronic money, for example, is a middleware service that illustrates thekinds of issues that must be resolved if the nii infrastructure is to become notjust a means for moving bits but also a general environment for online servicesand electronic commerce. one key to the controlled buying and selling ofinformation is an easy means for payment. today, anyone interested in sellinginformation on the network must either establish a financial relationship witheach individual customer or use an information reseller. information resellersmay be an effective mechanism but may also inhibit the freedom to packageand structure information in ways that provide product differentiation. a relatedissue in electronic commerce is that transactions that deliver information, suchas directory enquiry, will very often be sold for small sums of money. to billfor each transaction separately would add considerably to the cost ofthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure55about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.1 the role of asynchronous transfer modein the odn bearer servicefor the last several years, a proposal has been emerging for a newsort of network technology, which is called asynchronous transfer mode,or atm. technically, atm is a variant of packet switching, with thespecific characteristic that all the packets are the same small size, 48payload bytes. this small size is in contrast to the larger and variablesizepackets found in today's packet switched networks (ethernet, for example,has a maximum packet size of 1,500 payload bytes).these small packets, which are called "cells" in the atm standard,provide technical advantages in some contexts. they reduce certainforms of variation in delivery delay, and they make more straightforwardthe design of highly parallel packet switches, the socalled space divisionswitches.atm was originally developed in the context of the telephoneindustry, as a successor to the current generation of digital telephonestandards. in 1988 it was selected by the ccitt (now the itutelecommunications sector) as the agreedupon approach to achieving abroadband integrated services digital network (bisdn).* the perceivedutility of atm subsequently caused it to be standardized in other contexts,such as local area networking.the main goal of atm is flexibility. in the current telephone system, astatic connection is established and bandwidth reserved from the time acall is placed until it is terminated. even if a speaker is silent, a flow of(null) bits continues. with atm (as with packet switching in general),transmission is asynchronous, which means that cells need to be sentonly when there is information to transfer. this has the obvious advantageof improved utilization of bandwidth. an equally important point, however,is that this more flexible framework can be used to realize a broad rangeof services, such as connections of any desired capacity. today'stelephone system is implemented using a fixed hierarchy of link speeds:voice circuits (rated at 64 kbps each) are combined into a circuit at about1.5 mbps (called t1), t1 circuits are combined into a circuit at about 45mbps (called t3), and so on. in order to sell other speeds (fractional t1 ort3), it is necessary to add additional equipment to the system. with atm,a circuit of any speed can be configured, by varying the rate at which cellsare being sent. this flexibility permits the providers to sell a wider range oftransmission services and also provides a basic mechanism for buildingthe internal control and management communications that support thenetwork itself: communications for signaling, for operations andmaintenance, and for accounting and billing. building these facilities withthe same technology (multiplexers and switches) that implements the userservices has the potential to reduce cost. this situation contrasts withtoday's telephone network, which has a quite separate data network forsignaling.the other advantage of atm over traditional telephone circuits is thatthe physical link from the customer to the network can be used at onetime forthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure56about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many simultaneous conversations on which information is flowing inbursts. during the idle period between one burst and the next aconversation consumes no transmission bandwidth and so leaves thetransmission line free to carry bursts of traffic belonging to otherconversations. by conveying data in small cells, atm can rapidlyinterleave bursts of traffic from different conversations and so provide aquality of service that is particularly appropriate for multimedia andcomputer applications.as was noted above, atm may have more in common with packetswitching than with the traditional circuit switching of the telephonesystem. however, in contrast with packet switching as seen in the internetor on current network technology such as ethernet local area networks,atm permits resources (in particular, bandwidth) to be allocated tosupport specific flows of cells. this feature permits atm to provideconnections with different quality of service (qos), which refers todistinguishable traffic characteristics such as continuous steady flow, lowdelay for short bursts, low priority and possibly long delay for bulkratetraffic, and so on. this explicit control over qos is in contrast to the singleqos offered by the internet protocol, the "besteffort" transfer service.what is most important about atm is not its technical details, butrather the fact that it has been successful as a common starting point fordiscussion and cooperation among the previously somewhat disjointcomputer, data network, and telecommunications industries. there arenow widespread plans for atm deployment, both in the wide area andlocal area context. the joint effort put into atm by these communitiesrepresents a force for unification that materially enhances theopportunities for a future integrated open data network.but while atm may be a way of realizing the bearer service in thelate 1990s, the atm standards, because they contain many details relatedto the specifics of atm technology, do not directly play the role of thebearer service for the odn described by this committee. they are specificto atm and cannot describe how odn traffic should be carried over othertechnologies such as ethernet or dialup telephone lines. as discussionsin the text affirm, the committee believes that the odn bearer serviceshould be defined independently from a specific technology, which willpermit both atm and other sorts of technology to be mingled in the odn,just as a range of technologies are mingled in the internet today. to builda network out of heterogeneous network technologies, such as atmcombined with ethernet, fddi, and so on, requires a unifying definition ofthe overall offered service that is independent of the technology details. intoday's internet, this is the objective of the ip protocol; for the odn this isthe function of the bearer service. in the short run, how ip will evolve andhow it will interwork with atm are issues for the internet and atmstandards bodies. in the longer run, the same issues will be discussed inrelating atm to the broader nii objectives.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure57about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.* indeed, the terms "asynchronous transfer mode" (atm) and "broadband integratedservices digital network" (bisdn) are often used synonymously. properly, atm is atechnology approach, and bisdn is a standard, but this distinction has been lost,especially since the most active of the current relevant standards bodies calls itself theatm forum. regarding standards setting, "in 1988 there was only a very reducedrecommendation with respect to broadband isdn. it was already agreed then that atm(asynchronous transfer mode) would be the transfer mode for the future broadbandisdn. two years later, in 1990, ccitt sgxiii prepared 13 recommendations, usingthe accelerated procedure. these recommendations defined the basics of atm anddetermined most parameters of atm." see de prycker, martin. 1991. asychronoustransfer mode: solutions for broadband isdn. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, n.j.,p. 9.the transaction. mechanization by means of electronic money can reducethe cost of billing, making small transactions more affordable and the networkmore useful.to address these issues, the middleware layer should provide, as a basicservice, the means to effect payment transfer. were this capability in place, aninformation seller could deal with any purchaser on a casual basis, trusting inthe infrastructure to protect the underlying financial transaction.the two proposed models for payment are the creditdebit card model andthe money model, which differ in functionality and complexity.a creditdebit card paradigm permits a user to present his identity to apurchaser, with a third party (who plays the role of the authorizing agent in amerchant transaction) assuring the transaction. although this style of paymentis not complex to specify, one of its key aspects is that the identity of theparticipants is known. this prevents anonymous purchase and allows building aprofile of users based on a pattern of purchases. concerns about privacy areincreasing as more and more transactions are carried out online, and asrequirements grow for users to identify themselves in a robust manner for thesetransactions.a more complex scheme for creditdebit transactions is "electronicmoney," a term connoting a means to transfer value across the network betweena buyer and a seller who are mutually anonymous. such a scheme provides animportant degree of privacy and may facilitate wider acceptance of networkpayment, but it is substantially more complex and more computationallydemanding, and it carries the risk of running afoul of existing banking andexport regulations.the problems of network payment are sufficiently complex that theconsiderable private development efforts under way may not be sufficient.additional basic research in this area may be needed.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure58about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.defining the higherlevel servicesdefining the odn bearer service and the middleware services is only partof specifying the odn architecture. there must be broad agreementšderivedfrom the vision of an integrated nii and spanning the range of processes fromstandards setting to implementation of products and servicesšon what the corehigherlevel services will be, and there must be standards that define how theseservices are to be realized. these agreements and standards are critical toensuring that users with endnode equipment (computers, "smart" tvs andother entertainment units, and so on) can interwork, even though they are fromdifferent vendors and run software from different vendors. the alternativemight be that a particular hardware choice becomes coupled to a particularproprietary or immutable set of higherlevel services. again, the objective ofthe layered odn architecture is to decouple the lowlevel technology options(in this case both network and endnode choices) from the higherlevel servicesthat can be realized on the technology.basic higherlevel servicesbased on its observations of current and emerging uses of the internet, thecommittee suggests below a sample list of minimal higherlevel services for thefuture nii. these services should be taken as examples, which may change overtime, given the importance of change as a component of openness. the servicesmost relevant to the eventual network may emerge only in the next decade. atpresent, the committee has identified the following six services as constituting aminimal set: electronic mail. the importance of electronic mail, the largest internetapplication, is expected to continue. email is mostly textual now butwill presumably be multimedia in the near future, as the conversion isalready under way. fax. today, fax is transmitted using the existing telephone networkand is one of the largest uses of this network. a digital version of faxwould be a very low cost service with wide utility. advanced featuresof the bearer service, such as realtime delivery, are not needed for faxdelivery, as has been illustrated by the emerging transport of fax overthe internet. remote login: network access to remote computer systems. the accessspeed for remote login will increase with time, starting with voicegrade telephone lines or isdn. any open network should be requiredto supply a bearer service adequate to support this minimal level ofconnectivity, since it is a basic building block for a range of yet higherlevel services that involve using a remote computer. the standards thatdefine thethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure59about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.remote access should support at least the modes in use today, includingemulation of a "dumb" terminal and support for standard windowpackages such as the x window system. these services can besupported today over voicegrade lines with compression. database browsing. access to a variety of database services for thepurpose of browsing should be permitted. browsing through digitallibraries is one example; another is accessing one's own health orcredit records, a service that implies the need for a high level ofsecurity assurance. the standards that define the access should providefor at least simple forms of database query operations, which can bepackaged by the endnode device in some userfriendly way. given theexploding success on the internet of services such as worldwideweb, gopher, archie, and wais, all of which provide means tobrowse through and retrieve information (box 2.2; table 2.1), it isclear that this area will be of great importance. digital object storage. there should be a basic framework for a servicethat permits users to store digital objects of any kind inside thenetwork and also make them available to others. the term "digitalobject" denotes an object that is more complex than a file in a filesystem and that combines contents, type information, and attributes; anexample is a video clip. this capability is a first step toward allowingany user of the network to be an information provider, as well as aninformation consumer. financial transaction services. certain financial transaction serviceswill soon be pervasive. for example, electronic rendering and paymentof bills will be a popular service that will enable bills to be directed toan authorized party on behalf of individuals or businesses, and paidelectronically. banks and other financial institutions would handle thisfunction.these services, which are similar to services now being used or at leastexplored on current networks, have the characteristic that they are not stronglydependent on high bandwidth or sophisticated qos support. there are otherhigherlevel services that are more demanding. a partial list follows.more demanding higherlevel services audio servers. audio today is an important component ofteleconferencing, multimedia objects, and other more advancedapplications. multicast realtime audio, although now only beingexperimented with, promises a powerful and compelling service ontoday's internet and represents an example of the sort of new servicethat can be expected on the nii.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure60about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.2 emerging information services on theinternetthe driving application that first defined the internet was electronicmail. while the internet also supported file transfer and remote login, email was the service that most people used and valued. it is supported byvarious directory services such as whois and netfind.recently, we have seen a second generation of applications that arevery different from email. rather than facilitating communication amongpeople, they provide access to information. they offer a means forproviders of information to place that information on the network, and theyprovide a means for users of information to explore the information spaceand to retrieve desired information elements. these applicationsšwhichinclude archie, gopher, the worldwide web (www) and its mosaicinterface, and the wide area information service (wais)šare redefiningthe future of the internet and providing a whole new vision of networking. archie is an attempt to make the original file transfer protocol of theinternet, ftp, more useful by organizing the available files and makingit possible to search for desired objects. there are, at many places onthe internet, hosts that provide files that can be retrieved by amechanism known as anonymous ftpšby any person on the internetwithout the necessity of having an account or being known to thatmachine. although anonymous ftp does permit others to retrieve afile, it is not a very effective means to disseminate information,because there is no way for a potential user to search for the file.there is no way to find all the anonymous ftp sites on the internet, orto find out if a file is located in any particular spot. archie attempts tofind all the anonymous ftp sites on the internet, extract from each sitea list of all the accessible files, and build a global index to thisinformation. gopher is an attempt to replace the original ftp with a file accessprotocol that is easier to usešin other words to make it easier to''gopher" the information. in contrast to archie, its focus is less oncataloging and more on easy storage and retrieval. a softwarepackage that anyone can obtain and install on a computer, gophercreates on that machine a "gopher server," a location in which filescan be stored and retrieved. the structure of gopher makes itsubstantially easier to list and retrieve files than did previous tools suchas anonymous ftp. the worldwide web (www) is a more ambitious project for therepresentation and cataloging of oneline information. www is basedon the paradigm of hypertext, in which a document, instead of beingorganized linearly, is organized as a collection of multimedia objects(typically the size of a few screens of content), each of which haspointers to other relevant objects. the user, by following this web ofpointers, can browse in hyperspace without having to be concernedabout where the objects are actually stored. in fact, the objects can bestored in any www server on the internet, so thatthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure61about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the user, by following the web pointers, can in fact cross the internet,perhaps going from country to country as successive objects areexplored. the web of pointers, which can be translated automatically bythe computer into the desired object itself, make www an onlinewonderland for browsing.the most popular user interface to the www is a tool called mosaic,which displays the web objects for the user to read. the pointer isrepresented to the user as a highlighted region of the screen; clicking onthat region with the mouse causes the object named by that pointer toappear.exploration of the top level of the www information structure revealsan extraordinary range of information. a recent visit showed, for example,a number of online journals in fields as diverse as physics and theclassics; collections of pictures, including the library of congress vaticanexhibit (which over a half a million people have visited over the network);and weather maps, guides to restaurants, and personal profiles ofresearchers. all of these have been contributed by individuals andorganizations interested in making their particular knowledge available toothers.this last point is the key to the success of the www. the web is askeleton, a framework, into which anyone can attach an informationobject. the web provides the tools to let anyone become an informationproducer as well as a consumer. thus it exemplifies an open marketplaceof ideas, in contrast to commercial services that select and control thecontent of material provided by their systems to users. www has beenwildly successful. while the size of the internet has been growing at arapid, if not alarming, rate, the use of the www has grown at an evengreater rate (figure 2.2).the key to the web is in the pointers, the linkages that tie one pieceof information to another. the pointers from a web object must beinstalled by the person creating that web element, based on that person'sexpectation of where a user of that object might want to go next. althoughthere are tools for creating web objects, the intellectual decisions aboutwhat pointers to install belong to the object creator, who thus has greatflexibility in how pointers are used. this can lead to very creative andexpressive information structures, but also to structures that are ratheridiosyncratic.one consequence of this ability to put pointers into objects is thatanyone can build an index to other objects. that is, one can become aninformation producer not only by adding an object with original content,but also by creating a different way of indexing and organizing the objectsalready there. the web thus becomes a testbed for experiments in novelways to organize and search information. wais represents a different approach to information searching. inwww, a human user searches by following web pointers. in contrast,the wais server has used a connection machine, a highly parallelsupercomputer, to permit very powerful query requests to be made ofthe server. one of the most interesting requests is to ask the server todevelop a word usagethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure62about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.profile of a document, and then search all the other documents in theserver to find others with a similar profile. if www is a means for peopleto browse in cyberspace, wais is a way to let the computer do thebrowsing.although some of these tools are proving very successful, theyrepresent only a first step in the discovery of paradigms for the realizationof online information. the web pointers provide a way to navigate incyberspace but do not provide an effective way to filter a set of objectsbased on selection criteria. in contrast, wais provides a way to filterthrough all the objects in a server but does not provide an easy way to linkobjects in different servers.as paul evan peters of the coalition for networked informationobserved in briefing the committee, we are in a paleoelectronicinformation environment, with crude tools, hunters and gatherers, andincipient civilization, but more advanced civilization is coming.* theexpectation of far greater quantities and varieties of information combinedwith far greater ease and diversity in communication implies a need formore effort to develop the necessary related services.* committee members observe, however, that the internet experience, with itsabundance of information and a rising tide of email traffic, raises the question ofwhether people will be hunters or prey, and whether people will want to be camouflagedor colorful. video servers. standards are now being defined for the coding andtransmission of moving images, such as traditional or highdefinitiontelevision pictures. these standards will permit services similar totoday's cable tv services, as well as advanced offerings such asmovies on demand, and the playback of video components ofmultimedia information services and advertisements. video will makea range of demands for network services. delivery of a movie, forexample, represents a longterm requirement for bandwidth, whileexploring a database of short video fragments represents a very"bursty" load on the network. interactive video. while entertainment video can be coded in advanceand stored until needed, interactive or realtime video is coded,transmitted, and played back with minimum latency. this form ofvideo is required for teleconferencing, remote monitoring, distributedinteractive education, and so on. coding in real time for interactivevideo imposes time limits on the coding process that may limit thequality or compression of the signal. a separate standard may thereforebe needed for the coding and transmission of interactive video, tosupport applications such as multimedia teleconferencing.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure63about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 2.2 growth of internet browsing services, december 1991 to march 1994. graph courtesy of the internet society, reston, va.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure64about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2.1 resource discovery servicestypemachinespeoplefilesdocumentsx.500x.500x.500x.500resourcediscovery/etc/hosts;nis; dnswhois;finger; kis;netfind;netdigarchie;prospero;alex;gopher;www;z39.5waisretrievalftp; nfs;afs;prosperowais;gopher;z39.50selectionwais;gopher;z39.50source: quarterman, john s., and carlmitchell smoot. 1994. the internet connection: systemconnectivity and configuration. addisonwesley, reading, mass.quality of service: options for the odn bearerservicebesteffort and reserved bandwidth servicean objective of the internet has been to enable two computers to agreeprivately to implement some new service, and then implement it by exchangingpackets across the network. the only conformance requirements for thesepackets are lowlevel matters such as addressing. this flexibility is veryimportant and is captured in the odn's architectural distinction between thelowlevel services of the network infrastructure and the higherlevelconventions that define how applications are constructed.the internet today provides a service that has been called "best effort."when one sends a packet, the network forwards it as best it can, given the othertraffic offered at the moment, but makes no specific guarantee as to the rate ofdelivery, or indeed that the packet will be delivered at all. many computerapplications operate very naturally in a context that does not guaranteebandwidth, and the internet has demonstrated that besteffort service isattractive in this situation.16 just as many operating systems offer a differentperceived performance depending on what other processes are running, so alsodoes the besteffort service divide upthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure65about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the available bandwidth among current users. having an application sometimesrun a bit more slowly does not usually cause serious user dissatisfaction. forapplications such as remote file access, in fact, besteffort service has provedvery effective, as can be gauged by the success of local area networks (lans)such as ethernet that provide only this service. of course, besteffort service istolerable only within limits, and a network that is totally congested will not beacceptable.an alternative to besteffort service is one that requires the traffic source todeclare its service requirements, so that the network can either reserve andguarantee this service or explicitly refuse the request. when there is excessbandwidth, both besteffort and reserved bandwidth service work well to makeusers happy. but when there is congestion, the choice is then between slowingall users down somewhat, as is the case with besteffort service, or refusingsome users outright in order to fully serve others with reserved bandwidth.17 forsome applications such as realtime audio and video, a reserved service may bepreferable.18 users will need to be able to express a preference.this sort of variation in the bearer service is described by the term "qualityof service," which is understood in the technical community as covering controlof delay, bandwidth, degree of guarantee versus degree of sharing, loss rates,and so on. the internet today is moving from single, besteffort service to amore complex model with explicit options for qos, to support new applicationssuch as video and audio. the conclusion in that community is that options forqos are needed, but not as a replacement for besteffort service, which willremain effective for many applications in the internet.the besteffort service and the current cost structure of the internet arerelated. the original motivation for packet switching, made available almost 30years ago, was to permit statistical sharing among users, who were willing toaccept the variable delays of besteffort service in exchange for much lowercosts. there is no reason to assume that this situation has changed. some formof besteffort service will probably continue to exist, since it may lead to a morecompetitive pricing option for many users.19 effective bandwidth managementwill probably continue to be the key to controlling costs in longlines situations.the nii architecture must provide a range of means to allow bandwidth sharingfor cost control. this issue is discussed further in chapter 5.assuring the servicewhether the offered service is a reserved bandwidth or a besteffortsharing of bandwidth, it will be necessary to offer some assurance that theservice actually provided is the one the user was supposed to get.20the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure66about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the case of an explicit bandwidth commitment, the user can measure theprovided bandwidth, but in the case of besteffort service, the user cannot tell ifthe allocation of bandwidth was actually fair, or if some users somehowreceived more than they should have.in the current internet, allocation of bandwidth is done without robustenforcement. the host software is required to implement an algorithm thatregulates the sending rate of the source during periods of overload. but if theend user is clever enough to rewrite his operating system, cheating is possible,since there is no direct enforcement of fair sharing in the switch nodes. further,only tcp among all the internet protocols calls for this algorithm; currentprotocols for voice and video do not adapt to congestion. there is fear in theinternet community that this honor system cannot survive and that some explicitcontrols will be needed, even in the case of besteffort service, to assure usersthat the sharing is fair. the internet engineering task force is working activelyin this area. the debate about enforcing fair sharing of besteffort service islikely be a central part of the debate about the bearer service of the nii.an issue closely related to enforcement is accounting for usage. usageaccounting could provide the basis of billing, a means to assess networkallocation after the fact, and a means to assess usage and provide informationfor planning. a recurring question is whether adding to the current internetadditional facilities for usage accounting would yield sufficient benefits.feedback to users on actual usage, even in the absence of usage billing, canencourage efficient and prudent use. however, there is a recurring concern thatthe addition of accounting tools will inevitably lead to usagebased billing,which is in some cases undesirable (see chapter 5), and a separate concern thatthe cost of adding accounting tools to the internet will greatly increase the costand complexity of the switches and the supporting management environment.the committee notes this matter as requiring further investigation.21nii compliancethe previous sections have explored the range of services that could formthe basis of the nii, at the low level (the bearer service), the middleware level,and the application level. to define the minimum services that must beprovided everywhere in the nii, it is necessary to establish a baseline of definedmandatory functionality. without some such criteria, any provider couldessentially market any network technology or service as being a part of the nii,and users would have no assurance that it would actually be useful. definingnii compliance, that is, reaching agreement on the minimum set of nii services,is critical to turning the envisioned nii into an effective national infrastructure.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure67about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, attempting to define nii compliance in terms of core servicesthat must be available everywhere requires dealing with a basic tension betweenpower and universality. this tension precludes any single definition of niicompliance, so that defining compliance thus becomes rather difficult.the highlevel services discussed above by the committee include some,such as video, that demand substantial bandwidth and sophisticated techniquesfor traffic management. the committee believes that such services will form thebasis of important applications with great utility that will help drive the nii intoexistence. yet the necessary bandwidth will not be available or affordableeverywhere, even after a significant period of time. to define highbandwidthservices as a mandatory part of nii compliance would thus exclude from thenii infrastructure many components of today's networks, including all thetransmission paths using traditional telephone links. such a restriction is muchtoo limiting. any realistic plan for the nii must tolerate a range of capabilities,consistent with the different technologies that will be used in different parts ofthe network.this reality requires that the basic service of the nii be characterized in anadaptable way that takes into account both power and universality. as a result,the committee's definition of nii compliance has two parts: first, an evolving minimum set of basic services, both bearer servicesand application services, will be required without exception for niicompliant systems. as discussed above, application services such aselectronic mail, fax, remote login, and simple (textoriented)information browsing do not require advanced infrastructurecharacteristics and should be available without exception. second, any piece of infrastructure engineered to provide nii servicesbeyond the minimum core will have to be implemented in an niicompliant manner.22the real consequence of this definition of nii compliance is themaximizing of interoperation, the ability of end nodes attached to the odn tocommunicate among themselves effectively, assuring users that any parts of thenii that can support a particular service will implement it in a compatiblemanner. users interested in services beyond the minimum set must still verifywhether the relevant parts of the infrastructure can actually carry them.this approach to defining compliance is again motivated somewhat byobservation of the internet. the internet standards recognize a small core ofprotocols that must be present in any machine that declares itself internetcompatible. however, most internet standards, including the essentiallyubiquitous tcp, are not actually mandatory, but only recomthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure68about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mended. the internet philosophy is that if a service similar to the one offeredby tcp is available on a machine, then tcp should be implemented. thisapproach has been very effective in practice and seems to represent a middleground in defining compliance, pushing for interoperation and openness wherepossible but at the same time accepting the wide range of specific capabilitiesprovided by existing network technology (box 2.3).box 2.3 testing for compliancethe term "compliance" carries the perhaps unfortunate implication ofa need for formal conformance testing of services and interfaces. in fact,although formal testing seems to work for lowlevel standards such as linkframing protocols, it has not been effective for higherlevel standards suchas those for electronic mail, remote login, file transfer, and so on.rigorous testing based on formal protocol modeling has not succeeded inpractice in identifying nonconforming implementations.in fact, the marketplace itself has proved a much more effective testof conformance than has the certification laboratory. in the real world ofinterworking among heterogeneous implementations, real issues ininteroperation are quickly discovered, and vendors who are notresponsive to these issues do not succeed.a specific example of these market forces can be seen in a traditionof one of the first internet trade shows, called interop. on the show floor ofinterop is installed a real network, and all vendors bringing products to theshow are expected to connect to the interop network and to demonstrateinteroperation with their competitors' products. failures are very obviousand quickly fixed. the resulting definitions of protocol conformance, whileperhaps more operational than formal, have served the user communitywell.bandwidth varies significantly over the range of network options, and thequestion of compliance at various speeds becomes an issue. but bandwidth isnot the only dimension in which technology will vary. for example, wirelesstechnology, which is traditionally limited in transmission capacity due to thescarcity of spectrum and issues of cost and transmitter power, may be unable tocompete with fiber optics for enduser bandwidth, but fiber systems, whichhave abundant transmission capacity, lack critical mobility attributes enjoyed bywireless systems.23 a wireless system would not be deemed noncompliantsimply because it failed to support the same bandwidth as a fiberoptic system.similarly, a fiberoptic system would not be noncompliant because it failed tosupportthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure69about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mobile users. each would have to be evaluated within the intrinsic limits of itscapabilities. other issues, such as integrity, privacy, and security, also affect therange of services a particular part of the nii can support.while it may not be realistic to mandate that support for video and otherhigherbandwidth services be a part of the minimum definition of niicompliance, the committee believes that these more demanding services will bekey to many useful and important societal objectives in the coming decades. itthus concludes that the bearer services necessary to provide these servicesshould be a longterm objective of the nii.standardsrole of network standardsto make the vision of an integrated nii a reality and to define niicompliance, it is necessary to specify the technical details of the network. thisis the role of standards, the conventions that permit the successful andharmonious implementation of interoperable networks and services. thatstandards serve to translate a highlevel concept into operational termsšandthat the process of standards definition is thus key to success in achieving an niišis well understood in many sectors; indeed, the latter half of the 1980sseemed as much preoccupied with standards as it was with productdifferentiation. this was true in both the computer and communicationsindustries.today, network standards relevant to the nii are being discussed in manydifferent, sometimes competing contexts, such as the following: the internet standards are formulated by the internet engineering taskforce (ietf), an openmembership body that currently operates underthe auspices of the internet society and with support from researchagencies of the u.s. federal government. the open systems interconnection (osi) network protocols, whichoffer an alternative set of protocols somewhat similar to the internetprotocols, have been formulated by the international organization forstandardization (iso) internationally, with u.s. contributionscoordinated by the american national standards institute. a u.s.government version, gosip, has been promulgated by the nationalinstitute of standards and technology (nist).24 iso is broadening theosi framework (see appendix e). standards for local area and metropolitan area networks such asethernet, token ring, or distributed queue dual bus (dqdb) areformulated by committees under the auspices of the institute forelectrical and electronics engineers.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure70about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. asynchronous transfer mode, an important emerging standard at thelower levels of network service, is being defined by at least twoorganizations, the atm forum and the internationaltelecommunications union (itu) telecommunications sector(formerly referred to as the ccitt). standards for the television industry are formulated by a number oforganizations, including the society of motion picture and televisionengineers, the advanced television systems committee, and the itu.these sometimes discordant processes are shaped by commercial interests,professional societies, governmental involvement, international negotiation, andtechnical developments. the recent explosion of commercial involvement innetworking has had a major impact on standards definition, as standards havebecome a vehicle for introducing products rapidly and for gaining competitiveadvantage.factors that complicate setting standardsthe committee believes that the critical process of setting standards iscurrently at risk. historical approaches to setting standards may not apply in thefuture, and we lack known alternatives to carry us forward to the nii. thecommittee discusses below a number of forces that it sees as acting to stress theprocess.25network function has moved outside the networkas noted above, much of the uservisible functionality of informationnetworks such as the internet is accomplished through software running onusers' endnode equipment, such as a computer. the network itself onlyimplements the basic bearer service, and this causes changes in the standardssetting process. when function moved outside the network, the traditionalnetwork standards bodies no longer controlled the process of setting standardsfor new services based on this functionality. the interests of a much largergroup, representing the computer vendors and the applications developers,needed to be heard. this situation is rather different from that in the traditionaltelephone network, where most of the function was implemented in the interiorof the network, and the user equipment, the telephone itself, had characteristicsdictated largely by the telephone company. with the advent of computernetworks in the 1970s and the strong coupling to computer research, the cleardemarcation between users' systems and the network began to blur, anduncontrolled equipment appeared more frequently at user sites, to be attacheddirectly to data networks. some of this equipment was experimental, and thenetwork could make few assumptions about its proper behavior.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure71about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.one thing that is clear now is that much of the capability and equipment ofconnectivity is moving to the ''periphery" of the networking infrastructure; forexample, there is tremendous penetration of private local area networks oncustomer premises. this emphasis on the periphery implies that a single entity,or even a single industry, will be incapable of controlling the deployment of thenetworking infrastructure. thus the need for an odn architecture is clear.it is hard to set standards without a recognized mandatethe controlled nature of the early telephone system essentially gave therecognized standards bodies a mandate to set the relevant standards.historically, the telephone network was designed and implemented by a smallgroup that controlled the standardssetting process because it controlled thenetwork. (in most countries outside the united states, the telephone system isan arm of the government.) similarly, in the early days of the internet, thestandards were set by a body established and funded by the department ofdefense, which (for the dod) had a mandate to provide data networkstandards.26 no such mandate exists in the larger network context of today. forthe internet, for example, the explicit government directive to set standards hasbeen replaced by a process driven by vendor and market pressures, withessentially no topdown control.a bottomup process cannot easily set longterm directionas can be seen in the internet community, the absence of a mandate to setand impose standards has led to a bottomup approach, a process in which thedevelopment community experiments with new possibilities that becomecandidates for standardization after they have been subject to considerableexperimentation and use. standardization is thus akin to ratification of what isthe generally accepted practice. the paradigm of translating operationalexperience into a proposed standard imposes at least one measure of quality ona set of competing proposals. it has proved successful compared to therelatively more controlled and topdown processes occurring in the iso. but thebottomup approach to setting standards is not without fault.although setting standards by negotiation, compromise, and selection inthe marketplace has been largely effective for the internet, it is important torecall that the internet had its early success in the context of overall directionand guidance being provided by a small group of highly motivated researchers.this indirect setting of direction seems to have faltered as the internetcommunity has become larger and more fragmented by commercial interests.currently, the internet communitythe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure72about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.seems to make shortrange decisions with some success, but longrangedecisions, which reflect not only immediate commercial interests but alsobroader societal goals, may not get an effective hearing. the internetarchitecture board (iab) has the charter to develop longerrange architecturalrecommendations on behalf of the internet community, but it cannot imposethese recommendations on anyone.a topdown approach no longer appears workablemany people consider the bottomup approach to be too much like a freemarket model in which the final result is due to individual enterprise andcompetition, that is to say, is not sufficiently managed. the topdown approachappears to be more manageable to many observers, particularly those withextensive experience in managing largescale networks to meet commercialexpectations for performance. however, the classical topdown approach hasnot succeeded in the current environment, whereas the bottomup internetprocess, which has directly embraced diverse approaches and objectives in itsbottomup process, is a phenomenal success that must be applauded andrespected. although there may be merit in considering how to integrate the topdown and bottomup approaches, there is little experience to suggest that eitherapproach alone will work easily in the larger context of the future nii.commercial forces may distort the standardssetting processa vendor, especially one with a large market share, can attempt to set aunilateral standard by implementing it and shipping it in a product. some of themost widespread "standards" of the internet are not actually formal standards ofthe community, but rather designs that have been distributed by one vendor andaccepted as a necessity by the competition. this approach can lead to a veryeffective product if the vendor has good judgment; it may open the market toinnovation and diversity at a higher level based on the standard. however, theobjectives of the vendor may not match the larger objectives of the community.the resulting standard may be shortsighted, it may be structured to inhibitcompetition and to close the market, it may simply be proprietary, and it mayinhibit evolution.setting standards for the niišplanning for change isdifficult but necessarymanaging the process by which the nii network environment evolves isone of the most critical issues to be addressed. planning for changethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure73about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.requires an overall architecture and constant attention to ensure that anystandard, at any level of the architecture, is designed to permit incrementalevolution, backward compatibility, and modular replacement to the extentpossible. unfortunately, as the committee has noted above, the currentstandardssetting processes seem least effective in setting a longterm directionor guiding the development of standards according to an overall vision of thefuture. thus there is some need to find a middle ground whereby an overallvision of the nii can inform standards selection and also allow for competinginterests and approaches to be evaluated in an open process. the criticalquestion is not what the exact vision is, but how it will be promulgated andintegrated into the various ongoing standards activities.issues of scale in the niithe committee views the nii as being universal in scope, reaching not justto businesses and universities, but also eventually to most homes, as does thetelephone system. this objective raises many issues related to growth andscaling.a major research focus of the last 10 years has been scaling networkbandwidth to higher speeds (gigabits and beyond). scaling in the number ofnodes has perhaps received less attention. but the issues of scale in the numberof nodes are perhaps more challenging that those of speed. as the network getslarger, issues of addressing, routing, management and fault isolation,congestion, and heterogeneity become more relevant. these issues are furthercomplicated by the likely decentralized management structure of the nii, inwhich the parts of the network will be installed and operated by differentorganizations.we see in the internet today that some of the protocols and methods arereaching their design limits and need to be rethought if we are to build anetwork of universal scale. a major effort is now being made to deal withserious limitations in the internet's current addressing scheme, for example.close attention should be paid to the resolution of these problems in the internetto derive insights for the far larger nii.addressing and namingthe open data network envisaged by the committee will surely grow toencompass an enormous number of users and will be capable of interconnectingevery school, library, business, and individual in the united states, extendingbeyond that to international scale. the ability to communicate among such ahuge set requires the ability to name the desired communicant. the internetcurrently provides a 32bit addressthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure74about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.space, within which it is theoretically possible to address approximately 4billion hosts. however, as a result of the structured way in which this addressspace has been allocated, the number of addresses may be restricted to far fewerthan 4 billion, a limitation that the internet standards community is working torectify for both the short and a longer term. similarly, the internationaltelephone numbering plan is facing the result of the tremendous growth indemand for services and lines caused by the advent of fax, cellular phones, andsoon personal communicators and other highly mobile services. in the case oftelephone numbering, the demands of international commerce have furtheraggravated the problem by calling for universal information and 800numberservices. the internet and the telephone naming systems' simultaneous arrival ata crisis suggests that perhaps a common solution can be developed.27the current address spaces of the internet and the telephone network are alowlevel framework suited for naming network and telephone locations anddelivering data and voice. this framework is not used for naming users of thenetwork or service providers or information objects, all of which must benamed as well. developing suitable name spaces for these entities involvesissues of scale, longevity, and mobility. user names, for example, should belocation independent (more like unique identifiers than locators), which in turnimplies a substantial location service that translates names into current locations.the current services in the internet lack a suitable naming system forusers. one of the most userfriendly actions the nii community could takewould be to rectify this situation. past attempts have failed for a number ofreasons, mostly nontechnical, and this lack of success perhaps deters thecommunity from trying again. in this and other situations, a leadership with amandate could stimulate useful longterm action to achieve needed results.clearly the naming problem will grow substantially as more addressable(and nameable) devices proliferate; it has been suggested that numerouselectronic devices (such as thermostats and stoves as well as devices explicitlyintended for computing and communications) in homes and workplaces couldbe connected to networks. some devices may be mobile, some stationary. thusit is important to remember that names can be used to identify people, devices,locations, and groups.the migration to a new address space will be a major upheaval that willaffect users, network providers, and vendors. unifying the various networkcommunities, the internet, the cable industry, and the telecommunicationsindustry is an additional complex undertaking that will not happen unless thereis a clear and explicit advantage. an effort to define a single overarchingarchitecture is the only context in which this integration can be motivated. itwill take careful consideration to plan andthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure75about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implement a scheme that properly resolves such major concerns as anappropriate addressing scheme, interim management actions, and migrationplans. this implies that overarching architectural decisions for the nii, such asaddressing, must be made in a context with an appropriate longterm vision andarchitectural overview.wideranging discussion is needed on the requirements for nextgenerationintegrated addressing, with the goal of determining what the scope of thiscoming address space should be. it is critical that the requirements beappropriately specified. the government and the existing privatesectorstandards bodies should cooperate to ensure that the resulting decision meetsthe needs of the future nii. sustaining a discussion among the players aboutcore issues such as addressing, and then creating a context in which theresulting decisions are actually implemented, is an example of an effort inwhich government action could have significant payoff.mobility as the computing paradigm of the futurewe are in the midst of a subtle, but powerful, change in the wayindividuals access data and information processing systems. it is now the casethat end users are often "on the road" or simply away from their "home" or"base" computing environment when they need access to that environment. thatis, the computing infrastructure in this country is rapidly becoming mobile. onethird of all pcs sold today are mobile, a fraction that is rapidly approaching onehalf. moreover, more than 30 million people now have computers at home aswell as in the office, and they often conduct business on their home machines.thus a new paradigm is emerging in which locationindependent access topersonal and shared data, resources, and services will be the goal of ourinformation processing infrastructure. although relatively small systems tosupport mobility have been built, the complications will increase dramaticallywith the enormous number of nodes envisioned for the nii.mobility raises a number of issues that have to do with the softwarearchitecture. one problem is the uneven capability of mobile systems. forexample, the computers in use will include today's highperformance laptopcomputers, as well as intelligent terminals with a quality user interface. theavailable communications infrastructure will vary greatly over time and fromplace to place, spanning the range from gigabit bandwidth and microseconddelays to nearly no bandwidth and delays measured in hours or days.it is unreasonable to ask that the application handle such variability byitself. rather, the architecture must provide software that can support mobility.from the user's perspective, the network should present to the application theappearance of a coherent global environment, which doesthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure76about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not depend on the quality of the available communications, and which assuresthe availability of needed resources. examples of some of the elements of theunderlying system support functions are predictive caching, dynamicallypartitionable application architectures, and an appropriate naming andaddressing scheme.although issues of mobility arise with or without wireless connectivity, itis important to recognize that wireless versus wireline connectivity has otherimportant repercussions. issues related to privacy, security, authentication,bandwidth, addressability, and locating make it clear that the architecturedeveloped for an nii should not be limited to that of wireline connectivity. fulldevelopment of a proper model of mobility has yet to be conducted and iscertain to be a critically important area of investigation for the emerging nii.management systemsin a network and service aggregate as complex as that envisaged for thenii, it is critical that network management be attended to properly. the nii willrequire continuous support to keep it up and running and to ensure that usershave a high level of available service. since the nii is likely to be aconglomeration of many interconnected networks, the network managementfunction must be able to interoperate in a highly heterogeneous environmentthat is in a continual state of change, growth, and improvement. it is likely thatthis management function will be distributed across the component networks, adifficult reality with which we must be prepared to deal. this is not a newproblem; industry today is paying considerable attention to management systems.measurement and monitoringmeasurement of a network's behavior is important to understanding itsfunctioning. as the network grows very large and becomes very distributed, theprocess of data collection, the bandwidth needed by monitoring tools, therequirements for storing and processing of the collected data, and so on are allaffected. techniques to detect faults and to diagnose and predict performanceare essential, as is the ability to do automated or semiautomated measurement,reporting, and even repair in some cases.however difficult detection, diagnosis, and repair may be in the context ofa given network, the difficulty is compounded in an nii environment. onenetwork's occasional loss of a packet, much less the source of the difficulty,may be difficult to pinpoint. dealing with intermittentthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure77about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conditions that occur in an environment not administered by a single entity isamong the more difficult of the technical challenges to be faced. anotherdifficult problem is characterizing and controlling the performance of acomplex system consisting of numerous independently owned and operatedcomponents.in order to monitor the behavior of traffic and users for purposes of billingand activity summaries, it is important that measurement hooks be judiciouslyplaced in the network components (switches, routers, line drivers, and others).another critical function that can take advantage of measurement capabilities isnetwork control. because networks are occasionally subject to disastrousfailures that bring down major functions in society and industry (recall the pasteffects of power failures on wall street or of telephone outages on airlinereservation systems, air traffic control, or 911 services), it is imperative thatcontrols be placed on network traffic to avoid such catastrophes. the kinds ofcontrol the committee refers tošadmission, flow, routing, error, and congestioncontrols, among othersšwill be designed to react to traffic overloads, networkdynamics, network hardware, software failures, and so on. all of these controlissues are the subject of current research, and many approaches are being testedin the various networking testbeds.in addition to its use in network management and control, measurement isessential to evaluating a network's performance. the various measures ofperformance include response time, blocking, errors, throughput, jitter,sequencing, and others. how measures of these functions affect users'perceptions of satisfactory service is a matter of great interest to the providersof network services and infrastructure. data on measured actual performanceform the basis of models that can be constructed to predict the operation of thenetwork over a wide range of system parameter values.security and the open data networksecuring the network, the host, and informationthere are certainly advantages to having a ubiquitous open data highway.the telephone system, for example, is ubiquitous in the sense that attaching tothe telephone network makes it possible to reach and be reached by anytelephone. society has come to depend on universal telephone connectivity, andcomputer network connectivity can be equally useful. however, the very realthreats faced when computers are reachable on the networkšthreats such astheft of data, theft of service, corruption of data, and virusesšmust beanticipated. this has led many companies to hide their corporate networksbehind specialpurpose gatethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure78about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ways, such as mail gateways, that allow only a limited set of applications tocross into or out of the network. another solution has been the closed usergroup; some companies have used networks to interconnect their sites, but theydo not want connectivity between any of their sites and anything else. manypublic provider networks provide such functionality.the openness of the telephone network is occasionally a detriment, as withprank calls, telephone harassment, and unwanted telemarketing. most peopleare sufficiently resistant to these annoyances that they tolerate them in exchangefor the utility of the network. but computers seem more vulnerable than people,and the effects of compromised computer software can be catastrophic.computer security is not a solved problem, and virtually all systems arevulnerable to breakins and viruses.28 a virus can render a computer and alldata on it unusable.developing a security architectureif the nii is to flourish, we must provide solutions so that any end nodeattached to the network can mitigate its risk to an acceptable level. further, theinfrastructure must be developed to achieve sufficiently high reliability, and thearchitecture must protect against systemwide failures. infrastructure securityand reliability must also address the vulnerabilities inherent in wirelesstechnologies.29the prospect of new services and applications emerging on the niiincreases the urgency with which security must be addressed. electroniccommerce will increase the threat of fraud. accounting for network usage maylead to theft of service. these threats may require better tools for userauthentication, which may in turn lead to increased concern about the privacy ofonline activities. mobility may lead to new locationindependent networknames, which may raise similar concerns. gateways used to restrict networkaccess to known services such as electronic mail will prevent the introduction ofnew services and applications. all of these matters will arise as the networkevolves in the next few years, and all must be addressed now.the committee sees security as another area in which active governmentalinvolvement can materially advance the state of the nii. as part of its overallsupport for the nii, the government should foster the development of a securityarchitecture.30 this architecture should provide for mechanisms that protectagainst classic security threats (to confidentiality, integrity, and availability ofdata and systems) as well as violations of intellectual property rights andpersonal privacy. this security architecture must include technical facilities,recommended operational procedures, and means for recourse within the legalsystem.the most well developed security architecture is that used by thethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure79about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.department of defense for the protection of classified information. this modeldoes not seem adequate for the full range of problems to which the nii will besubject, and research on a broader spectrum of security problems is needed.currently, the federal government, particularly the advanced research projectsagency (arpa), is funding research in robust, available networking. thecommittee supports this approach and urges other agencies such as the nationalscience foundation (nsf) to have an explicit program in this area.31 threeelements of security issues that are not well characterized at the present time,and that seem critical to achieving success in the nii, are as follows: first, effective protection of data and systems will require the use ofsecure "walls" to separate network functions and service offerings thatare expected to be accessible from those that are not. the networkmust allow information providers to determine the degree of accessthat will be permitted to their works. the architecture must allow thesewalls to be constructed so that controlled access through the walls canbe implemented. second, technology will have to aid in protecting data integrity. it iscritical for information creators to know that what they produce is whatnetwork users get, and for users to be assured that what they aregetting is what they think it is. there must be protection against thedissemination of a work altered without authorization. a technologicalmeans is needed for "certifying" the authenticity of the data, so thatusers are able to choose sources of information with a reasonabledegree of confidence. third, the network itself must provide the reliability (availability) thatis critical to the delivery of any higherlevel service. today, users viewthe internet as reasonably stable, but it is known that it can be seriouslydisrupted by abuse from an end node, either by gross flooding of thenetwork with traffic or by the injecting of false control packets thatdisrupt the internal state of the network, for example, the routing tables.there is evidence in the network communities of increasing concern aboutsecurity, concern heightened by reports of incidents and abuses.32 for the lastseveral years, all proposals for internet standards have been required to includediscussion of impacts on security. although this requirement does force thecommunity to notice in passing the issue of security, the committee urges aneven stronger emphasis on and expectation for security requirements in keynetwork protocols.security objectives and current approaches for reachingthemit is often assumed that security problems can be solved by the creationand deployment of new security technology. while some technothe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure80about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logical means exist that currently are not fully exploited, the problem is not justtechnical. ensuring security requires attention to operating procedures, userattitudes and values, policy and legislative context, and a range of otherissues.33 the following sections discuss existing technology in the largercontext of particular security objectives.computer system protectionit is possible to imagine that individual computers and operating systemscould be made secure, but current practice limits the ability of today's productsto offer robust protection. any host attached to a network such as the internetmust assume that it is vulnerable to attack by an attacker that can penetrate thecomputer. although attacks are not a common problem on the internet, theiroccurrence must be anticipated.apart from the assurance of better endnode security, the current approachto ensuring computer system protection is to impose a computer in the networkthat restricts the range of access. one method is to use a mail relay, whichcertainly restricts the range of access; unfortunately it does this so well that itprevents applications other than mail from succeeding. the other, use of arouter that forwards packets only between a certain set of hosts, can permit awider range of services but must occur in combination with some flexibleapproach to specifying the hosts that are permitted to communicate. althoughsuch router technology exists, there is no generally accepted architecture foradministering the control that it can provide.protection of information in the hostgiven that system penetration cannot be totally prevented, it is necessaryto have some means to prevent damage to information in the host as a result ofpenetration. to protect from loss, the best method is the oldfashioned one ofbackup to detached media. this approach protects from both attack and physicalfailure and should be a standard procedure for almost any computer user.protection against disclosure and corruption is more subtle. disclosure canbe protected against in several ways. one, the model used in the military andintelligence communities, is to implement, as part of the system, an inner coreof protected mechanism (a kernel that monitors access to user information) thatis intended to survive during a system penetration and that will maintain controlof access to the information. another model, socalled discretionary control,typically involves user authentication and access control lists to identify theusers permitted to access information objects. this sort of control is widelyused in systemsthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure81about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.today, but many in the security community consider the typical access controllist mechanism to be less robust than the security kernel. a final means ofprotection, which does not depend on system software, is encryption of theinformation when it is not being used. this method is effective with two limits.first, the information must be transformed to its unprotected form to be used,and this opens a period of vulnerability. second, encryption depends on havingand protecting the encryption key, which is not easy. if the key is stored in thecomputer, then it is no more protected than the original file was. if it is storedoutside the computer, it may be forgotten or compromised by physical means,such as by being observed on the paper on which it is written. without care, anencryption system becomes no more secure than a password system.the committee recognizes that the various uses of encryption are currentmatters of government policy discussion.34 such matters as export control, andwhether keys must be made available to the government, will have an impact onthe ways in which encryption is employed.protection of information in the networkas commercial traffic grows on the internet, so also will the temptation toattack that traffic. the only effective means to protect information in thenetwork is encryption. there is no direct equivalent of the military securitykernel that can protect data even in the event of a penetration. encryption makesdata unreadable to attackers without the encryption key: thus it protects from allthe gross forms of attack and provides a clean separation between those whoshould have access and those who should not. again, the problem is protectingthe key used to transform the information, but the difficulty is greater in thenetwork because the key must be shared between the sender and the receiver.there are two solutions to the problem of protecting the key: a systematicway of managing shared keys, and ''publickey" systems. among a small groupof cooperating users, it is reasonable to imagine a reliable way of sharing keysoffline, such as mailing them printed on paper. but this approach is neither fastnor easily scaled to global communication.publickey systems, sometimes called asymmetric systems, attempt toreduce the problem of key distribution by implementing a scheme in which aseparate key is used to encrypt and decrypt. this separation means that theencryption key can be widely publicized (e.g., listed in name servers), while thedecryption key is kept secret. thus, anyone can encrypt a message, but only itsintended receiver (with the secret decryption key) can decrypt it. this techniqueseems a very powerful way to address the problem of keys.35 it does not entirelyeliminate the concern with keys, however. for example, the decryption key canstill be stolen,the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure82about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or the sender can be tricked into using the wrong encryption key, so that thewrong recipient can read the message.authenticating usersmost security controls depend on some way to verify users' identities: theuser authentication process. the need to identify and authenticate users exists atmany levels of the security architecture. at the network level, it is necessary toidentify users for purposes of accounting and billing. at the system level, it isnecessary to authenticate users so that they can be given the properauthorization. the traditional access control list implies that the system canknow which user is making a request, so that the proper entry on the list can beevaluated. network applications such as network mail also would benefit from asystem that would allow a mail recipient to verify the sender's identity. systemswith this capability, such as the internet's privacy enhanced mail, are just nowbeing deployed.the most common method for authenticating users is to demand apassword from the user as a proof of identity. although it is well understood,this scheme has a number of weaknesses, both in the human factors (peopleforget the password, or pick a password easily guessed, or write it down in avisible place) and technically (some network technologies make wiretappingvery easy, which facilitates casual theft of passwords, as a recent rash of attackson the internet has illustrated).36 today, systems are being deployed that usecryptography rather than simple passwords to provide a more robust facility.these systems are beginning to be used on the network, but they are not yetwidely integrated into commercial systems.control of authorized userswhile encryption can be used to keep data from the hands of unauthorizedusers, encryption in its basic form offers no limits on what an authorized usercan do. once the user has the key to reveal the contents of a file, there seem tobe no limits as to what that user can do to it. in particular, the user can copy theinformation, change it, and give it to other users. there is no identified technicalmeans to prevent this copying, without unreasonably limiting the primary use ofthe information, although technology is under development in this area.however, encryption can be used to achieve some specific capabilities.most importantly, cryptography can be used to provide a certificate, a digitalsignature, which attests that a file's contents have not been corrupted. such acertificate cannot be forged, and so it provides assurance from the creator that afile is intact.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure83about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.taking a comprehensive approach to ensuring securitytechnology provides some effective tools for use in building a secure andeffective system, but it is not the whole answer. technology must be made partof a total approach that includes a set of operating assumptions and controls thatallow the users to make reasonable decisions about the operation of a system. if,for example, all users passing along a piece of information were required toattach an additional certificate, asserting the integrity and authenticity of thecontents, then presumably there would be an incorruptible trail from anyreceiver back to a source that claimed to be the original creator. such a trailwould not prevent data theft and corruption, but would provide evidence of theevent. however, this control would be effective only if users understood thatthey should not be party to receiving data without a certificate. such asignificant departure from current practice would doubtless generate greatresistance. but implementation of these practices by major vendors of softwarefor information handling might help the scheme to succeed.the committee concludes that progress in the area of trustworthy andcontrolled dissemination of information does not depend primarily ontechnology but rather on the development of an overall model, or architecture,for control, as well as education and public attitudes that promote responsible,ethical use of information, and associated regulation and policy. although thismodel can make effective use of technology components, it will derive itsstrength from its acceptance by the community. at the same time, there is still astrong need for research and development in the security area, both to developnew technical concepts in key areas and to explore alternative approaches toarchitecture and operations.finding and balancing opportunities to buildtoward convergenceas the committee has pointed out in chapter 1 and above, a diverse butinterrelated set of expectations and requirements is driving current efforts aimedat developing a u.s. national information infrastructure. one vision of the nii,developed around the notion that it will provide citizens access to theinformation they need over a ubiquitous national network, derives from theobserved success of the internet and includes open access and a range ofservices. another, the combined entertainment, telephone, and cable tv (etc)vision, emphasizes access to a large number of television channels providingvideo entertainment and other related services for which there is perceived to bea large market that promises considerable commercial success. harmonizingthese visionsthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure84about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conceptually and technically will require finding specific points at whichconvergence can be encouraged. competing needs and interests will have to bebalanced as we take opportunities at hand now to begin to construct an open niithat will serve the nation well into the future.development of standards for televisionšan examplea particularly important opportunity exists in the development of newstandards for television, including highdefinition television (hdtv). themove to hdtv represents a move from the old analog standard of ntsc videoto a digital standard for coding and transmission. a key standards issue is howto relate methods for hdtv coding and transmission to the broader matters ofdirect importance to the nii.37 there is no question that video will be animportant component in the emerging nii, and it will be packaged andtransmitted along with data and other digital information according to variousstandards. if broadcast channels (including those that are now envisioned to bemade available only for hdtv) were to support a wide range of applicationsincluding, but extending well beyond, hdtv, then they would become generalpurpose digital distribution channels, which could couple at their destinationsinto networks such as lans that are designed to further transport theinformation.although the current hdtv architecture is layered, it is not reallymodular; that is, the interfaces between layers are not defined with the goal inmind of allowing different layers to be replaced with other layers as technologyand distribution methods evolve and/or dictate. the main goals of the currenthdtv design were limited to the primary issues of concernšto supporttelevision with higher resolution and to efficiently use broadcast televisionchannels with highresolution signals. it is important to expand these goals inlight of the emerging nii and its applications.the same considerations apply in the nearer term to the evolving cable tvinfrastructure. at present, digital tv channels on nextgeneration cable tvsystems are assumed to be tailored to the delivery of television using the mpegii standard. unless the need is recognized for a general service capable ofdelivering digital information of many forms, the details of the cableinfrastructure may become so targeted to mpegii that no other informationcan be added to the system without extensive modification.the economic forces that shape the reconstruction of the infrastructure arevery compelling. generality in a system almost always adds to cost. the futuretelevision standards represent an excellent example of the tugofwar betweengenerality and specificity. if the future standardsthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure85about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for video dissemination are specifically engineered for the delivery of tv only,cost optimizations may result that are in total very substantial, due to the largenumber of expected end nodes and due to economies of specialization; sucheconomies support an argument for multiple outlets or interfaces specialized toindividual applications. but such a monetary cost reduction might come at theopportunity cost of preventing any of the broader goals of the nii (notablyintegrated service access and delivery) from being implemented over thisinfrastructure. this, surely, would be a greater cost. nevertheless, the television,cable, and related entertainment industries cannot be expected to take onthemselves the objective of engineering into their systems extra cost to meetgoals that lie beyond their objectives.38 it thus seems likely that market forcesalone will not produce an access infrastructure that can accommodate diverseuses over time.reengineering of the nation's access circuitsevents as they are currently developing suggest that cable andtelecommunications industries vary widely in their recognition of the vision ofan integrated nii as articulated by the committee. although some isolatedservice offerings are very exciting (such as the proposal from continentalcablevision and psi to offer internet access service),39 there is no consensuseither as to the importance or the viability of a broadly useful nii.a key ingredient in this lack of consensus is that there is no widely agreedupon method as to how, or if, cable infrastructure will attach to the desktopcomputer in the home, to the data networks that exist (or are being planned), tobusiness environments, and so on. this is an urgent matter to resolve in thecontext of the nii. it is particularly important in the context of standards andinterfaces for consumer equipment, which is very difficult to upgrade or replaceonce it is widely deployedšas the example of ntsc, the analog codingstandard for broadcast television, makes clear. the practical impossibility ofreplacing all the televisions in the country is causing the ntsc standard to havean impact and consequences far beyond its technical merits.a major example of commercial interests moving ahead very quicklywithout a context in which to address broader public interests is now in themaking, namely, the currently planned reengineering of the nation's accesscircuits. articulation of public interests, preferably with direct governmentinvolvement, could help to shape these developments. the committeerecognizes that, as this report was being written, the technology policyworking group of the information infrastructure task force was contemplatingrelevant activities.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure86about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cost and function in access circuitsone of the key issues in the argument over the reengineering of accesscircuits is the potential of added cost to provide reasonable bandwidth goingaway from the home, the socalled "back" or reverse channel. there are severalapparent tradeoffs in this area.one of the committee's key objectives is that the overall structure of thenii not act to preclude anyone from playing a particular role in offering a highlevel service. for example, it should be possible for any user to become aprovider of information on the network. this objective is an issue because inmany cases producers and consumers have asymmetric needs for bandwidth;the highbandwidth path runs from the producer to the consumer, with only alow rate of data transmission in the reverse direction. today some networksprovide symmetric data paths, whereas in other networks the paths to and fromthe user are very different. for example, the telephone network providessymmetric bandwidth to and from the user, while the cable networks providevast bandwidth to the user, but little or no return communication.such asymmetry is a potential limitation to the development of an opennii, because it means that becoming a producer of information (whosecommunication into the network requires large bandwidth) is possible only byentering into a special agreement with the network provider. normal users canonly be consumers of information, and the network provider controls access towhat the producers provide.the objective of allowing for equal twoway communication must bebalanced with the technical and economic problem that symmetric channelsmay not be costeffective for many situations; a related issue is to assess thecosts and benefits of back channels of varying sizes.40 engineering highbandwidth reverse channels into an existing cable tv system would addsubstantially to the system costs. these costs are hard to justify in immediatepractical terms, since many access paradigms are asymmetric at the applicationlevel. for example, a great deal of asymmetry is built into the architecture of thepopular clientserver model, and access to certain archival library databasesimplies asymmetry as well. on the other hand, peertopeer applications canoften exploit symmetrical channel access.it is important, however, to recognize the value of introducing intoasymmetric networks the potential for symmetry, even if that capability is notuniversally deployed. that is, the overall architecture should provide forsymmetry although individual applications need not. indeed, the issue shouldnot be choosing asymmetry as opposed to symmetry, but rather determininghow to provide flexibility so that customers can purchase the appropriate degreeof asymmetry.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure87about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.options for incorporating the odn bearer servicethere are a number of different options for incorporating the committee'sconcept of the open bearer service into an access network intended primarily forsome particular application, such as delivery of cable video. the five differentpatterns of integration discussed below, which have very different implicationsfor cost and functionality, are ordered to illustrate increasing degrees offlexibility, with delivery of video used as the example of a core application ofthe network. option 1šthe undesirable option, which allows for no integration, isinstalled technology that is useful for only one purpose, in this case thedelivery of video. cable systems today are often this limited, offeringno options for expansion of service. future systems might also bedesigned for this single function if there is no broader vision of therange of services to be offered. option 2šthe system is designed to carry two separate servicesšmultiple channels of video and the open bearer service. some oftoday's cable systems have small additions (like bidirectionalamplifiers) that allow a completely separate service such as the onecontinental cablevision and psi are proposing to offer in cambridge,massachusetts. the two separate services cannot see each other, butthe second could grow to be nii compliant in its own right. option 3šthe idea of separate services for video delivery and openbearer service becomes more interesting for future systems with digitalvideo encoding. as the delivery systems migrate from ntsc encodingof video to digital encoding, such as mpegii, the video becomesmore amenable to processing by both specialized and general digitalprocessors. while the digital video may be delivered over the networkin a highly specialized and costeffective manner, the encoding can bedefined (as mpegii is) so that it has at least one form that separatesthe actual video information from the details of the delivery method. acapability for converting the video into this format at customers'premises allows it to be transferred to and processed by other endnodeelements such as generalpurpose computers. this arrangement is avery powerful one: on the one hand, it does not affect the coding ordelivery of the presumed highvolume information, which can bedelivered in whatever costreduced manner the industry prefers; on theother hand, it simultaneously supports a general bearer service andprovides a way to move the video into that more general format asneeded at the end node. this report suggests that this combination beused as an example of a step that can be taken to realize the vision ofan open and flexible nii. option 4šfurther options for integrating the delivery of video and thegeneral bearer service would more directly couple the two, butthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure88about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.might also raise issues of cost and the utility of the networktechnology. one step would be to use the odn bearer service as thedelivery framing for cable tv. while some would argue that aproperly defined bearer service could be used for a specific highefficiency situation such as cable delivery of video, the uncertaintyabout cost impacts represents a significant issue that could impede thisstep. however, this step is not necessary in order to achieve anintegrated odn. once the costs are understood, this degree ofintegration might make sense. this is a decision for industry to make. option 5šdeploying the odn could be further facilitated bydesigning an access network technology specifically intended toreduce the costs of the core service (in this instance, digital videodelivery) and at the same time provide a carefully designed general,bidirectional odnstyle bearer service. the tv would ideally use anopen bearer representation if costs permit, but this detail is not criticalto the success of the effort. in the section "research on the nii" at theend of this chapter, the committee notes a specific research anddevelopment effort that could be funded to move toward this goal.the committee believes that a truly open nii cannot be achieved unless thecable tv and/or telephone access circuits are reconstructed in a way thatsupports the services of both the entertainment and information sectors.technically, what is needed is a bearer service based on the concept ofbidirectional digital packet switching. such a service would permit theobjectives of the odn to be supported at the same time as other servicesdedicated to the entertainment sector.need for government action in balancing objectivesbecause there will be real incremental costs in engineering access circuitsto the home to meet broad nii objectives of the kind expressed in the opendata network,41 the committee concludes that this is a time when thegovernment, by direct action, can materially influence the course of the nii. ata minimum, the government could urge that future access circuits to homes beimplemented in a way that supports the vision of an integrated nii, although,where real incremental costs are involved, simple urging will not be effective.at the other extreme, the government could mandate that all future accesscircuits support nii objectives, based on some specific set of servicerequirements. such a mandatory action would preserve the concept of equitablecost for competitive providers, as occurs, for example, with variouscommunications equipment features required by the federal communicationscommission. however, in the current climate of limited regulation and increasedthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure89about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dependence on competitive forces to shape industry, the tack of directgovernment mandate may not be feasible, and such precedents may not befollowed.the committee thus seeks a middle ground for government action, inwhich government actively works with the affected industries to define asuitable structure of economic incentives that serve to motivate the installationof a national infrastructure with appropriate characteristics. the debate aboutnextgeneration television, entertainment networking, and the emergingreconstruction of the nation's access circuits has reached a crucial point: whatfollows may be either a departure from a broader nii, or a striving forinteroperability with it. the committee strongly urges the latter approach, andit urges the government to recognize the opportunity at hand and to act on it.acting now to realize a unified niithere is a definite role to be played by government in the pursuit of anopen and flexible national information infrastructure, especially as commercialproviders begin to figure ever more dominantly in the deployment of networktechnology. left to their own devices, commercial providers will properly servethe markets that offer them growth and profitability. planning for change,providing a general and open baselevel service, and using and supporting openstandards all may increase the cost of network deployment and thus may be atodds with commercial plans targeted to essentially one product, such as videodelivery.it is difficult to judge the degree of tension between the committee's visionof an open network and current commercial deployment plans. the trueeconomic costs of openness cannot be judged by assessment of today'sequipment, which was not designed to this end. the intrinsic support from themarket for an open nii cannot yet be judged; this committee has assessed theexperience in the limited communities (such as the academic researchcommunity) that have had real exposure to its vision but notes in thosediscussions the issues in scaling from those limited communities to a largersociety. finally, although it can discover anecdotal evidence that the tensionexists, the committee necessarily has a limited ability to assess marketing plansand commercial projections.the tension that is evident is more a question of degree than a choicebetween two poles. nonetheless, it is a tension that must be recognized andrationalized if a coherent nii is to come into existence. in stating its approach,the committee recognizes that in the long run, it is the market, and not the forceof government, that will determine if the vision of an open nii is relevant,useful, or successful. in attempting to identify those steps that could lead to therealization of an integrated nii, the committhe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure90about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tee notes at the same time the need to minimize the impact of guessingincorrectly. it is the committee's belief that, with proper technologydevelopment, taking the key steps now that will avoid precluding its vision canbe done at tolerable costs. the committee urges the government to articulate avision in this area and to work to ensure that industry will take this vision intoaccount in its activities and development plans. only if there is an accepteddefinition of nii compliance, and policy that encourages that compliance, willthere be an effective way to accomplish a common vision of the future networks.recommendation: technology deploymentthe committee recommends that the government work with the relevant industries, in particular the cable and telephone companies, to find suitableeconomic incentives so that the access circuits (connections to homes, schools,and so on) that will be reconstructed over the coming decade are engineered inways that support the open data network architecture.the term "engineering" refers to the process of choosing what equipmentto deploy, when to deploy it, and in what configuration to deploy it so thatcustomer needs are met at least cost. the committee concludes that a nationalinfrastructure capturing the odn architecture will not be widely deployed ifcompetitive forces alone shape the future; deregulation, along likely lines, willnot be sufficient to guide the development and deployment of the odnarchitecture. while anecdotal, numerous comments from inside the cable andtelephone industries suggest that the perceived costs of adding the features thatsupport openness are discouraging the necessary investment in the currentcompetitive climate. the committee therefore concludes that these features willnot be incorporated in the evolving national information infrastructure withoutpolicy intervention.needed now is direct action by government to ensure a planned,coordinated start to deploying the access circuit technology for the nii.research on the niišensuring necessarytechnical developmentthis chapter touches on a number of areas in which continued research isrequired to realize the nii. the strong traditions of academic and industrialresearch that have led to u.s. leadership in telecommunications and networkingmust be continued and expanded if a truly national information infrastructure isto come into existence. significant technical issues remain to be addressed inthe development of the nii;the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure91about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.achieving the ''information superhighway" involves more than just a matter ofpolicy, legislation, and regulation.it would be easy to conclude, from the great success of the internet, that allrequired network research has been done. such a conclusion would be verydestructive to the leadership role played by u.s. industries and universities inall areas of technology related to information infrastructure. this committeebelieves that research, both experimental and basic, is essential to the futuresuccess of the nii and to national competitiveness. chapter 6 summarizes themany ways in which the government can have an impact by continuedinvolvement in the nurturing of research. in this section, the committee reviewsspecific technical areas in which work is required to fulfill the vision of anintegrated nii. the section has been written to be selfcontained and thereforerepeats some concepts advanced in earlier sections.for nsf to undertake support for the range of topics identified belowwould imply a significant expansion in the modes and paradigms for researchthat nsf has traditionally recognized. the list includes a number of specificresearch topics that would naturally fit into the traditional pattern of nsfproposals. it also identifies architecture studies and testbeds as researchobjectives. architecture studies are often larger, more diffuse, collaborative,and less easy to define and to evaluate in advance. testbeds, especially thevirtual testbeds that have been built on the internet, are again very collaborativeefforts among workers at many sites, and they involve coordination andcollective setting of direction as much as they do funding. testbeds have beenactively supported by arpa, sometimes with nsf collaboration. a greatertestbed effort by nsf would imply a departure from its normal pattern offunding, which involves the submission and evaluation of individual proposalsfrom various sites and does not naturally lead to the required degree of directionsetting, coordination, and architecture leadership.research to develop network architecturethe open data network architecture is a plan that defines the integratednii's key aspects and how they fit together. the odn architecture must bedeveloped, a requirement that implies more than a program to study a series oftechnical issues. what is needed is a fitting together of all these pieces into anintegrated concept that drives the whole development. this effort represents aresearch program in its own right and is perhaps the most important of the tasksthat will lead to the nii.the internet is based on such a framework, which was first developed inthe 1970s as an arpafunded research program. that research on architecturedefined the key principles of the internet: how the functhe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure92about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tions were divided into layers, how functional responsibilities were dividedbetween the host and the network switches and routers, where conformance to asingle standard would be mandatory, and so on. similar architectural planningunderlies any coherent infrastructure such as the telephone system, and it willdefinitely be required for the larger and more complex nii.network research today has tended to stress the issue of higher speed. themost obvious examples are the gigabit testbeds, jointly funded by arpa andnsf, which have accelerated the deployment of highspeed network technologyand stimulated the drive to higherspeed applications. however, the morepressing problems for networking tomorrow are issues of scale andheterogeneity, rather than speed. a system built so that it can scale to a largesize is perhaps the most basic consequence of a successful odn architecture.problems of addressing and routing, of decentralization of management andoperations, of dealing with heterogeneity, and of providing secure andtrustworthy service are all issues that must be addressed in an overallarchitecture plan. the government must support research into general andflexible architecture as a keystone of its nii research.defining the bearer servicedefinition of the odn bearer service is an example of the sort of issue thatarises as a part of architecture planning. one of the starting points for the odnbearer service described by the committee was the ip protocol from the internetprotocol suite. however, as noted above in this chapter, even in the restricteddomain of the internet (as compared to the broader nii) the current ip servicesmust be extended to meet emerging needs in areas such as explicit quality ofservice (qos).to address this issue, it is not sufficient to do research in how toimplement qos. the harder problem, now being addressed for ip in therelevant ietf working groups, is how to fit these concepts into the overallframework of assumptions that define the ip protocol. the most importantarchitectural issue is to balance two objectivesšto add flexibility to ip to makeit more useful, and also to keep it simple and uniformšso that the protocol canbe implemented in a consistent manner across a wide range of lowerleveltechnologies. the power of ip is that it can be made to work over almost anynetwork technology. once the technology independence is augmented withcomplex requirements for qos, this power may be lost. balancing technologyindependence with the need for qos is the essence of architecture research.presumably, the bearer service for the nii will have to reflect theintegration of issues even broader than the issues associated with thethe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure93about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nextgeneration ip. developing the bearer service will require an understandingand balancing of a number of key technical factors. the outcome of this effortmust be a scalable design that provides the needed isolation of the bitwaysbelow it from the information services above it; it must also be designed in afashion such that a full range of qos requirements can be met, including somethat we cannot yet anticipate. a directed research program toward this endwould be a major contribution to the technical accomplishment of an open nii.issues for the lower levels: scale, robustness, andoperationsthe odn architecture must, of course, incorporate a number of specifictechnical developments, each of which must be explored as part of the overallnii development. summarized below are a number of issues, also raised earlyin this chapter, that are certainly under study today but are not yet sufficientlyunderstood to enable meeting needs of the future.addressing and routingthe issues of naming, addressing, and routing are among the most centralto the success of a largescale open nii. both at the lower levels, where bits arebeing delivered, and at the higher levels, where services are being invoked,meaningful names must exist for the entities in question in order to make use ofthem. without telephone numbers, one cannot call. most successful networkarchitectures, including the telephone system and the internet, are strugglingwith the problem that the naming plan did not provide enough names to supportthe actual growth of the network.even more important, perhaps, is the problem of routing. as the networkgrows larger, and the range of services grows more complex, the difficulty offinding the location and a route to all the named objects gets more complex.this is a topic of much research at the present time, but there is yet no clearconsensus as to the correct approach, taking into account all the real issues:decentralization of management, competing providers, mobility of end nodes(both computers and people), multicast delivery, worldwide scope, and so on.decentralization adds a substantial degree of complexity to routing. thevarious providers in the nii will each wish to make local assertions as to thesorts of traffic they will carry, and for whom. these various local decisionsmust be combined into a selfconsistent route before any traffic can actuallyflow across the network. the problem of findingthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure94about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.routes becomes even more complex when qos is taken into account; thesuitable route may depend on the details of the qos specification, for example,a specific bandwidth requirement. when all these concerns are combined withthe objective of establishing routes quickly, so that traffic is not delayed duringroute setup, the overall problem can be quite daunting.there is a new generation of applications being deployed on the internet,including audio, video, and shared workspace tools for multipartyteleconferencing, which depend for their operation on multicast (the ability todeliver information from a source to a set of recipients, instead of just a singlerecipient). multicast makes the problem of finding good routes much morecomplex, since the range of options is greatly expanded. one approach is tobuild a separate route from each source to all its intended destinations. thisapproach is computationally complex but potentially the most efficient.alternatively, one could build a single tree of routes that reaches from a knowncentral point to all the destinations, and then allow any source to send to thatcentral point as a way to accomplish multicast. this alternative is much easierto implement but is potentially highly inefficient, both in use of bandwidth andin extra network delay. multicast is becoming a very important feature of theinternet, and research into its effective implementation is critical.even in the internet there is concern today that the system has scaled to thepoint that the complexity of managing the routing at the global level will exceedcurrent capabilities. recognition of this problem helped to motivate the recentnsf award for routingrelated research in connection with developing a routingarbiter function. a new generation of software tools will be needed to controland operate the even more complex nii.quality of servicethe nii will support a diversity of applications ranging from currentinternet services such as email, file transfer, and remote login to such newapplications as interactive multimedia video conferencing, transmission ofmedical images, and realtime remote sensing. each of these applications hasdifferent requirements for such qos measures as delay, throughput, andreliability. research is needed to understand how to design networkcomponents and interfaces that can provide the wide range of qos that will berequired in the nii. this work includes the design of specific mechanisms suchas queue management and admission control, as well as the specification ofgeneral service models that the application can use to take advantage of thesemechanisms.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure95about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new approaches to transport protocolstcp has been the default transport protocol of the internet suite. however,it is not suited to all situations and all applications. tcp is designed to ensuretotally reliable delivery. if it cannot deliver the information without error, it willnot continue to transfer any information at all. however, some applications cantolerate errors. audio and video for teleconferencing do not require totally errorfree delivery. a momentary disruption in the transmitted stream is preferable toa total suspension of delivery. tcp as defined cannot provide this service.multicast, again, implies new issues for the transport layer. if one issending to a set of receivers and an error occurs that disrupts transmission toonly one of the receivers, the options for resolving the error are expanded. thetransmission to all the destinations can be suspended until the error to the one isfixed, or the one receiver can be restored while communication to the otherscontinues. there may be more relaxed models of reliability that make sense incertain applications, and there may be more options for restoring the state of thereceiver.today, these cases are covered at the transport level by building into theapplication a special transport protocol that is custom designed for theapplication. there have been a number of proposals for a general framework forreliable multicast, but these have proved somewhat controversial, and noconsensus has emerged. research to generalize these ideas and propose a newgeneration of transport protocol would be very valuable.network control functionsnetwork controls are needed so that a very large and decentralized nii willbe able to react to traffic overloads, network dynamics, and hardware andsoftware failures. in addition to the routing function discussed above, a numberof other network control functions will have an impact on the success of thenii. for example, when a user specifies a needed qos, the network mustdecide if that request is one that should be accepted or not. if, for example, noroute exists that can support the requested qos, then the admission controlfunction will reject the request.on the other hand, a feasible route may be available that satisfies the qosrequest, but the cost may be unacceptable to the user, in which case the requestmay be rescinded by the user; this is a form of selfimposed admission control,and it requires more interaction with the user at a high level. once a call isaccepted, the network has the responsibility of providing the agreedupon qos.in order to accomplish this, the network must "monitor" the traffic submitted bythe user and must deterthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure96about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mine if that user is delivering no more than the level of traffic that wasnegotiated at the time of call acceptance. a number of congestion controlmethods exist that serve to guarantee that the contract is being kept by the user(one popular class being that of "leaky bucket control"), but no one techniquehas yet been universally accepted.a proper study to determine an appropriate mix of these many controlalgorithms (routing control, admission control, cost control, congestion control,flow control, error control) has yet to be done, the outcome of which isnecessary to set the proper guidelines for key aspects of the lower levels. all ofthese control issues are the subject of current research, many are being tested inthe various networking testbeds, and work on these issues will support multipleneeds such as those discussed under "quality of service" above.mobility as the computing paradigm of the futuremobility has to do with the capability to access data, resources, andservices from any location via either wireline or wireless connections to the nii.one lowlevel issue in mobility is addressing and routing: how to deliver data toa host whose location changes as it is in operation. another lowlevel issue ishow and to what the network should assign names. a name could be assigned tothe device that roams, to the user, to a location, to a user with a specific deviceat a specific location at a specific time, and so on. the higherlevel issue,perhaps the more important in the long run, is how applications must change inthe mobile environment, and what kind of network and operating systemsupport is required to manage mobility. one implication of true mobility seemsto be that communications may be intermittent. mediumand longtermdisruptions in the communications infrastructure will cause most applicationstoday to fail, or at least to display to the user behavior that is quite unsuitable.new models are needed for information caching, coordination of local andremote versions, methods for providing services to mobile users according totheir system profile, and so on.research is also needed to develop a system that can give a mobile user,who may be linked with a lowspeed line to the infrastructure, feedback abouthow many bytes, dollars, or increments of time may be needed for the reply to aquery made of the system. such a capability would allow the user to either abortthe request, or, in a system with the necessary intelligence, to ask for a subset ofthe reply, or an approximation. to date, only preliminary research has beendone on the software architecture and related system interfaces that will enablemobility; this is a critically important area of investigation for the emerging nii.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure97about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.management systemsšmonitoring and controlthe nii will require continuous support to keep it up and running and toensure that users have a high level of available service. since the nii is likely tobe a conglomeration of many heterogeneous interconnected networks, networkmanagement will be especially difficult. first, the management function will bedistributed across the component networks, since each network operator willpresumably be responsible for managing his or her own component of theoverall system. second, in a very large system the degree of trust andintegration between the parts is likely to be reduced, which leads to greaterproblems in isolating and resolving problems. research is needed to enabledevelopment of new technical means to alleviate some of these problems, forexample, techniques based on new methods to assess current operating state andto share this state among neighbor regions.measurement and monitoring aid in understanding the functioning of agiven network. as the network grows very large and very distributed, thecollection of data, the bandwidth needed by monitoring tools, the requirementsfor storing and processing of the collected data, and so on are affected.research is needed in support of better techniques for fault detection,performance diagnosis, and prediction, as well as automated or semiautomatedmeasurement capabilities, reporting, and even repair.new technology for access circuitsas this chapter has noted, the design of access circuits (the "lastmile"technology) has much to do with the ability to provide a ubiquitous nii with therange of services envisioned by the committee. picking among the designoptions is a matter of both available technology and policy.specifically, the government could sponsor research to explore the optionsfor several key features: access circuit technology that could provide very efficient delivery ofidentified traffic classes such as video and at the same time support thegeneral sorts of services, including multimedia mixed data traffic,envisioned for the nii; access circuits that provide costeffective mixing of "bursty" trafficfrom several sources, as well as a means to deal with transientcongestion by reflecting it back to the end nodes; and access circuit technology that could provide for a costeffectivevariation in services for bidirectional traffic, to accommodate a rangeof endnode needs for capacity into and out of the network. if thetechnology provided the ability to adjust this service dynamically, theinvestmentthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure98about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in installed infrastructure could better survive the changes in thepattern of usage that can be anticipated over the lifetime of theinvestment.middleware and information services supportthe previous section addressed some of the current concerns related toclassical networking, the lowlevel transport of bits among end nodes. as thecommittee has observed, what distinguishes an information infrastructure froma basic data network is a defined and implemented set of higherlevel services,the middleware layer, which provides an environment more directly suited tothe advanced applications that will run there. the middleware layer is a muchless mature component of networking than the lower layers, which have beenexplored and reduced to practice in a number of cases. thus, the issues inmiddleware research are very open ended and wideranging.navigation and filtering toolsa major issue is how to tame the multimedia wave of information that isbreaking over our heads: 500 satellite channels, terabytes of skyfall per day,thousands of new books and magazines and hundreds of thousands ofnewspapers and newsletters a day, and an exploding array of electronic mailand bulletin boards. how can people find the good stuff and filter out the rest?much of this information is text or has a text component. certainly that is trueof print and mail, but it is also true of some video (if it is closed captioned) anddocuments scanned using optical character readers.a major issue is how to "navigate" and "filter" text. until recently,information retrieval has been a neglected subject of computer science and oflibrary and information sciences. the work has tended to be very academic andhas not focused much on either user interfaces or very large databases. researchis needed on text understanding, enhancing, and indexing and on filter andsearch interfaces and engines.nontext media (sound, speech, image, video) research is much morespeculative. the problem statement is the same: capture, process, enhance,index, filter, search. but the task is much more formidable. we have no goodtechniques for categorizing such media (e.g., fingerprints have one categoryscheme, xrays another, but most image classes do not have a welldefinedcategorization). any search or index scheme requires such categorization.probably the major breakthroughs will come not from the research onsearch methods but rather from research on user interfaces. today, there is areal barrier between people and machines. graphical user inthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure99about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.terfaces are valuable, but the current interfaces between humans and ourknowledge bases are very labor intensive because there are significant learningbarriers to their use. they present a hypertext and keywordsearch capabilitybut generally do not incorporate contextual knowledge of the user. abreakthrough is needed in the research on user interfaces and query interfaces tofacilitate access to query engines and knowledge bases.intellectual property rightsthe nii promises a future in which the trade in information is assignificant for the national economy as the trade in goods and services now is.research is needed to make clear what new tools will be needed and how theywill affect society. the solutions should promote the availability of a broaddiversity of information over the networks, rather than simply control access.some of this work was contemplated in recently proposed legislation; relevantwork would also fall under the information infrastructure technology andapplications (iita) component of the hpcc initiative. partnerships amongindustry, academia, and government will be essential.today we lack a consistent technical, legal, and business framework forthe dissemination of intellectual property over networks. problems to be solvedrange from licensing and fee recovery when material is being sold, to ensuringthe integrity of information and proper attribution when the information is beingfreely distributed. if information owners have some assurance that licensingagreements entered into electronically over the network are enforceable, theywill have significantly more incentive to trust information to this newenvironment. information providers will also require some assurance that theyare protected against liability, at least to the extent that they are protected whendistributing their information over other types of electronic systems. anothercapability that might tend to reduce unauthorized copying of intellectualproperty is an easy means for online payment of copying fees. experimentationwith technology that allows payment, in a simple and robust fashion, forservices obtained through an electronic route is essential. the committeerecognizes that such experimentation has begun in industry and universitysettings. mechanisms based on both credit card charges and electronic moneycould provide attributed and anonymous purchase of information. a veryefficient payment system would facilitate the selling of information in smallincrements, which is a natural transaction over a network. however,experiments with users will be required to determine if incremental or flatfeepayments are more desirable.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure100about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer and communications securityclassical endnode security is based on the idea that each node shouldseparately defend itself by using controls on that machine. however, currentgeneration pcs and workstations are not engineered with a high degree ofsecurity assurance, so as a practical matter, an alternative is being deployedbased on putting "firewalls" into the network, machines that separate thenetwork into regions of more and less trust and regulate the traffic coming fromthe untrusted region. firewalls raise a number of serious issues for the internetprotocol architecture, since they violate a basic assumption of the internet,which is that two machines on the same internetwork can freely exchangepackets. firewalls explicitly restrict the sorts of packets that can be exchanged,which can cause a range of operational problems. research with the goal ofmaking firewalls work betteršmaking them both more secure and moreoperationally robustšwould be very important at the present time.the strongly decentralized nature of the nii makes security issues moredifficult, because it will be necessary to establish communication among a setof sites, each of which implements its own controls (e.g., user authentication)and is not willing to trust the other. trustworthy interaction among mutuallysuspicious regions is a fundamental problem for which there are few generalmodels. security techniques using any form of encryption are no more robustthan the methods used to distribute and store the encryption keys. personalcomputers today offer no secure way to store keys, which severely imperilsmany security schemes. a proposal for solving this problem would be veryimportant. the other issue with keys is the need for trustworthy distribution ofkeys in the large, decentralized nii. how can two sites with no common pasthistory of shared trust exchange keys to begin communication in a way thatcannot be observed or corrupted? the most direct solution would seem to be atrusted third party who "introduces" the two sites to each other, but there is noframework or model to define such a service or to reason about its robustness.research in this area is a key aspect of fitting security into a system with thescale of the nii.in addition to protection of host computers and the data they hold, thenetwork itself must be protected from hostile attack that overloads the network,steals service, or otherwise renders the system useless. additional research anddevelopment should be done on technical mechanisms, better approaches tooperation, and new approaches to training and education.methods and technology for ensuring security are relevant to both thelower levels of the network and to the higher levels of the informationinfrastructure. protecting intellectual property rights is a securitythe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure101about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concern, as is anticipating problems of fraud in payment schemes (control offraud depends on identifying users in a trustworthy manner).again, achieving security requires the study of specific mechanisms andoverall architecture. much is known about techniques such as encryption. whatis equally important is a proposal for an overall plan that combines all usefultechniques into a consistent and effective approach to ensuring security. thisoverall plan must be developed, validated, and then replicated in such a waythat users and providers can understand the issues and implications associatedwith their parts of the overall system. this effort, not the study of specificmechanisms, is the hard part, and the key to success.research in the development of softwarethe continuing need for research in means to develop large and complexsoftware packages is not new, nor is it specific to networking and theinformation infrastructure. at the same time, it is a key issue for which thereseems no ready solution. problems of software development are a keyimpediment to realization of the nii.a new generation of applications developed to deal with information andits use are likely to be substantially more complex than the application packagesof today: they will deal with large quantities of information in heterogeneousformats, they will deal with distributed information and will be distributedthemselves, they will provide a level of intelligence in processing the quantitiesof information present on the network, and they will be modularšcapable ofbeing reconfigured and reorganized to meet new and evolving user objectives.these requirements represent a level of sophistication that is very difficultto accomplish with reliability, very expensive to undertake, and thus very risky.the committee adds its support to the continued attempts to advance this area.experimental network researchexperimental research, which involves the design of real protocols, thedeployment of real systems, and the construction of testbeds and otherexperimental facilities, is a critical part of the research needed to build the nii.since this sort of work is often difficult to fund and execute, especially withinthe limits of the academic context, the committee stresses the importance offacilitating it.the internet has provided an experimental environment for a number ofpractical research projects. in the early stages of the internet, the network itselfwas viewed as experimental, and indeed these experimentsthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure102about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.played an important role in the internet's development. however, theincreasingly operational nature of the internet has essentially precluded its useas a research vehicle. in the future, any remaining opportunity for largescalenetwork research will vanish, given that the nsfnet backbone is about todisappear and will be replaced by commercial networks and a backbone withonly a small number of nodes, the very high speed backbone network service(vbns), which is to provide high bandwidth for selected applications. inaddition, it is likely that most of the internet, like the larger nii, will beoperated by commercial organizations over the next few years.this transition has required the implementation of separate networks usedspecifically for research and experimentation. the gigabit testbeds providefacilities for investigating stateoftheart advanced technologies andapplications. arpa has also provided a lowerspeed experimental network, thedartnet, connecting a number of arpafunded research sites. however,these networks are small and do not provide any real means to explore issues ofscale. indeed, there does not seem to be any affordable way to build a freestanding experimental network large enough to explore issues of scale, which isa real concern, since practical research in this area is key to the success of thenii.currently, the research community attempts to deal with this problem byusing the resources of the internet to realize a ''virtual network" that researchersthen use for largescale experiments. thus, multicast has been developed bymeans of a virtual network called the mbone (multicast backbone) that runsover the internet.42 similar schemes have been used to develop new internetprotocols.there is a danger that the success of the internet, much of which has beenbased on its openness to experimentation, will lead to a narrowing ofopportunities for such experimentation. it is important that a portion of the niiremain open to controlled experiments. a balance must thus be maintainedbetween the need to experiment and the need to provide stable service usingcommercial equipment. attention should be given to the technical means toaccomplish these goals. funding should be allocated for the deployment ofnetwork experiments and prototype systems on the nii, even though they maybe relatively more expensive than other research paradigms.experimental research in middleware and applicationservicesconducting testbed experimentation at the middleware level is usually lessproblematic than doing network research, because operation of experimentalhigherlevel services cannot easily disrupt the ongoing operational use of thenetwork by applications not depending on those serthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure103about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vices. the internet thus remains a major facility for development and evaluationof middleware services, an opportunity that should be recognized andencouraged. testbeds can address associated management of rights andresponsibilities, including assessment of needs and mechanisms for theprotection of privacy, security, and intellectual property rights.experimental and testbed efforts are needed to support a transition tohigherlevel, information management uses of networks. as john diebold hasobserved,43 applications of information technology progress through a cycleencompassing modernization of old ways, innovation (involving thedevelopment of new access tools and services), and ultimately transformationfrom one kind of activity to another (including doing the previouslyinconceivable). a great deal of experimentation is needed to achieve trulytransformational applications.the challenge can be illustrated by reference to the emergence of "casualpublishing." the ability to publish from a desktop has changed publicationpractices; desktop video generation and reception will change them more.although computer technology is making publishing changes possible, who canbenefit, how, and at what costs will depend on the nature of the infrastructure.a similar set of technical, market, and policy issues arises in the digital librarycontext, where experimentation has begun with support from nsf, arpa, andnasa.44rights management testbedmore generally, an example of a useful testbed relating to rightsmanagement would incorporate systematic identification of the rationale foractions appropriate to government and industry into a joint industrygovernmentproject demonstrating model contractual and operational relationships tosupport the carriage of multimedia proprietary content. the computer,telecommunications carrier, cable provider, software provider, and contentprovider industries should participate, perhaps providing matching fundscomplementing a small contribution from the federal government, with broaddissemination of results a requirement. questions that should be answeredinclude the following: how can electronic authorization or execution of electronic contractsbe provided over the network? this is an example of a general andflexible piece of infrastructure that the private sector is not likely toprovide. what means can be developed to quickly provide varying degrees ofauthorization for particular uses of a work, for example, when the workmay be used by different users for different purposes and at differentpricing schemes?the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure104about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. what various technological meansšand the associated best times touse themšcan be found for protecting data? what are the options for formatting multimedia information in aconsumerfriendly fashion for distribution over the network to"episodic" users? this area is now the focus of considerable amountsof research and industry activity.all efforts should be aimed at the most costefficient and interoperablemeans of achieving goals. a variant or a component of the above concept mightinclude a series of multimedia projects that explore provision of electronicaccess to collections and materials generally inaccessible in the past, but of highresearch value, including photographs, drawings, films, archival data, soundrecordings, spatial data, written manuscripts, and so on.research to characterize effects of changeit will be important to understand how the evolving infrastructure willaffect both the infrastructure for research and education as well as processes forresearch and education. this continuing process of change presents newchallenges that militate against nsf assuming that it has successfullydemonstrated the value of networking to research and therefore can diminishactivity in that area. the new nsfarpanasa digital libraries initiative andnsf and arpa information infrastructureoriented activities under the iitacomponent of the hpcc program are steps in the right direction, but they areonly first steps.recommendation: network researchthe committee recommends that the national science foundation, along with the advanced research projects agency, other department of defense research agencies, the department of energy, and the national aeronautics and space administration, continue and, in fact, expand a program of researchin networks, with attention to emerging issues at the higher levels of an opendata network architecture (e.g., applications and information management), inaddition to research at the lower levels of the architecture.the technical issues associated with developing and deploying an nii arefar from resolved. research can contribute to architecture, to new concepts fornetwork services, and to new principles and designs in key areas such assecurity, scale, heterogeneity, and evolvability. it is important to ensure that thiscountry maintains its clear technical leadership and competitive advantage ininformation infrastructure and networking.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure105about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. the term "open" has been used in a variety of ways in the networking and standards community.some of the uses describe rather different situations from that which is described in this chapter. forexample, the telephone companies have been developing a concept they call open networkarchitecture. that architecture does not address the conceres listed here; it is a means to allow thirdparty providers to develop and attach to existing telephone systems alternative versions of advancedservices such as 800number service.2. tolerance of heterogeneity must be provided for at more than the physical layer. at the higherlevels, information must be coded to deal with a range of devices. for example, different videodisplays may have very different resolution: one may display a highdefinition tv picture, whileanother may have a picture the size of a postage stamp. to deal with this either (1) the picture mustbe simultaneously transmitted with multiple codings, or the postage stamp display must possess thecomputational power of an hdtv, so that it can find within the highresolution picture the limitedinformation it needs, or (2) (preferably) the information stream must have been coded forheterogeneity: the data must have been organized so that each resolution display can easily find theportions relevant to it.3. an illustration of this point can be seen in the history of a protocol suite called xns that wasdeveloped by xerox. xns was proposed in the early 1980s and received considerable attention inthe commercial community, since it was perceived as rather simple to implement. the interest inxns continued until it became clear that xerox did not intend to release the specification of oneprotocol in the xns suite, interpress, which was a protocol for printing documents. within a veryshort time, all interest in xns ceased, and it is essentially unknown today.4. the notion of a multilayer approach is consistent with directions now being undertaken by arpaand nsf in supporting the nren and iita components of the hpcc initiative. it also appears insuch projects as the proposed industryuniversity "i95" project to "facilitate the freemarketpurchase, sale and exchange of information services." see tennenhouse, david, et al. 1993. i95:the information market, mit/lcs/tr577. massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge,mass., august.5. the committee notes that conceptual models of the sort offered here may differ from models usedto organize implementations, and emphasizes that the purpose of its conceptual model is to providea framework for discussion and understanding. models intended to guide actual implementationmust be shaped by such issues as performance and may thus be organized in a somewhat differentmanner. in particular, a modularity based on strong layering may not be appropriate for organizingsoftware modules.6. this fourlayer taxonomy is not inconsistent with a threelayer model that has been articulated inrecent nii and hpcc presentations, a model based on "bitways," middleware, and applications. thetaxonomy suggested in this report further divides the lower bitways layer to emphasize theimportance of the bearer service, as is discussed in text below.7. quality of service (qos) is discussed again later in this chapter. although somewhat technical,this matter is a key aspect of defining the odn. today's internet does not provide any variation inqos; it provides a single sort of service often called "best effort." the telephone system alsoprovides only one qos, one designed for telephony. the internet is currently undertaking to adduserselected qos to its core service; it seems a requirement for a nextgeneration general servicenetwork.8. in the internet today, these transport features are provided by a protocol called the transmissioncontrol protocol, or tcp, which is the most common version of the transport layer of the internet.the tcp assigns sequence numbers to data being transferred across the network and uses thosesequence numbers at the receiver to assure that all data isthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure106about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.received and that it is delivered in order. it a packet is lost or misordered, these sequence numbersdetect that fact. to detect whether any of the data being transferred over the network becomedamaged due to transmission errors, tcp computes a "checksum" on the data and uses thatchecksum to discover any corruption. if a damaged packet is detected, the receiving tcp will askthe sending tcp to retransmit that packet. the tcp also contains an initial connectionsynchronization mechanism, based on the exchange of unique identifiers in packets, to bring an endnode connection into existence reliably.while tcp is the most prevalent of the transport protocols used in the internet, it is not mandatory,nor is it the only transport service. a range of situations, such as multicast delivery of data, anddelivery where less than perfect reliability is required, imply the use of an alternative to tcp. forthis reason, tcp is defined in such a way that no part of its implementation is inside the network. itis implemented in the end nodes, which means that replacing it with some other protocol does notrequire changes inside the network.9. the transport layer defined in this report is not exactly the same as the layer with the same namein the osi reference model, the osi layer 4, because it also includes protocols for data formats,which are a part of the osi presentation layer. thus the odn transport layer is a more inclusivecollection of services that gathers together all the services that are provided in the networks of todayto support applications in the end node.10. for example, the government required that television sets include uhf tuners. in retrospect,most people would argue that the policy was seriously flawed. uhf television has never lived up toits expectations, the service has hoarded billions of dollars worth of valuable spectrum for decades,and the cost of television sets was increased with little net benefit to consumersš especially thoseliving in less populated areas.11. the committee recognizes that the information infrastructure task force has begun to explorethe concept of technically based "road maps" for the nil.12. the committee recognizes that unbundling is a controversial issue under current debate amongstate and federal regulatory agencies. the ameritech proposals to open up its facilities present oneindication that recognition of tendencies toward unbundling may be widening within industry. seeteece, david j. 1993. restructuring the u.s. telecommunications industry for globalcompetitiveness: the ameritech program in context, university of california at berkeley, aprilthis monograph describes how ameritech offers to unbundle its local loops and provide immediateaccess to practically all local facilities and switching systems, with significantly lower costs for theunbundled loop compared to the revenue available from exchange telephone and related services:once effectuated, the ameritech unbundling plan will make the local exchange effectivelycontestable. basically, anyone wanting to enter any segment could do so at relatively low cost.entry barriers would in essence be eliminated. . . . [i]nterconnectors can literally isolate and eitheruse or avoid any segment of the network. they are also flee to interconnect using their owntransport or purchasing transport from ameritech. . . . [a]ll elements of the network must becorrectly priced since any underpriced segment can be used separately from the balance of thenetwork and overpriced segments can easily be avoided. (p. 64)13. with each emerging network technology, including ethernet, personal computers, highspeedlans such as fddi, and highspeed longdistance circuits, there have been predictions that ip ortcp would not be effective, might perform poorly, and would have to be replaced. so far thesepredictions have proved false. this concern is now being repeated in the context of network accessto mobile endnode devices, such as pcs and other computers, and other new communicationsparadigms. it remains to be seen if there are real issues in these new situations, but the earlyexperiments suggest that ip will indeed work in the mobile environment.14. there are some other less central ip features, such as the means to deal with lowerleveltechnology with different maximum packet sizes. there is also a small set of iplevelthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure107about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.control messages, which report to the end node various error conditions and network stares, such asuse of a bad address, relevant changes in network routing, or network failures.15. a related issue is development of standard format sets for publishing over the internet, forrequiring headers and/or signatures, or for requiring some kind of registration that mightautomatically put the "work" in a directory.16. indeed, many applications cannot predict in advance what their bandwidth needs will be, asthese depend very dynamically on the details of execution, for example, which actions arerequested, which data are fetched, and so on.17. providing a refusal capability has implications for applications and user interfaces designed inthe internet tradition, which today do not ask permission to use the network but simply do so. theconcept of refusal is missing.18. by late 1993, perhaps 1,000 people worldwide were using realtime video over the internet. theconsequence was that at times fewer than 0.1 percent of internet users consumed 10 percent of thebackbone capacity. personal communication, stephen wolff, national science foundation,december 20, 1993.19. this point is relevant to a current debate in the technical community about whether the basicbearer service that can be built using the standards for atm should support statistical sharing ofbandwidth. some proposals for atm do not support besteffort service, but rather only serviceswith guaranteed qos parameters. this position is motivated by a set of speculations that a "better"quality of service better serves user needs. however, taking into account cost structures and thesuccess of besteffort service on the internet, a "better" service may not be more desirable.technical decisions of this sort could have a major bearing on the success of atm as a technologyof choice for the nil20. the guarantee issue is related to the scheduling algorithm that packets see. a packet (or atm)switch can have either a very simple or a rather complex scheduling algorithm for departingnetwork traffic. the simple method is first in, first out (fifo). there are a number of morecomplex methods, one of which is weighted fair queueing (wfq). in fifo, a burst of packettraffic put into the network goes through immediately, staying in front of other later packets. wfqservices different packet classes in turn, so that the burst is fed into the network in a regulated wayand then mixed by the scheduler with packets from other classes.one alternative for achieving fairness is to allocate bandwidth in a very conservative manner (peakrate allocation) so that the user is externally limited (at the entry point of the net) to some rate, andthen to assure that on every link of the network over which this flow of cells will pass, there isenough bandwidth to carry the full load of every user at once.such an approach using peak allocation eliminates from the network any benefit of statisticalbandwidth sharing, which is one of the major benefits of packet switching. on the other hand, wfqis one method for ensuring that we benefit from statistical multiplexing. the way this decision issettled will have real business consequences for the telephone companies and other atm networkproviders.21. one estimate for the accounting file for only longhaul intrau.s. internet traffic is that it wouldexceed 45 gigabytes per month per billion packets; the nsfnet backbone was approaching 40billion packets per month by late 1993. see roberts, michael m. 1993. "internet accountingrevisited," educom review, novemberdecember (december 6 email).22. this explicitly does not preclude implementing similar services in noncompliant ways as well.thus, video might be provided according to the standards required for nii compliance, and as wellin some proprietary noncompliant coding.23. there is a great deal of uncertainty about the limitations of wireless. the low earth orbitingsatellites could provide considerable bandwidth; in this area, arpa has funded a gigabit satelliteexperiment. at the local level (ground radio) the limitations are also unthe open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure108about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clear, but bandwidth will always be a problem to some extent with wireless. the question is howpervasive wireless will be for data communications. the predictions are indeed muddied. to quote afebruary 15, 1994, article in america's network, "the most experienced analyst with the bestresearch data can't predict with certainty how the coming wireless data market will develop." robertpepper (fcc) reminds us that when cellular began, the best guesses were that there would be 1million customers by the end of the century; today there are 60 million. it is clear that the lowerspeed data services will surely be used widely, it is use of the highspeed services that is hard topredict.24. the current status of the gosip is in doubt. nist has convened the federal internetworkingrequirements panel to advise it on options for dealing with the gosip. at this writing, the draftreport of this panel, opened for comments, was not yet final. however, the overall direction of thereport appears to be to abandon the current gosip, which mandates one required protocol suite (theosi suite), and to move to a more open approach based on multiple suites and an explicitacceptance of the internet protocols.25. see also u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1992. global standards: buildingblocks of the future. tct512. government printing office, washington, d.c., march.26. in the early 1970s, arpa undertook the development of tcp/ip for the specific purpose ofproviding a standard approach to interoperation of dod networks. the technical development wasdone by a working group convened and funded by arpa, with academic and industrial researchparticipants. in the late 1970s, arpa worked with the defense communications agency (dca) tomandate tcp/ip as a preliminary standard for internetworked dod systems. the dca and arpacooperated on the establishment of a more formal review committee to oversee the establishmentand deployment of tcp/ip within the dod.27. additionally, the committee notes the emerging issues of addressing in the cable networks.today, the cable networks have no real need for a global addressing architecture, sincedistinguishing between individual end nodes is needed only for directing the control messages sentto the settop box. however, as the entertainment products become more complex and interactive,the need for an explicit addressing scheme will increase. if the cable networks expand to interworkwith other parts of the information infrastructure, their addressing scheme should probably beunified with the scheme for telephony and information networks.28. computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1990.computers at risk: safe computing in the information age. national academy press, washington,d.c.29. wireless radio transmission is especially subject to security risks for a number of reasons. first,the transmission is broadcast into the air, and so it is relatively simple to "tap" the transmission.second, since the transmission is broadcast, a number of other radio receivers can easily receive it,and more than one of them may decode the message, opening up more opportunities for a breach ofsecurity. third, since the medium is radio, it is easy to "jam" the transmission. fourth, since radiosare usually (though not always) portable, they are more vulnerable to being stolen, lost, damaged,and so on.30. the committee recognizes that security is an emphasis of the administration's informationinfrastructure task force, but it seeks a sufficiently broad and deep technical framework, beginningwith a security architecture.31. cstb has previously recommended more securityrelated research. see cstb, 1990,computers at risk.32. lewis, peter h. 1994. "computer security experts see pattern in internet breakins," new yorktimes, february 11; and burgess, john. 1994. "dod plan may cut ties to internet,' networkworld, january 10, p. 95.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure109about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.33. cstb, 1990, computers at risk.34. cstb will launch a separate study of encryption and cryptography policy in mid1994.35. see cstb, 1990, computers at risk.36. lewis, 1994, "computer security experts see pattern in internet breakins,'37. recognition of this problem is developing in the relevant industries, but problems of design andimplementation remain. see "national information infrastructure and grand alliance hdtvsystem operability," february 22, 1994.38. note that specificity is a theme of technology decisions for most interactive television trials todate. see yoshida, junko, and terry costlow. 1994. "group races chip makers to settop," eetimes, february 7 (electronic distribution), which observes that "many of the digital interactive tvtrials and commercial rollouts are married to a particular settop box design that is directly tied to aspecific network architecture. examples range from the settop box silicon graphics is basing on itsindy workstation for time warner cable's full service network project in orlando, florida, to thebox scientificatlanta is building around 312)o inc.'s graphics chip set for us west's trial inomaha, nebraska.'39. continental cablevision. 1994. "continental cablevision, psi launch internet service: firstcommercial internet service delivered via cable available beginning today in cambridge,massachusetts," news release, march 8.40. a wide range of speeds might be offered from the user back into the network. today's optionsfor access speeds range from voicegrade modems to current higherspeed modems at 56 kbps toisdn at 128 kbps. none of these speeds are sufficient either for lowdelay transfer of significantquantities of data or for delivery of video from the home into the network. since highqualitycompressed video seems to require between 1.5 and 4 mbps, a channel of this size (at least a t1channel) would permit a user to offer one video stream. it would still represent a real bottleneck fora site offering access to significant data. for comparison, in today's lan environments 10 mbps isconsidered minimal for access to data stored on file servers. finally, for networks whose primarypurpose is to provide access to entertainment video, the operator of the network presumably has theaccess capacity to deliver several hundred video streams into the network simultaneously. it isunlikely that this sort of inbound capacity will be readily available to any other user of the network.but at lower and more realistic input speeds, perhaps from t1 to 10 mbps, there are a variety ofinteresting opportunities for becoming an information provider.41. in an attempt to explore what these costs might be, the committee discovered that there aretechnical disagreements about the degree of additional complexity and cost implied by itsobjectives. comments from inside the cable and telephone industries indicate that these industrieshave already assessed the costs of adding these more general features and have concluded internallythat they cannot afford them in the current competitive climate. the committee thus takes as a giventhat these features will not be incorporated any time soon without policy intervention.42. a virtual network such as the mbone is constructed by attaching to the internet a set ofexperimental routers. the operational ip addressing and routing is used to establish paths betweenthese routers, which then use these paths as if they were pointtopoint connections. experimentalrouting algorithms, for example, can then be evaluated in these new routers. these new algorithmscan neither see nor disrupt the operational routing running at the lower level, and so the experimentdoes not disrupt normal operation. the isolation is not perfect, however. in the case of the mbone,quantities of multicast traffic might possibly flood the real internet links, preventing service.explicit steps have been taken in the experimental routers to prevent this occurrence. building avirtual network requires care to prevent any chance of lowerlevel disruptions, since it does involvesending real data over the real network.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure110about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.43. diebold was quoted by paul bran peters in a june 1993 briefing to the committee.44. the nsfarpanasa digital libraries initiative solicits proposals for research in three areas:(1) "capturing data (and descriptive information about such data) of all forms (text, images, sound,speech, etc.) and categorizing and organizing electronic information in a variety of formats." (2)"advanced software and algorithms for browsing, searching, filtering, abstracting, summarizing andcombining large volumes of data, imagery, and all kinds of information." (3) "the utilization ofnetworked databases distributed around the nation and around the world."examples of relevant research are listed in national science foundation. 1993. "research on digitallibraries: announcement," nsf 93141. national science foundation, washington, d.c.the open data network: achieving the vision of an integratednational information infrastructure111about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3research, education, and librariesthe research, education, and library communities have been informationinfrastructure pioneers. their use of networking to create new channels forscholarly communication and collaboration is pointing the wa to broader anddeeper participation by individuals at all levels of society in the process oflearning. the internet has been the vehicle for most of the networkingexplorations of research, education, and libraries, but it so far has been usedmost heavily by segments of the research community."research" includes scientists across a wide range of disciplines as well asresearch in the humanities; "education" includes k12 and a range of higherand continuingeducation institutions and activities; and "libraries" includesresearch and specialty libraries typically associated with research institutions aswell as public libraries that, like k12 schools, are embedded in a generalcommunity setting.1 research, higher education, and libraries subsume anumber of elements that are sometimes separately addressed under the healthcare umbrella, such as healthrelated research, education, and library support.2the experiences of the research, education, and library communitiesillustrate some of the tensions among what different groups of communitiesneed, want, and can affordštensions that will be replicated or expanded as thenation moves to a truly national information infrastructure (nii). they alsoillustrate that the value of the internetšregardless of whether that value ismeasured in terms of program effectiveness, productivity gains, or returns oninvestmentsšincreases as a function of (1) the size and diversity of its userpopulation, (2) the power and sophistication of its applications, and (3) thecapability of the infrastructure.3research, education, and libraries112about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.movement toward an nii and away from standalone, separate researchnetworks will solve some problems but may give rise to others for the research,education, and library communities. to understand and provide adequately fortheir future networking needs, it is necessary to examine how thesecommunities differ from other communities to be served by the nii, and toappreciate as well their continuing force for positive change in the growth ofu.s. society.researchwithin the research community, individuals and disciplines differ in termsof their use of electronic networks: some primarily use electronic mail, someemphasize access to shared databases, some require access to special tools ordevices (e.g., supercomputers and special sensors), some depend on networksfor rapid transfer of large data files, and some take advantage of "news" (i.e.,discussions and bulletin board groups), as there are thousands of "newsgroups"addressing a multitude of topics and disciplines. the upgrade of the nsfnetbackbone to t3 service has enabled new applications such as teleconferencing,multimedia electronic mail, visualization, and ondemand electronic publishing(box 3.1). qualitative benefits have arisen with changes in the nature of thework being done: broader interaction can change the questions being asked, thereview accorded to research, and the scope of participation.4quantitative benefits or gains in efficiency may be seen in the sharing ofscarce resources (obviating the need for duplicative investments), from thenetwork facilities themselves to expensive devices and information resourcesattached to them. another quantitative benefit is the effective reduction of thecost of reproducing and distributing informationšit is often cheaper toduplicate and transmit information electronically rather than in paper or otherphysical media.for example, a university of colorado group funded by the nationalaeronautics and space administration (nasa) built a prototype system fordistributing satellite data over the network via an online access system. in thissystem the user is responsible for locating, reviewing, and ordering the data, anapproach that saves human time and cost in locating, copying, and shipping datatapes. the system is made possible by a network that can accommodate thetransfer (ftp) of modestsize data files (the size of a typical file is 1 to 4mbytes), using the usual techniques of data compression and user selection ofdata file size to minimize the impact on the network. during the recent togacoare5 oceanographic experiments in the western pacific, satellite seasurfacetemperature maps were produced and made available to users over theinternet; researchers not having internet access required production of a contourresearch, education, and libraries113about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.map of the images that could then be faxed to them. even the ability toelectronically access text can present real savings: physicists, for example, haveenthusiastically developed and used electronic archives in areas such as highenergy physics that are stored at los alamos national laboratory facilities asan alternative to buying journals that cost hundreds to thousands of dollars peryear for subscriptions.box 3.1 research applications of networking communication via electronic mail with other researchers locally,nationally, and worldwide sharing and transfer of data files among researchers, and betweenresearchers and data sources (especially government agencies) contribution, sharing, and accessing of news information of all kinds(e.g., conference announcements, current affairs, electronic bulletinboards, meeting abstracts, developments in individual fields, and so on) electronic reference searches (e.g., access to online librarycatalogues, directories of special collections, and databases withabstracts) access to specialpurpose computing resources, such assupercomputers and sensorbased instrumentation access to shared and community resources, including national andglobal databases and data systems electronic submission of reviews and proposals access to articles, books, and other materials published electronically development of and access to community software access to remote, remotely controlled instruments for researchone of the many new internet tools that has facilitated information sharingand collaboration in biomedical research is the mosaic hypermedia browserused by researchers studying the genome of the fruit fly, drosophilamelanogaster. through the efforts of a large number of researchers in manylaboratories, approximately 90 percent of the genome in this species has nowbeen cloned onto 10,000 fragments, where approximately 3,000 conventionalloci have also been mapped. a researcher at any participating site can open acomputer screen window, use a mouse to click on (select) increasingly detailedphotographs of the region in which he or she is interested, and then open lists ofthe relevant clones, deletions, and loci of that region, which include thecorresponding literature references. this software was first developed for thenematode caenorhabditis elegans6 and is now available for a variety of otherspecies.research, education, and libraries114about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.laboratories throughout the world, connected by the internet, have beguncollaborating to sequence completely the dna of several organisms, leadingultimately to sequencing of the entire human genome.7 the databases that mustbe linked include dna sequences (genbank), chromosome mappinginformation (genome data bank), and protein sequences and structure (proteininformation resource).8new network capabilities and technologies will generate a continuing flowof new network applications that will lead to significant changes in the conductof research. if development of highperformance computing andcommunications technologies in academia and industry continues, networkcapabilities should expand at rates that may initially exceed the demandgenerated by the science community. the increase in capabilities will makepossible an overall shift from electronic mail exchange and modest file transferactivities to online distribution of large volumes of data (both measured andmodeled), fueling in turn continued rapid growth in scientific researchers'demands for network services. one possibility is that highperformancecomputing in the future will involve networking dozens to thousands ofworkstations and other computers in different locations. initially thesecomputers will be running applications in the background and at night; but atsome future time, people may collaborate through relatively continuouscollaborative computing. given such possibilities, it is hard to predict the ratioof transactions to bandwidth over time. it is clear that the "experiment" ofnetwork use in the research environment is only just beginning.the nature of research is itself changing. today scientists are seekinganswers to more complex problems, while the instruments and facilities neededto conduct research are becoming increasingly expensive and the funding forscientists' projects is becoming scarce.9 this is a scenario that stronglyencourages increased collaboration, although the nature and extent ofcollaborative research may differ within disciplines and across disciplinaryboundaries. there is considerable impetus for collaboration in oceanographicresearch, for example, where research projects not only cross the lines of thetraditional subdisciplines of the field (i.e., physical, biological, chemical, andgeological) but also require collaboration among international scientists.10aware of such trends in funding and the increasingly interdisciplinarynature of such research, some scientists have recently introduced a new concept:a center without walls in which the nation's researchers can perform theirresearch without regard to geographical locationšinteracting with colleagues,accessing instrumentation, sharing data and computational resources, andaccessing information in digital libraries. the name given to this concept is"collaboratory," a term derived by combining the words "collaboration" and"laboratory."11 in this enviresearch, education, and libraries115about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ronment a scientist's instrumentation and information are virtually local,regardless of their actual locations; research teams separated by continents anddisciplinary boundaries will be able to conduct joint experiments in ways thatwill greatly expedite the transfer of knowledge and thus will change thescientific process involving interdisciplinary and collaborative research. thecollaboratory concept suggests that in addition to transmission and switchingcapability, information infrastructure for research will also need to providemore basic services and tools, such as mechanisms to easily identify andassemble the needed experimental components from across the network.today's research projects are increasingly multisite, and many involvenumerous entities; universities, laboratories, industry, and other organizationsmay participate. principal investigators are often geographically distributed, butthey require opportunities for realtime interaction and, in many fields,capability for remote experimentation. for example, research in quantumchromodynamics, involving efforts to investigate and define intranuclear forces,is heavily data oriented and requires large amounts of bandwidth. moreover,applications consume and produce huge amounts of data that need to be stored,processed, and transferred at different sites. to meet such a range of needs, anetwork service must support multimedia (including realtime audio and video)traffic, provide large amounts of bandwidth to those sites requiring it (smalleramounts to those that do not require the "kitchen sink"), and be quasiubiquitousin order to connect investigators and sites. such a network service is alsoneeded to provide for others, such as educators, access to the eventual results ofscientific research and to enable educators to carry out their own research usingnetwork resources.an example of the emergence of international, collaborative research is theinternational thermonuclear experimental reactor (iter), a department ofenergy (doe)sponsored project involving a multinational team (from theunited states, germany, russia, and japan) that is trying to design and build areactor for energy production. the collaboration is among four major sites (onein each of the four countries) with additional other sites participating bothwithin the abovenamed countries and elsewhere. the project has progressed tothe stage that participants need the ability to exchange engineering (computeraided design/computeraided manufacturing) designs in real time and toconcurrently analyze, discuss, and annotate these designs. such capabilitiesrequire highbandwidth connections for the transfer of engineering data and forthe support of a "realtime" collaborative, distributed (internationally)environment. today's networks do not have such connections. neartermimprovements may entail increasing the capacity of the deployed infrastructure;greater support for realtime collaboration would entail extending theresearch, education, and libraries116about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure architecture along the lines outlined for the open data networkdescribed in chapter 2.several groups of researchers are already beginning to move large volumesof scientific information over the internet. those conducting global changeresearch (oceanographers, earth scientists, and atmospheric scientists, amongothers), for example, obtain massive quantities of information from satellitesand other collection devices, and those quantities are expected to increase to 1terabyte per day through the implementation of the earth observing systemdata and information system (eosdis) and other programs organized throughnasa, doe, the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa),and other federal agencies. the contemplated data volumes are so large thateven with substantial (e.g., factors measured in hundreds) amounts of datacompression, high levels of bandwidth will be needed to do research in theseareas.for example, researchers investigating global climate change currently usemodels that require very large amounts of data before, during, and afterconstruction of the models. their analyses are typically done visually with ahighend workstation. the limiting bandwidth available on esnet and othersegments of the internet constrains the ability of these scientists to view theirresults in real time and, even worse, prohibits them from performing an analysisthat incorporates both surface and air modelsšsince these models areimplemented on different machines in different locations, and very largeamounts of data would have to be transferred for use in an integrated model. anadditional complication for global climate change researchers is that datacollected in nasa's earth observing system (eos) is also likely to be used.because these data will be located at various sites, including oak ridgenational laboratory, the transfer of large volumes of information will berequired.similar requirements can be seen as arising from the growth inapplications involving graphical images and video. one driver for theseapplications is scientific visualization, which makes massive data sets morecomprehensible. high bandwidth will also continue to be required to supportrealtime interactions (e.g., to support remote access to special instruments oreven video conferencing) and remote access to highperformance computingdevicesšthe performance of which continues to increase.12 in addition,interactive activities such as commanding spacecraft and monitoring remoteinstruments entail networking needs that greatly exceed current capacities andsophistication.for example, the advanced photon source (aps) comprises 22 separatecollaborative action teams that involve industrial companies, nationallaboratories, and universities accessing the 40 to 50 aps beam lines. theseteams require the ability to employ "telework" tools and techniquesresearch, education, and libraries117about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to perform remote experimentation and collaboration in real time. the hope isto extend this ability to an educational setting in at least a realtime monitoringor visualization mode. that prospect cannot be realized until the networksupports multimedia traffic, provides the needed large bandwidths, and providesa more secure environment.a central question regarding the supply of information infrastructure to theresearch community is the distribution of needs. at this time, specificcommunities can be identified that need very high bandwidth. the expectationthat this group is relatively small is reflected in the nsf's plan to support a verysmall research network operating at very high speeds (the vbns). how largewill requirements for such infrastructure grow, and how quickly will theyspread? the answers may depend on the degree of ease of access to highbandwidth infrastructure.13the degree of innovation, the diversity of applications, and the dependenceof researchers on the internet have been nurtured by an environment in whichcost has not been a major constraint for the individual user (see chapter 5). thebenefits of connection to the internet are underscored by contrasts within theresearch community: researchers in disciplines and at campuses without easy(or any) internet access have not had the opportunities to collaborate, learn newresults quickly, and broaden their professional interactions that their connectedcolleagues have.the problems and opportunities inherent in broadening access within theresearch community are especially evident outside the natural and physicalsciences. new technologies and internet access are opening up new avenues forhumanities research, teaching, and scholarly communication. used far lesscommonly but enthusiastically among a small group of proponents, humanitiescomputing and networking have grown significantly in recent years. electronicbulletin boards, email, and discussion groups are the most widely usedmechanisms for daytoday communication. in addition, literary text analysiscan be carried out with unprecedented detail due to the availability of machinereadable texts and complex textanalysis software.14 thus, the internet hasallowed humanities professors at several institutions to assist in building amultimedia database for the study of ancient greece under the perseus project.with the collection and storage of text, translations, color images, maps, anddrawings contributed by museums and archaeologists, the perseus database willbring the world of ancient greece alive for students and researchers across thecountry.humanities buildings, departments, and scholars are often among the laston a campus to be connected to the internet.15 disciplines in the humanitieshave not been well capitalized in part because the need for capital (such ascomputing equipment and networks) has not been recognized, yet withoutaccess to the capital these researchers cannot demonresearch, education, and libraries118about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strate its value in their fields. overall differences in funding across disciplinesreflect societal choices about where to invest. the new national initiative onarts and humanities computing is currently planning the next steps in gaininga voice for the humanities and arts in the development of the nii.16broadening of access was a goal of the original national research andeducation network (nren) proposals, and substantial progress has been madethrough expansion of the original nsfnet, the internet, the national sciencefoundation (nsf)catalyzed regional networks, and the nsf connectionsprogram, as well as growth in the targeted esnet and nasa science internet(nsi) programs.17 the branscomb report18 has called for broadening the accessto advanced workstations across the scientific research community, a move thatwould fuel demand for networkbased infrastructure. the possibility of slowergrowth in research networkingšimplied by a shift toward commercializationand user payments compounded by some tightening in the availability ofresearch supportšraises the prospect of competition for infrastructure resourcesbetween those with no access (who argue for ubiquity and aggregate bandwidthto serve them) and those with high individual needs for bandwidth. however, ashas been seen in the provision of access to esnet and nsi, there may be specialsolutions developed to meet special needs. there is little question thatresearchers in engineering, science, health, and the humanities have benefitedgreatly from their use of the internet. that benefit can be expected to growconsiderably with the greater reach and capabilities of the nii.higher educationhigher education networking presents a chickenandegg problem.networking for this and other segments of the education community attractedfederal attention somewhat later than networking for research partly becauseteaching faculty, most college students, and academic librariansšexcept forthose involved with scientific researchšhad no access to the network until itwas opened to them in 1988 with the expansion of the original nationalresearch network program into the nren program. what they had were onlytheir own visions of potentialities, often growing out of experiences withtelevision and satellite broadcasting, which introduced telecommunications intothe teachinglearning process.19 the renaming of the federal nren program toinclude education was a result of the library, academic computing, andeducation communities' intense, aggressive lobbying, political activity that alsospurred the development of new organizations and activities dedicated todeveloping and applying information infrastructure for higher education.20research, education, and libraries119about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for example, the push for the ''e" in nren was associated with theestablishment of the coalition for networked information by the association ofresearch libraries, cause, and educom.on the whole, higher education is positioned to make extensive use of thenii to enhance the delivery of academic programs and to enrich their content bybroadening the mix of inputs and participants. for example, bestnet is aninternational consortium of colleges and universities using the capabilities oftelecommunications to enhance the teaching and learning experiences ofstudents across geographic and cultural boundaries. using computerconferencing, email, shared databases, and interactive computing, participatinginstitutions are experimenting with collaborative teaching. initially started as acooperative effort among three california state university campuses, texasa&i university (kingsville), the centro de enseñanza técnica y superior(mexicali via baja california norte, mexico), and tijuana institutotechnologico de mexicali to share spanish language instruction, it is nowexpanding its reach into other continents and other disciplines.the nii will also help educational institutions to reach students where theyare or prefer to be located. students, especially graduate students, will want topursue degree programs and professional development courses atteleconferencing sites that are convenient for them. for many students,especially older or adult students, convenient teleconferencing and remoteaccess, in combination with the quality of their courses, may become moreimportant than many of the campus experiences that accompany the traditionalattending of classes at the institution itself.21 in addition, the "electronicoutreach" capability provided by the nii can enhance the recruitment andretention efforts of all educational institutions.x window and the mosaic hypertext interface for the worldwide weboffer broad possibilities for applications in undergraduate education. forexample, mosaic is incorporated into some of the "electronic studios" beingdeveloped at rice university for courses ranging from an introductory biologylaboratory to a graduate seminar in architecture. electronic studios combine avariety of computing tools, some available over electronic networks. tool setsvary by discipline; engineers may need circuit design programs, for example,while sociologists may seek statistics programs.22the use of interactive video as a medium for the delivery of instruction inmultiple sites is beginning to emerge. for example, the "cuseeme"videoconferencing program was used in the virtual design studio project forcollaborative housing design among cornell university, mit, the university ofbritish columbia at vancouver, the university of hong kong, washingtonuniversity at st. louis, and an institution inresearch, education, and libraries120about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barcelona, spain. three of the teams worked for two weeks using cuseemeand gave a final video presentation using a picturetel videoconferencingsystem. according to kent hubbell of the cornell university architecturedepartment, teams designing with cuseeme were far ahead of the teams thatdid not use the technology: "it is really amazing what a difference just a littlelive video image makes to the entire communication process."23shared databases for print, video, voice, and image are anticipated. thecost savings possible from resource sharing are illuminated by existinginformation resource applications within higher education. for example, anincreasing number of colleges and universities are contracting for networkedaccess to information resources available from commercial providers. thecalifornia state university (csu) system, with 20 campuses serving 350,000students, illustrates the potential for significant savings on the acquisition ofinformation resources through partnerships with vendors, such as mead datacentral and dow jones news/retrieval, which have been willing to offerservices at a discount in return for being able to effectively promote theirservices to students. for example, the database service set known as lexisnexis is accessed by students and faculty at all csu campuses (at present, byapproximately 200 concurrent users systemwide) through the internet. at theaverage commercial rate of $10 per search and at the current volume of 125,000searches per month by csu users, the service would cost $1.25 million permonth and the total annual fee, at commercial rates, would amount to $15million; under its negotiated agreement with mead data central, csu paysapproximately $200,000 per year. note that while csu was able to use itscentralized procurement to its advantage, many libraries and educationalinstitutions have raised concerns about the cost of site licenses relative to theservice demand they generate.the principal constraint on networkbased applications is one of access;significant numbers of highereducation institutions remain with limited or nointernet access. by early 1994, approximately 1,100 institutions of highereducation (including all schools in the top two carnegie classificationcategories, "research" and "doctorate") were connected to the internet; thetotal number of highereducation institutions in the united states exceeds 3,000.the limited extension of the intracampus telecommunication infrastructure intoclassrooms and faculty offices, the shortage of desktop computers, the lack ofresources for faculty development, and the scarcity of technical staff supporthave been major obstacles in programs mounted to date. without extensivestimulation at state or federal levels, it may be more than several years beforethere will be ubiquitous access at institutions not already connected to theinternet.one illustration of the challenge is provided by conditions in michiresearch, education, and libraries121about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gan. michiganbased michnet was founded (circa 1970) to provide datanetworking connectivity among michigan's publicly funded universities. merit,the service provider, began by interconnecting the three largest publicuniversities, i.e., michigan state university, the university of michigan, andwayne state university, in 1971. today michnet provides 135 dedicatedattachments to 92 organizations distributed over all of michigan's twopeninsulas. these include 42 fouryear colleges and universities (including all13 public universities) and 11 (of 29) community colleges.24 thus, onlyapproximately onethird of michigan's community colleges are served bymichnet currently. because there is a statewide network backbone in place inmichigan, there is not a technical barrier to attaching new organizations. rather,for each category of organization michnet serves, the two primary inhibitorsare funding and motivation. community colleges, for example, like otherorganizations, usually weigh committing funds for data networking againstother communication priorities, such as distance learning (which can besupported with conventional telecommunications). with the current attentionbeing given to the internet and the nii, there is increased awareness and interestin data networking access. but funding remains a challenge, although somerelief has been found from nsf's connections program.k12 educationthis is a time of great opportunity to expand information infrastructure fork12 education, because such applications have attracted considerable politicalattention and support. the expansion of programs relating to mathematics andscience education at nsf, the launch and proposed expansion of the nationaltelecommunications and information administration (ntia)telecommunications and information infrastructure assistance program, thesigns of greater interest in technology at the department of education and thatdepartment's inclusion in the new information infrastructure technology andapplications (iita) component of the high performance computing andcommunications (hpcc) program, the administration's challenge goal ofconnecting all classrooms to the nii by the year 2000, and industry efforts toconnect schools make this a time of great expectations.however, the k12 education community to date has not generally been amajor consumer of information technology. some infrastructure applicationsare already in place, one example being the distance learning techniques thatwere rapidly deployed and accepted at many institutions, although these effortsmay rely on more conventional telecommunications or other media. whilenetworking has spread in the research community through the relative ease ofaccess to seemingly "free," sharedresearch, education, and libraries122about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and the "contagion" effects of peer pressure or observation ofcolleagues, the number of educators with direct experience in using thistechnology has been limited to the early adopters, those who had specialfunding, or those with access to special singlepurpose administrative networks.networking for education has followed a significantly different historyfrom research networking. first, where it has occurred it has been inherentlymore expensive, characterized by the prominence of dialup access (attelephone service rates, plus the applicable computer service charges, usuallyincluding online connection time charges plus occasional transmission charges)to bulletinboard or other centralhostbased services. much of this activity hasbeen independent of the internet, at least until relatively recently; networking ink12 education has been inhibited by the lack of broad access to an openinformation network. there have been multiple services serving small andseparate communities (militating against the achievement of a critical mass ofusers on any one service). cost has been a major obstacle, given the chronicbudget pressures confronting schools and the lack of predictable costsassociated with educational networking.indeed, cost is a key reason that data networking connectivity among theeducational community has basically only trickled down from the majorresearch universities to other fouryear schools and then to the twoyearschools, with the k12 and public library communities bringing up the rear. forexample, michigan has over 5,000 k12 school buildings, a number dwarfingthe 135 michnet attachments (for all kinds of research and educationinstitutions) in place today. to bring the internet to all these sites will be amajor challenge. as a result of an ameritech overcharge, michigan's k12community has a onetime opportunity to access additional funding to enhanceits networking access. these funds may be used in various ways, for example,for video conferencing, distance learning, and data access. yet even if all theavailable funding were used for internet access, at best about 25 percent of theschools would have some of their access costs covered.25second, networking of any kind has been difficult to launch in educationbecause of a lack of basic physical infrastructure. the majority of k12educational institutions are illequipped to participate in an informationsociety. at the most basic level, schools often lack telephone connections andeven sufficient electric outlets to support broadšor sometimes anyšcomputerbased access to electronic networks. the deployment of telephones in theschools was limited because telephones were viewed as business tools, notinstructional tools. by contrast, television technology was adopted quicklybecause the connection to instruction was easier to understand. in the businessplans of cable franchises, many cable comresearch, education, and libraries123about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panies offered to network the schools as an incentive for the local community toaccept their offer. before long, school hookups were a standard part of thefranchise agreement.although research users of the internet typically effect connectionsthrough local area networks, where lans are found in k12 schools, themotivation has often been to support computeraided instruction in a singleclassroom rather than to link multiple classrooms or provide access to externalnetworks. also, many personal computers in schools are not capable ofconnection to lans and/or they may not have the necessary disk or memorycapacity to support network applications.26 finally, schools also lack theresources to install new technology.upgrading computing and communications within schools is complicatedby what are often inefficient approaches to procurement: procurement on anindividual school or even a school district basis may not provide the volumesufficient to gain meaningful discounts. this situation suggests that even withinspecific areas (such as states), it should be possible to organize procurement toachieve economies. more efficient procurement can better leverage resourcesprovided through corporate activities, such as programs like a recent pacificbell proposal to connect schools in its service area.third, a critical infrastructure deficiency relates to the human element:training and support in electronic communication are needed for educators.most efforts to engage in networking for education have been undertaken on adoityourself basis, requiring substantial dedication and time to overcome thedifficulties of installing, using, and maintaining sometimes inscrutable systems.usually, the first teacher who has experimented with the technology is labeledthe "computer expert" and is rewarded by being given more responsibilities tocope with during a very busy school year. a large number of educators need tobe trained to use the new methods of communication. this problem particularlyaffects schools serving lower socioeconomic students, where educatorsgenerally have less training and awareness of the internet (and therefore are lesslikely to even desire access). the need for professional development in networkapplications and resources includes both the classroom instructor as well as thebuildinglevel administrator who will adopt the new technology.part of the problem is a lack of involvement on the part of teachereducation programs and institutions. colleges of education have tended to havelimited network access. teachers emerging from preparatory programs thathave used electronic networking tend to ask for access, but most such programsprovide little such exposure.of the many educational applications and benefits foreseen (box 3.2),research, education, and libraries124about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication among people is the prime benefit of networking for educationas colleagues, teachers, students, and parents gain access to a level ofcommunication not possible before. educators in both higher education andk12 education are now being enabled to participate in collaborative projects.much like the science "collaboratories," the inbox 3.2 educational applications and benefits ofnetworking (via internet) access to more current information (e.g., space science facts, weatherpatterns, white house press releases, and so on from nationallaboratories, government agencies, universities, and commercialsources) for use in developing curricula, assignments, and so on, andfor increasing motivation in both students and teachers access to more accurate factual information, in the social as well asnatural and physical sciences familiarization of teachers, administrators, and students withcomputing and communications technologies, for both educational andjobpreparation benefits experimentation: capacity to assess how networking fits into thecurriculum, or if it does not fit, to determine how the curriculum mightbe reconceived development of collaborations among students, teachers, and schooladministrators, building on common interests and experiences despitedifferences in location and strengthening a sense of belonging to oneor more communities ability to enable more active (as opposed to passive) acquisition ofinformation and learning, increasing the interaction component of theeducational process and facilitating a shift from secondary to moreprimary sources of information reinforcement of basic skills of reading, writing, locating information,and structuring and solving problems expansion of interest in science, through use of information resourcesprovided by federal science agencies, sharing of other materials, andcommunication with others nationally on related topics (e.g.,environmental protection, shuttle launches, geography, languages, andso on) ability to follow up on professional development activities for teachersand administrators ability to build a bridge from school to home through network links forparents and guardians, providing information about assignments,school events, curriculum content and structure, and so onresearch, education, and libraries125about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.duction year project at the regional education source center in huntsville,texas, which has provided an electronic support network for firstyear teacherswith mentors both in the public school and among university faculty, suggestsnew avenues for collaboration. a variety of international collaborations havedeveloped among educators connected to the internet.as educators do gain access to the internet (and other networks), theirapplications are evolving. as a result, it is dangerous to assume that educationalnetworking needs are inherently simple and "lowend." for example, k12programs are using scientific data generated by such agencies as the doe,nasa, and noaa; there are k12 programs (e.g., superquest) providingaccess to highperformance computers; and graphics, video, and multimediaprograms are inherently attractive to educators trying to convey complexinformation to children and other students. nevertheless, given the constraintsoutlined above, much educational networking to date has been lowend.to achieve many of the benefits anticipated by educators will requireaccess to the highend networking that would make possible better video andmultimedia exchanges. this implies higher bandwidth, reliable service, and soon. more sophisticated systems and higher bandwidth enable better graphicalinterfaces and functionalities, which can reduce training costs, possiblyoffsetting higher transmission costs.27 use of the latest internet tools such as theworldwide web and its mosaic interface are limited only by the bandwidthand hardware found in k12 institutions. other important ingredients includedevelopment of suitable content and curricula. networking in k12 will neverachieve critical status unless mainstream educational services are available overthe network.perhaps most importantly, information infrastructure holds the promise ofchanging the processes of teaching, education, and learning (box 3.3). wherethis happens, resources will be reallocated from printbased to online resources(depending, in part, on publishers' support for electronic source material).educators' roles are changing to include participation as researchers,instructional designers, and managers of information who collaborate as theydevelop educational programs with the help of their remotely located colleaguesand mentors from many sectors of the community. students will need to be ableto better articulate study problems, identify and access necessary resources, andwork with their peers (who may be classmates or even students in anothercountry) to solve their problems. the roles of both the educator and learner mayreverse as both explore new information resources; both will need new skills.even broader shifts in roles and relationships are also on the horizon. theorganized involvement of parents in the education process is essenresearch, education, and libraries126about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.3 k12 teacher experiences with the internet my students are beginning their raytracing project in computerscience. now if my school system would buy a cray supercomputerclass machine (costing approximately $20 million today), then i wouldhave less need for telecommunications. but it is great that students inrural wisconsin can use a supercomputer in california. this occursbecause of telecommunications. of course the argument could bemade that they don't need to work in threedimensional geometrieswhere not only the objects can be manipulated, but also the observer.too much like the real world. our preservice teachers feel freed of many bonds that had held thempreviouslyšnow they are completely free to explore the electroniclibraries on the internet, to make and maintain contacts with fellowteacher education majors at other universities, to collect and sharelesson plans and ideas for teaching with other educators around theworld, to ask questions of experts they are able to ferret out, to stayabreast of current events in the field, to become immensely morefamiliar with salient legislation, and to improve their professionalliteracy through communication with officers and contacts in nationallevel teacher organizations. a bonus is that they take great pride in thefact that they are "connected to the world." class discussions havetaken on an entirely new flavor. there is justification for more seminarlike classes in which students can have open discussions about a widevariety of topicsšand this is enhanced by the remarkable quantity ofinformation they share with each other. my classes have participated in a variety of educational projects on theinternet. the students have communicated with paul smith, aresearcher from melbourne, australia, who was stationed at caseyresearch base in antarctica. the students, via the internet, were ableto participate actively in paul's research in australia, a wonderful livinglesson in science, reading, and language arts. this project will continuethis fall, when paul returns to antarctica for 15 months of study. thechildren are also looking forward to returning to antarctica, via theinternet, to share in his work. as a teacher, it is difficult to imagine the world of the future, yet this isthe very world that i must prepare these children to enter. change israpid. i can only teach the children the pursuit of learning, and todevelop a strong sense of inquiry, discovery, and investigation. theseare the rudimentary skills these children will need to functionsuccessfully in the future. computer telecommunications is one of thenecessary tools that i need in order to prepare the children for theirfuture. it is not a luxury. regardless of how good a chemist i am, and regardless of thechemical expertise in my local area, there are always questions that icannot answer or find answers to locally. with networking, studentsand teachers have an almost infinite resource pool from which to seekinformation and knowledge.research, education, and libraries127about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. results that seem to be documented:1. holding power, especially in innercity schools. students getinterested in computers and stay in school;2. reaching students with special needs;3. geographic awareness (through kidlink);4. foreign language skill improvement;5. greater sharing of ideas, lesson plans, and so onša combination ofhaving a sense of belonging (less isolation) and "things you can usetomorrow if not today"; and6. development of workplace skills.i have rankordered these in terms of my perceptions, which are opento discussion. virtually all of the students that i have dealt with over 15 years havebeen involved in chemical research. electronic networking hasprovided them with electronic mentors worldwide, access to computingplatforms (including supercomputers for high school students), andaccess to substantial online databases and information banks. in spiteof living in a resourcerich area (research triangle park, n.c.), manyof my students have done projects that required resources not found inthe local community. in working with physically impaired students, it has been clear that oneof the substantial benefits of networking has been a "leveling of theplaying field." unless the student describes his or her "disability,'' thepeople he or she interacts with electronically have no concept that theperson is disabled. this also applies to work with minority students orother students not from the "majority" culture. my alltime favorite was the use of email in a junior high school"resource room." that area was normally packed with kids who weredisruptive and perceived as having learning and social problems, and itwas generally not a highstatus area in the school. after beingintroduced to electronic messaging to exotic places (between novascotia and the southeastern united states), the kids became reallyexcited about writing, started attending (for the first time) to languageconventions, and generally became motivated about at least oneaspect of school. here's the spinoff. now the "lowstatus" resourceroom has a lineup of normally high achieving kids who thought theresource program suddenly had more promise. then came the rolereversalšthe formerly lower achieving students became technicaltutors to the formerly otherwise high achieving kids. smiles all around. i have found the internet to be the most important tool i use in my classthis year. i have become very involved with academy one, and use thevarious gophers and other outside services to get information for myclasses on a timely basis. for example, today i brought into class aposting of data regarding yesterday's earthquakes in oregon. theinformation about the 17 larger earthquakes that had occurred in thatarea in 20 hours (date, time,research, education, and libraries128about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.latitude, longitude, depth, magnitude, and notes) provided us with anexcellent base of material to discuss how telecomputing can assist us ona timely basis. the story of what happened in that area – and how itmight serve to help us prepare for our own earthquakes here in losangeles – was very clear in the data that we were able to get so quickly. when i first began working with fourth grade students andtelecommunications, they thought that the only thing an apple ii wasgood for was to play games like nintendo. at the end of four months ofdoing online projects and simulations, these kids were talking aboutselling their nintendos to buy "real computers." these same kids werefurious to find another student from another class playing a game onthe apple ii and would insist, "get them off! i've got work to do!" i talked to a class about exchanging email with students in othercountries. at the end of class a boy came to me and asked, "can i usegrandma's computer to write a letter to a boy in another country?" thatmight seem like a simple request, except that i knew the child. he liveswith grandma when his mom isn't living with a new boyfriend. he's thekid who never turns in homework and is barely passing from year toyear. the words "can i write" are like music to the ears of any teacherwho wants to help students learn to read and write better. it does notmatter what they are writing. if they are motivated to write something,their skills will improve as a result of the practice. that doesn't eventake into account the fact that they would be learning the technology,the keyboarding skills, and information about other cultures. several teachers have expressed pleasure at not needing to typematerials by hand that i have made available on the network.everything from lesson plans to laboratory exercises to curriculumdevelopment guides is now being used by classroom teachers. in mostcases they can use the material quickly with a minimum of fuss on theirpart. the connection that the internet provides is invaluable. here i am, aresearch biochemist at a major university, thinking about changing tohigh school science teaching for the next half of my working life. anystudent can access the resources of this and other labs around theworld and have reallife answers to reallife questions without having toleave whatever isolated environment he or she happens to be in. weare all alive in the midst of this biological revolution, and this type ofcommunication makes it possible for all of us to participate. is thereany real question of the educational advantage of such a system? i amno expert on the network, but i have been able to provide resources formy earth space science classes that i had not even dreamed of a yearago. my students have been able to ask danish astronomers andmathematicians questions about the history and proper pronunciationof tyco brahe. we have been able to get information on tropicaldeforestation directly from researchers in brazil. we are now analyzingimages recorded at telescopes from the summit of mauna kea, bigbear solar obserresearch, education, and libraries129about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vatory, and the hubble space telescope. yes, we might have beenable to obtain the images from the canadafrancehawaii telescopedirectly without the electronic interface, but we never would have beenable to make them available for student research so quickly or efficiently. my students have never been so excited about any technology as theyare about access to the network. we are now beginning to learntogether more ways to explore the net, and they look forward toobtaining their own user accounts so that they can continue to explorefrom their home computers. one of their first activities will be anelectronic cultural exchange with students in brazil, florida, centralamerica, and europe. if i participate in a workshop per month via the network, i can sharemost of the information to be gained by my physical attendance, andsave the taxpayers over $10,000 in air fares at the same time. our sixth graders needed current information about countries on whichwe have some historical materials but few that are up to date. so wewent to the cia world factbook (outside services, tenet, open137.113.10.35šwilliam and lee; login: lawlib; search cia worldfactbook; of country (egypt, india, israel, west bank, gaza strip,greece, italy, syria, etc.)). the students needed information aboutwhat was formerly mesopotamia, plus the other countries. theavailable information about each included area, population,government, transportation, economics, general information,languages, religions, money, and more. the factbook was the 1992edition, and it gave better information than we could have obtainedfrom hundreds of dollars worth of books about these countries. wewere searching immediately after the meeting between israel and thepalestinians, and so the information was especially pertinent. thestudents were so excited to find so much information on every countrythey searched for. to test the system, they went on to look up othercountries not on their listšmost of which were part of their own heritage. this message is to let you know that as an elementary teacher i can nolonger survive without email! emailing is a truly wonderful learningtool for teachers and students. students who have never had a desireto read much or write anything are now very interested in doing bothbecause of email. they see how important it is to be able to read sothat you can read messages concerning your project, directions for thecomputer, and sources of information for your project both on and offthe computer. they realize how important it is to clearly communicateyour data on a project. even punctuation and capitalization havebecome important to them.note: these anecdotes were compiled from electronic mail messages sent byeducators in response to an electronic request by a member of the study committee.educators who use the internet to varying degrees and for diverse purposes were askedto document how network use has affected teaching and learning.research, education, and libraries130about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tial and will occur more frequently and naturally through networks thatconnect the home to the school and to libraries and other repositories ofinformation. in time, the teacherparent relationship will change as teachers takeon new roles as facilitators who broker research and monitor student progress,often assisted by specialists, such as nutritionists, who provide guidance inareas that affect student behavior and performance. another contributor, madepossible by the open data network, will be the employer of the future. theneeds of the workplace, rather than mere job listings, will play an integral rolein defining the curricula for a select number of students, especially thoseseeking vocational or professional pursuits after college.realizing processchange benefits will not be automatic. compoundinginsufficient physical resources have been cultural barriers. for example, schoolstend to be managed as a hierarchy with implicit (and explicit) expectationsabout who gets information first; collaboration with colleagues, especially thoseoutside one's school building, is not the norm. open, especially studentdriven,communications challenge those expectations and (in the behavioral sense)protocols. finally, telecomputing projects have been seen as an addon,requiring extra effort. changes in schooling require support and involvementfrom all segments of the education hierarchyšthe administrators, parents,community, support staff, and classroom practitioners. provision of the broadnii envisioned in this report is an important step in this direction. but until asystemic approach is taken that applies to all types of education professionalsand activities and addresses the requirements of implementing a newcommunications system, much work will be needed to truly integratenetworking and information infrastructure into schooling. accordingly, leadingeducation professionals, their organizations, and some policymakers have begunto explore the linkages between educational reform and the emerging nii.28the absence of consensus on how to incorporate networkbasedapplications into education suggests a need for research into appropriatetechnology, appropriate levels for providing networking and internetworkingsupport, the economics of school networking (funding, policies), contentstandardization, and informationage skills and knowledge assessments. as oneworkshop report observed, "educators will not use networks to teach justbecause the technology is pervasive in society."29initial federal programs have concentrated on computer and networkingactivities relating to mathematics and science; for example, that is the focus ofthe nsf activities through the education and human resources directorate,including the national infrastructure for education (nie) program (which alsoinvolves nsf's computer and information science and engineeringdirectorate). yet "educating the whole child"research, education, and libraries131about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or the process of education as a whole extends beyond math and science; theprocess of communicating over a network has been shown to have benefits inthe areas of reading and writing, for example (see box 3.3). also, true niisupport for education must encompass administrator, principal, and teacherpreparation; public awareness; and other facets of the education process thatmay not be captured in programs focusing on enhancing science and matheducation.several states have taken a leadership role by potentially eliminatingrestrictive state provisions in order to facilitate and support the development ofteacher and administrator preparation programs and to assist in the restructuringprocess. in texas this effort integrates technologies and innovative teachingpractices into preservice and staff development training of teachers andadministrators. through regional centers for professional development andtechnologyša collaboration among universities, school districts, regionaleducation service centers, and the private sectoršsystemic change is occurringin the professional development programs.the local basis for educational funding contributes to substantialdifferences in the ability of schools and school districts to make use of networkstoday. several states have moved to augment local capabilities; for example, thestate of florida has implemented a grants program to retrofit schools. in texasthe state legislature implemented the technology allotment fund, whichprovides an allocation that districts may apply for if they submit a plan for theintegration of technology. the amount is $30 per child and is based on theaverage daily attendance of the school district. there are also equity concernsamong individual students, only some of whom may be able to afford their own,homebased technology. where access has been achieved, teachers report thatdisadvantaged students have gained access to resources and have responded farbeyond what has been observed with more conventional educational approaches(see box 3.3).equally important will be the outreach capability of the networks to ensurethat the poor or rural residents of a community are not excluded.30 realizingthat potential, however, is a function of time: the ntia telecommunicationsand information infrastructure assistance program can make only onecontribution, the nsf connections program and nie program two others, and itmay be several years before all k12 schools (of which there are more than110,000) are connected to the internet. as in the case of higher education, avariety of organizations have emerged to pursue opportunities relating to k12networking. these include the international society for technology ineducation (iste) and the consortium for school networking (cosn).research, education, and libraries132about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lifelong educationthere is consensus across the research and industrial communities thatpeople should expect to be retrained periodically throughout their careers. annii is an attractive vehicle for this purpose.in some career fields the relevant base of information is doubling everythree or four years, a situation that is redefining what is meant by "certified" or"qualified" as regards professional competency. this is perhaps most apparentin areas that are affected by science and engineering or are heavily positionedwithin the regions of public interest and subject to regulatory controls. anexample is medicine and health care, where change is continuous and rangesfrom new, or upgraded, government regulations to the latest developments inbioengineering. given this avalanche of information, "professionalism" maysome day be defined in terms of a trained user's access to and familiarity with"search" procedures that are friendly and analytical, and that enable the user toacquire information efficiently on a needitnow basis or to performserendipitous browsing.selfeducation, beyond formal school educational programs, will beaccomplished by individuals at ease with networking procedures that permiteasy access to online digital libraries and make available virtual trips tomuseums and science projects without leaving home. continuing education viateleconferencing will enable the learner to participate in preprogrammed or liveacademic courses remotely and to receive academic credits, if desired.acceptance of the latter by educational institutes may, however, bring to thesurface a wide range of issues regarding accreditation and the changing role ofthe institution and the instructor in the education process.the nii will create important changes in professionallaypersonrelationships. as nonprofessionals gain increased access to databases on thenetwork, they will begin to increase their awareness of a multitude of topics thatpreviously were the strict provinces of the professional. the longterm resultwill be the creation of a much better informed citizenry. the potential forinformation infrastructure to support paraprofessionals and allied healthprofessionals in medicine, for example, is already in evidence. an extension ofthis facility will be seen in the growing number of information entrepreneursproviding information for a fee to laypersons on selected professional subjectsusing such resources as electronic bulletin boards and specially designedelectronic libraries.libraries and the broadening of public interestnetworkinglibraries complement both research and education. they figured first intonren and now into the vision of an integrated, broadly usefulresearch, education, and libraries133about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.4 contributions of public librariesthe united states has the world's most extensive public librarysystem, with some 15,482 physical locations, including branches. in thepast year, more than half (53 percent) of the adult population used apublic library, as did 74 percent of children aged 3 to 8. a picture of therole and impact of public libraries can be derived from statistics presentedin "america's libraries: new views in the '90s," a fourpage 1993 updateto america's libraries: new views, a special report published by theamerican library association, chicago (1988).users of public libraries are diverse. a 1991 household survey by thenational center for education statistics revealed that 42 percent ofafrican americans said they had used a public library in the last year, asdid 32 percent of hispanics, 55 percent of whites, and 52 percent of allothers. expenditures for collections and services total $4.3 billionannually, or about $17.80 per person, and represent less than i percent ofall tax dollars. support for public libraries comes primarily from localcommunities. in 1991, sources of funding were approximately 76.8percent local, 13 percent state, 1.2 percent federal, and 9 percent othersources.the information resources available to and used by the public arevast. more than 1.4 billion books, magazines, video and audio tapes,computer software, and other items are borrowed each year. public librarycirculation increased 5 percent in 1991, the latest in a steady series ofincreases over the last decade. some 222 million reference questionswere answered by public librarians in 1991.the general public itself has already identified the library as a keyprovider of information. participants in a 1992 gallup poll indicated thefollowing as "very important" roles for public libraries: formal education support center (90%), independent learning center (83%), the preschooler's door to learning (82%), research center (67%), community information center (63%), reference library to community businesses (54%), popular materials library (50%), a comfortable place to read, think, or work (49%), reference library for community residents (47%), and community activities center (40%).the number of public libraries offering electronic information servicesis growing rapidly; according to a survey conducted by opiniontechnology, more than 80 percent of all public libraries and 99 percent ofall academic libraries now offer such services. computerrelated servicesare available to the general public in the following percentages of publiclibraries serving populations of 100,000 or more:research, education, and libraries134about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. cdrom databases (79%), remote database searching (71%), microcomputers (62%), microcomputer software (57%), online public access catalog (60%), and dialup access to online catalog (29%).nii. the highperformance computing act of 1991 (pl 102194)envisioned libraries as both access points for users to utilize the network as wellas providers of information resources via the internet.31 the administration'scharacterization of the nii carries forward this expectation, expanding it toinclude a training function.libraries have long played a central role in society as providers ofinformation resources (hence the dream of digital libraries32), as points ofaccess to information (information that is increasingly in electronic form), andas interfaces with the end user (librarians teach users how to locate and interpretinformation) for many constituencies. the united states has about 125,000libraries, including public, academic, research, and special libraries (box 3.4).research and academic libraries resemble the research and highereducationcommunities that they serve in terms of problems and prospects; public librariesresemble k12 education in terms of severe financing conditions and service toa broad community.33 also, as in k12 education, public libraries often arelimited by inadequate physical infrastructure and training, and they tend to beextremely sensitive to cost.34in the nren environment, research and academic libraries have taken aleadership role in advancing networkbased initiatives to provide access toinformation resources in support specifically of research and higher educationthrough interconnection and interlibrary loans. they also support widersegments of the public.35 reduced operating hours at local public libraryfacilities, reflecting budget constraints, have shifted demand to research andacademic libraries, a shift enabled in part by network connections. cooperationamong different types of libraries extends beyond resource sharing to suchactivities as preservation, education, and training, especially relating to networkbased applications. for example, the "cic" libraries (components of severalprimarily midwestern state universities) have been coordinating on plans foracquisition, storage, cataloging, preservation, and retrieval relating to over 600electronic journals, the contents of which will be supplied to memberinstitutions over the midlevel cicnet.36research, education, and libraries135about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the nature and mix of services provided by libraries are changing with theevolution of information infrastructure. recent association of researchlibraries' statistics indicate that research libraries are moving from the "justincase" model of onsite resources to the "justintime" model of resourcesharing.37 as physical acquisitions costs for scholarly information in print formmount for libraries, interest in "nofee" (or lowcost) information through theinternet grows as well. printed service subscriptions and monographacquisitions are declining.38 internet access enables libraries to leverage theirresources so as to acquire more of the scholarly record, and to own materialscollectively and share them between libraries and their end users (box 3.5). onthe other hand, it is not without its difficulties; box 3.6 outlines barriers tobroader library activities involving the internet.in the years ahead, libraries will communicate and provide access toinformation in a variety of formatsšdigital, voice, graphicšand employmultimedia technologies via a ubiquitous and seamless web of interrelatednetworks. public access programs and policies proposed and implemented todaywill be central to this emerging information infrastructure.libraries participate in numerous experiments and pilot programs thatdemonstrate the utility of highcapacity networks for the exchange and use ofinformation for all disciplines (box 3.7). research and academic librariesalready engage in and/or provide electronic document delivery, electronicjournals, fulltext databases, enduser searching, training, network access,development of network navigational tools, online public access catalogenhancements, cooperative development of databases and hardware, andpolicies, services, and strategies that promote access to information in lieu ofownership. there are numerous discussion databases and electronic forumsdeveloped by and aimed at library professionals, who access them through theinternet. the tradition of service to those who cannot afford books and othersources of information is being and can be further expanded in libraries toinclude not only local access to terminals and other networkaccess devices butalso possibly even loan of such devices.network applications in libraries today focus on access to resources suchas books, journals, and online files; in the near future, the focus will be onaccess to and use of research materials and collections generally inaccessiblebut of extreme research value, including photographs, satellite and relatedspatial data, archival data, videos and movies, sound recordings, slides ofpaintings and other artifacts, and more. this development presumes that digitalfacsimiles or digital records are available for access and distribution over anetwork.39the development of such digitized resources is central to the concept ofdigital libraries. characteristics of digital libraries include the following:research, education, and libraries136about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.5 advantages of internet access via publiclibraries equitable and ubiquitous access provider. libraries offer access to thenetwork; the equipment, technical support, and software needed toaccess it; and the information resources available through it. affordable access. library experience with current commercialelectronic information services indicates that several services tend tobe priced for the institutional or corporate subscriber, and not for theindividual user who may have only occasional need for access to asmall portion of an information source or database. in this environment,the public library provides the electronic equivalent of one of itstraditional functionsšto provide access to a wide variety of informationsources and viewpoints regardless of a user's economic status orinformationseeking skills. network information resource provider. a 1992 journal article* identifiedsome of the databases developed by and uniquely available frompublic libraries: communitybased information and referral files listinggovernment and social services; query files of questions frequentlyasked by the public, with answers; genealogy files for specific localgeographic areas; local newspaper indexes; annotated reading lists;catalogs of holdings; tour and daytrip itineraries for local historicalsites; and so on. access to government information. libraries have long hadresponsibilities under law and custom for partnering with governmentsto provide public information. this has been accomplished through thefederal depository library system, with libraries in every congressionaldistrict, and state depository systems. the library as the local accesspoint for electronic government information is a natural extension ofthis partnership. training and assistance for the public. unlike most sites for publicaccess terminals (which range from government buildings touniversities, from shopping malls to laundromats), public libraries havetrained staff available for consultation and training in the use of thelibrary's resources, including electronic information resources. a logicalextension is to provide training for the public in the use of networks andnetworked information resources plus pointofuse consultation,guidance, and technical assistance, as well as to develop onlinetraining and interpretative aids. library as electronic gateway. libraries of all types have more than 25years of experience in using computer and communicationstechnologies to link together to share bibliographic information forcataloging and interlibrary loan. the internet and the nationalinformation infrastructure have the potential to link libraries further forelectronic sharing of fulltext, graphic, and multimedia libraryresources; to link library personnel electronically for new kinds ofreference services; to link libraries to nonlibrary sources of information;and to provide access to the local library from any location with acomputer and modem.**research, education, and libraries137about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.* isenstein, laura j. 1992. "public libraries and national electronic networks: thetime to act is now!" electronic networking 2(2, summer):25.** an excellent discussion of the advantages of internet access via public librariesšandthe source from which this box was derivedšcan be found in: henderson, carol c.1993. "the role of public libraries in providing public access to the internet,"prepared for a conference, public access to the internet, john f. kennedy school ofgovernment, harvard university, may 2627, 1993. large size: the total of all printed knowledge is doubling every eightyears, and many research databases dwarf past collections ofinformation; manipulability: the use of an electronic digital format means that dataof any kind can be potentially communicated, analyzed, manipulated,and copied with ease; inclusion of mixed media: the digital library will consist of multipleforms and formats of information including images, sounds, texts,computer programs, and quantitative data; distributed: the digital library is not a single entity or database in aspecific geographic location. instead it consists of resources that areconstantly changing and available on a distributed basis. the evolutionof the digital library and its distributed nature are fundamentalcharacteristics relating to the digital library's value to the user; and accessibility and interactivity: digital libraries will be accessible tonew communities and a widerrange of users. the resulting availabilityof new research and new knowledge will in turn increase the value ofthe digital library, a benefit that will come from the interactivitybetween the user and the digital library.40creation of digital libraries will likely exacerbate information managementand policy issues and will require additional research to resolve problems thatmay thwart progress (see chapter 4).41 many if not all of the information policyissues requiring attention are now new. they relate to freedom of expression,intellectual property, access, privacy and confidentiality, security concerns thatinclude the integrity and reliability of the date resources, and the preservationand archiving of data resources.42 the nature of the technologies eitherexacerbates existing tensions (e.g., relating to copyright and fair use) or presentsnew questions and opportunities to rethink existing practices.notable among the technical issues relating to library participation in annii is the need for librariansšworking together with publishers andresearch, education, and libraries138about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.6 barriers facing public libraries as publicaccess points few public libraries on the internet. the first major barrier to publiclibraries as public access points on the internet is that so few areconnected currently, perhaps on the order of a few hundred out of9,000 (located at 15,000 sites, including branches). gaining accesshas not been easy. university computer centers closely monitor their"guest accounts." the primary mode of access offered by most of theregional affiliates and networks, as well as private providers, requires adirect highspeed line, with the user serving as a full node on thenetwork. for most libraries, even in relatively large municipalities orcorporations, the finances and other resources required for startup ofdedicated line operation are simply too great. while there are someless expensive dialup options available, most of these offer electronicmail only and do not provide ftp and the telnet functionality that isespecially important to libraries. increasingly, library or libraryrelatednetworksšcooperative, notforprofit regional or statebased libraryservice organizations that broker online computer library centerelectronic bibliographic network services and/or other technologicalservices for groups of individual librariesšare becoming the providersor brokers of internet connectivity.* lack of affordable access. dialup, entrylevel connectivity is only thebeginning of the cost for libraries, many of which will also incur longdistance charges. a good example is found in the state of wisconsin,where it costs about $14,000 annually to be a full member of wiscnet,the state network providing internet access. for an entire campus, thatis not a major expense. but 45 percent of u.s. public libraries havebudgets under $50,000; in wisconsin it is 54 percent. for suchlibraries, $14,000 annually is a major expense. in addition, these costsprobably do not include local staffing costs for technical support, usersupport, and training. lack of userfriendly interfaces. lack of userfriendly interfaces andtools, the lack of databases and resources geared to public use, andthe seemingly limitless information on the internet, not all of it useful topublic libraries and their users, constitute additional barriers. the lackof organization of much of the information on the network is anotherserious barrier to using it effectively. training and support needed for staff and the public. librarians need toknow what is available, how to find it, and what the technologicalproblems may be and how to solve them, before using the internet onbehalf of users or providing direct access to the public. persuasion isneeded that a new set of procedures and costs will be worth theinvestment of scarce time or money. some of upper librarymanagement is not conversant with the latest technologies. in othercases, librarians need ammunition to convince parents, school boards,or local governments that are themselves technologically out of date orchallenged. especially important is the need to train staff beforeoffering internet service for public access.research, education, and libraries139about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. policy issues. as public libraries begin to move toward providing directpublic access to the internet, they face a host of administrative andpolicy issues that must be addressed. in general, these are not uniqueto public libraries, and so they are listed but not discussed. theyinclude: privacy and security issues, intellectual property protection and fair use of copyrighted materials, affordability of commercial information services, interoperability and standards, whether and how to impose limits on public use when demandoutstrips resources (time, equipment, capacity, or budget), scalability of internet address system, and censorship, access by minors.tools and policies developed by the library field and put to regularuse in libraries can help in coming to grips with these various problems.* an excellent discussion of the barriers facing public librariesšand the source fromwhich this box was derivedšcan be found in: henderson, carol c. 1993. "the role ofpublic libraries in providing public access to the internet," prepared for a conference,public access to the internet, john f. kennedy school of government, harvarduniversity, may 2627, 1993.other information providers, research users, and information and computerscientistsšto develop standards, common formats, and controls that will permitusers to identify, locate, and access needed resources in a consistent fashion.standards and protocols will also be needed for those users of digital librarieswho may lack the needed skills to effectively utilize the networked environmentand who may not have a librarian to call upon.broad use of digitized resources outside of a library facility withprofessional staff is expected to increase with homebased and other remoteaccess to information infrastructure. overall, the future role of libraries willevolve to reflect and interact with developments in individual, personalinformation retrieval systems and also developments in the publishing arena andother sources of supply for electronic information resources.research, education, and libraries140about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.7 experimental library projects the electronic text center and online archive of electronic texts atthe alderman library, university of virginia. opened in 1992, theelectronic text center combines an online text archive with computerhardware and software systems for the creation and analysis of text.the archive, including electronic texts encoded with standardgeneralized markup language, includes the entire corpus of oldenglish writings, several hundred middle english and modern englishworks, and smaller selections of french, latin, and german works.considerable effort has gone into creation of online and printeddocumentation, much of it available over the internet via gopher andworldwide web servers. over 7,500 remote logins from over 1,600online users were counted in 1993. the electronic texts have beenused in a wide range of research and educational activities. the north carolina state university digitized document transmission project. scanned images are transmitted over the internet to libraries,researchers' workstations, and agricultural extension offices.collaborating on this project are the national agricultural library and14 landgrant university libraries in 11 states. the economic development information network, or edin. thiscollaborative effort between pennsylvania state university, thepennsylvania state data center, and the institute for state andregional affairs provides access to bulletins and news releases,issues of commerce business daily, directories of economicdevelopment centers and agencies, database files pertaining todemographic and economic data, and more. the chemistry online retrieval experiment (core), a prototypeelectronic library of 20 american chemical society (acs) journals thatis disseminated over cornell university's local area network. theproject is a collaboration among four participantsšthe acs and itschemical abstracts service division; bell communications research(bellcore, the research arm of the regional telephone holdingcompanies), morristown, n.j.; cornell university's mann library; andthe online computer library center. the core system enablescornell faculty and students to search a database that eventually willinclude more than 10 years' worth of issues of 20 chemical journalsand information from scientific reference texts. users can retrievearticles electronically, complete with illustrations, tables, mathematicalformulas, and chemical structures. they also can switch to articles onrelated topics, or to referenced articles, using hypertexttype links. thedatabase is constructed with the same composition data used topublish the printonpaper versions of the journals, thus minimizing thelabor needed to create it and keep it current. tulip (the university licensing program). this project of elsevierscience publishers is a database of 42 elsevierpublished sciencejournals. researchers at 17 participating universities, including the ninecampuses of the university of california system, can access thesejournals over local area networks and print journal pages or articles ondemand. the system provides access to bitmapped page images (forviewing), fulltext files (for searching), and bibliographic files.research, education, and libraries141about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crosscutting observationsthe key parameter for the research, education, and library communities iscost. limited ability to pay for services is typical; a related factor is a need forpredictable charges because of the limited, fixed budgets of schools andresearch institutions. higher costs may mean a reduction, elimination, orpreclusion of access for those actual and potential users with the least robustfundingšk12 education, smaller and less affluent institutions, smaller andmore poorly funded departments or researchersšabsent targeted support.higheršor in some cases anyšcosts will force users and their sources offunding to confront the issue of whether there is a tradeoff between networkingand their "basic" activity (research, education) or whether networking is soconnected to their basic activity that they would prefer to reduce spendingelsewhere to support it.at the time the nren concept was conceived, some members of theresearch community characterized funding as zerosum: for those with limitedor no use of networks, money for networking was perceived as money lost toresearch.43 although the benefits of networking are now more broadlyappreciated in the research community, the transition from a "free" service to afee for service revives questions about possible tradeoffs and how integratednetworking is or should be in research or education. the problem may beparticularly acute in k12 education, where the institutional barriers tocommercial fulfillment of a public service must be addressed by publicinstitutions.higher costs should also prompt some consideration of possible gains inefficiency. efficiency does not receive the kind of attention in the researchcommunity, in particular, that it receives in industry. information access is oneway in which networks increase efficiency in education, although such aclassical benefit is not the principal benefit in an area where the dominant costis an already leveraged resource: personnel and teachers.44 on the other hand,this situation underscores the need for training and skill development, whichwill affect how much benefit is received, and how fast.in research and education, outputs, inputs, and the relationship betweenthem are hard to characterize and control. yet cost savings can be an importantbenefit of the use of information infrastructure, because they are inherent in thenotion of networks and information infrastructure as shared resources. thatsharing enables broader use of resources than would be possible if eachresearcher, educator, librarian, or student had to be individually capitalized. inaddition, as the internet experience demonstrates, information infrastructure canfacilitate crosssectoral sharing, including the building of bridges between k12education and highresearch, education, and libraries142about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.er education and research. for example, many states are now working toconnect universities, colleges, community colleges, k12 schools, and publiclibraries via networks to support both learning and research.it would be a mistake, however, to frame nii planning for the research, education, and library communities simply from the perspective of financial aidrequirements. these communities have been information providers as well asconsumers, and they will continue to make important contributions to networkinformation resources in this regard in the future. the fact that thesecommunities typically do not charge for their information services might beconsidered an important factor in considering how to charge them for theirnetwork access. another important factor may be the fact that thesecommunities also actively train their constituents in network use.viewed from a national and even a global perspective, research andeducation in all fields will continue to provide the bedrock for u.s. social andeconomic growth. competitiveness in international markets, education of allmembers of society for positive and meaningful participation in the comingdecades' tasks and opportunities, and breakthroughs in scientific andnontechnical scholarly pursuits that will improve our way of life are among thegoals that can be fostered by ensuring equitable access to the nii. the steps wetake now to realize the potential benefits of the information future will be asignificant measure of the country's progress in shaping its agenda to reflect itsideals.notes1. in networked environments, museums, archives, and other information providers are expected toplay an increasing role, complementing libraries.2. cstb has planned, together with the institute of medicine, a comprehensive study of informationinfrastructure for health care.3. peters, paul evan (executive director of the coalition for networked information, washington,d.c.). "responses to questions," message (electronic mail system) to susan l. nutter, august 13,1993. stonemartin, martha, and laura breeden. 1994. 51 reasons: how we use the internet andwhat it says about the information superhighway. farnet inc., lexington, mass.4. for example, the electronic physics publishing activities centered at the los alamos nationallaboratory are recognized as helping to democratize the field, allowing new insights to go beyondthe "old boy network" that previously was the only group to know of key results when they werestill new.5. togacoare refers to the decadelong tropical oceanglobal atmosphere internationalresearch program, including the coupled oceanatmosphere response experiment.6. pool, r. 1993. "networking the worm," science 261:842.7. computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993.national collaboratories: applying information technology for scientific research. nationalacademy press, washington. d.c.research, education, and libraries143about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8. cuticchia, a.j., m.a. chipperfield, c.j. porter, w. kearns, and p.l. pearson. 1993. managing allthose bytes: the human genome project," science 262:4748.9. carey, john. 1994. "could america afford the transistor today?" business week, march 7, pp.8084.10. cstb, 1993, national collaboratories.11. cstb, 1993, national collaboratories.12. the branscomb report recommended broadening access to scientific and engineeringworkstations for nsf's 20,000 investigators and contemplated increasing simulation andvisualization activity using personal computers and more powerful systems. these desktop systems,in turn, require highperformance inputoutput, distributed access to databases, and otherinfrastructurerelated complements. branscomb, lewis, et al. 1993. from desktop to teraflop:exploiting the u.s. lead in high performance computing, nsf blue ribbon panel cm highperformance computing. national science foundation, washington, d.c., august.13. one concern already being raised is whether those with greatest proximity to a vbns node willhave easier access.14. "scholars quickly understand that electronic documents have several obvious benefits: they canbe searched quickly for phrases, words, and combinations of words, allowing one to try out notionsand hypotheses with great speed; they encourage largescale searches over oeuvres, genres, andcenturies, searches that are difficult and timeconsuming with printed texts alone; they can provideaccess to texts otherwise unavailable, and they allow such work to be done from one's home oroffice." seaman, david. 1993. "gatekeeping a garden of etext delights: electronic texts and thehumanities at the university of virginia library." gateways, gatekeepers, and roles in theinformation omniverse: proceedings from the third symposium, november 1315, 1993,washington, d.c.15. tibbs, helen r. 1991. "information systems, services, and technology for the humanities,''annual review of information science and technology (arist) 26:287346.16. peters, paul evan, "national initiative on arts and humanities computing," message (electronicmail system) to cniannounce subscribers, january 1, 1994.17. mandelbaum, richard, and paulette a. mandelbaum. 1992. "the strategic future of the midlevel networks." pp. 59118 in building information infrastructure. harvard university press,cambridge, mass.18. branscomb et al., 1993, from desktop to teraflop.19. in the early 1980s carnegie mellon university and the massachusetts institute of technologywere the pioneers in incorporating technologies that wove telecommunications into the instructionalprocess. oklahoma state university now uses telecommunications to teach german to students inrural high schools. chico state university provides a range of courses to sites in rural northeasterncalifornia as well as a graduate program in computer science to industry locations across the nation.state systems in oregon, utah, texas, and california are planning major telecommunications effortsas a means to increase student access to and utilization of resources. an advisory commission to thecalifornia community colleges recently recommended the expansion of telecourses to increase theproductivity of the system.20. this initiative was discussed by federal agency personnel in 1988, and it was urged byeducom, and its networking and telecommunications task force, in 1989; it had antecedents inproposals to the national science foundation by computer scientists robert kahn and vinton cerf.mandelbaum and mandelbaum, 1992, "the strategic future of the midlevel networks"; personalcommunication, stephen wolff, national science foundation, june 1993; lynch, clifford a., andpreston, cecilia m. 1990. "internet access to information resources," annual review ofinformation science and technology (arist) 25:296.21. the fielding institute represents a highereducation institution that is built aroundresearch, education, and libraries144about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the virtual campus, serving a geographically distributed student body dominated by adultprofessionals pursuing graduate and doctoral programs.22. burr, elizabeth. 1994. "electronic studios," news from fondren 3(3, winter):13.23. a macintoshbased, realtime, multiparty videoconferencing program, cuseeme, is availablefree from cornell university under the copyright of comell and its collaborators. cuseemeversion 0.60, with an improved user interface, provides a onetoone connection or, by use of areflector, a onetomany, a severaltoseveral, or a severaltomany conference depending on userneeds and hardware capabilities. it displays 4bit grayscale video windows at 160 x 120 pixels or atdouble that diameter, and does not (yet) include audio. at this time cuseeme runs only on themacintosh using an ip network connection over the internet. a pc version is under developmentand is expected soon. with cuseeme each participant can decide to be a sender, a receiver, orboth. personal communication, jill charboneau, cornell university, april 1994.24. also connected are 10 k12 schools or school districts, 14 state or federal government agencies,11 health care organizations, 34 nonprofit organizations, and 13 businesses. personalcommunication, eric aupperle, merit inc., april 13, 1994.25. personal communication, eric aupperle, merit inc., april 13, 1994.26. klingenstein, kenneth. 1993. "the boulder valley internet project: early lessons in earlyeducation," inet '93 proceedings, pp. eca 18.27. klingenstein, 1993, "the boulder valley internet project."28. for example, the national coordinating committee on technology in education and training(ncctet), which includes a large number of k12 and highereducation organizations as well asindustry and government members, recently issued a statement on educational needs associated withthe nii. it noted that "the nii (as it develops) arid related technologies can be key supports foreducation reform and therefore be incorporated into education reform initiatives at the national,state, and local levels." national coordinating committee on technology in education andtraining. 1994. "the national information infrastructure: requirements for education andtraining," march 25, electronic communication.29. "the cosn/farnet project, building consensus/building models for k12 networking." n.d.report of october 28, 1993, workshop, electronic distribution.30. telecomputing can enhance interactions within communities in the context of strengtheningk12 education. in texas, for example, where 70 percent of the counties are medically underserved,the means to link existing infrastructure and highereducation institutions with schools to shareinformation about health, education, and medical care is provided by a state network developed foreducation, tenet. one collaborative initiative links tenet and the south texas center forpreventive genetics at the university of texas. a pilot project has begun to develop a monitoringand treatment system for children diagnosed with certain birth defects. an integral part of theproject is communication with school nurses, school clinics, and teachers via tenet. for example,teachers and nurses are asked to become involved in monitoring compliance with dietaryrequirements at school. the goal is to remove distance as a barrier to effective treatment, improveprognoses for individuals being undertreated, increase dietary treatment compliance, and provide adatabase to answer researchers' queries about efficacy of treatment as it relates to cognitive function.31. "the network is to provide users with appropriate access to highperformance computingsystems, electronic information resources, other research facilities, and libraries. the network shallprovide access, to the extent practicable, to electronic information resources maintained by libraries,research facilities, publishers, and affiliated organizations." pl 102194, section 102.32. note that in an environment filled with jargon, it is important to distinguish betweenresearch, education, and libraries145about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a virtual libraryša facility for accessing information, which can be stored in various forms or mediašand a digital library, which usually refers to a collection that is itself digitized. the virtual libraryis more easily implemented.33. "public libraries" means public libraries as defined in the library services and construction act,state library agencies, and the libraries, libraryrelated entities, cooperatives, and consortia throughwhich library services are delivered.34. mcclure, charles r., joe ryan, diana lauterback, and william e. moen. 1992. publiclibraries and the internet/nren: new challenges, new opportunities. school of informationstudies, syracuse university, syracuse, new york.35. according to clifford lynch,work in [the interlibrary loan] area has ranged from the use of electronic ill systems linked tolarge national databases of holdings (such as oclc) which allow a requesting library toquickly identify other libraries that probably hold materials and dispatch loan requests to themthrough the exploitation of technology to reduce the cost of the actual shipment of material.the first step in this latter area was for the lending institution to send a xerox of a journalarticle rather than the actual journal copy, so that the borrowing library did not have to returnthe material and the lending library did not lose use of it while it was out on interlibraryloan. . . . more recently, libraries have employed both fax and internetbased transmissionsystems such as the rlg ariel product to further speed up the transfer of copies of materialfrom one library to another in the ill context, and with each additional application oftechnology the publishers have become more uncomfortable, and more resistant (with somelegal grounds for doing so, though again this has not been subject to test). interestingly, over thepast two years, we have seen the deployment of a number of commercial document deliveryservices (the fees from which cover not only the delivery of the document to the requestinglibrary but also copyright fees to the publisher) offering rates that are competitivešindeed,perhaps substantially betteršthan the costs that a borrowing library would incur for obtainingmaterial such as journal articles through traditional interlibrary loan processes. . . . now,consider a library acquiring information in an electronic format. such information is almostnever, today, sold to a library (under the doctrine of first sale); rather, it is licensed to the librarythat acquires it, with the terms under which the acquiring library can utilize the informationdefined by a contract typically far more restrictive than copyright law. the licensing contracttypically includes statements that define the user community permitted to utilize the electronicinformation as well as terms that define the specific uses that this user community may make ofthe licensed electronic information.see lynch, clifford a. 1993. accessibility and integrity of networked information collections.background report/contractor report prepared for the office of technology assessment, july 5, p.16.36. shaughnessy, thomas w. 1994. "libraries organize as a virtual electronic library," libraryline 5(march):12.37. association of research libraries. 1992. "key issues to consider in nren policyformulation," proceedings of the nren workshop, monterey, calif., september 1618.interuniversity communications council inc., washington, d.c.38. the 100 members of the association of research libraries paid $19.8 million more for servicesin 19921993 than in the previous year but purchased 30,000 fewer subscriptions and 30,000 fewermonographs. association of research libraries (arl). 1994. "state of research libraries andimportance of hea title iic to research and education." arl, washington, d.c., march 2.39. these records and networkbased access to them present both technical and intellectual propertymanagement issues. see library of congress. n.d. "delivering electronic information in aknowledgebased democracy," summary of conference proceedings, july 14, 1993.40. these characteristics of digital libraries were presented in a statement by the associresearch, education, and libraries146about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ation of research libraries to the subcommittee on science, committee on science, space andtechnology, from the hearing record of february 2, 1993, regarding the highperformancecomputing act of 1991.41. a new nsfarpanasa research program associated with the nren program will fundrelevant research.42. recent supreme court decisions relating to access and the availability of government electronicrecords underscore the need for rules and regulations that govern their preservation and disposition.building concerns about archiving and preservation into existing network projects will be important.43. see computer science and technology board, national research council. 1988. toward anational research network. national academy press, washington, d.c. (the computer scienceand technology board became the computer science and telecommunications board in 1990.)44. note that libraries may have greater integration of networking for public access and internaloperational purposes than is typical of k12 education.research, education, and libraries147about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4principles and practicediscussions of a national information infrastructure (nii) and discussionsof research and education networking tend to embrace several tenets orprinciples for the design and implementation of information infrastructure.1there are different classes of principles: some relate to the availability ofinformation infrastructure (e.g., ubiquitous and equitable access); some relate tothe terms and conditions of use (e.g., protections for privacy and security). insome instances, desired attributes of the structure of the infrastructure are alsopresented as principles. in this report, those technical issues, including securityprotections, are discussed separately as part of a comprehensive considerationof open information networking (chapter 2).in the past year, the administration, industry, and professional and otheradvocacy groups have presented sets of principles intended to guide thedevelopment of the nii (see appendix b for samples of such principle sets).these principles reflect value judgments and suggest the directions in whichmany individuals and groups will try to direct the development of architectureand, in particular, the deployment (including investment, pricing, and financing)of the nii.on the surface there is significant commonality among the lists that havebegun to circulate, reflecting the universal quality of several principles, theprominence of public interest advocates in their formulation, and the fact that itis relatively easy to achieve agreement on highlevel statements. for example,the presence of privacy, security, and intellectual property protection acrossvarious lists of principles shows that these issues not only reflect shared moresand norms, but also are seen as broad enablers of information infrastructure. atthe same time, there also areprinciples and practice148about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.differences among these lists in terms of emphasis as well as content. further,the meaning or interpretation of these principles may differ for different groups.the research, education, and library communities have valuable experiencewith the implementation, or lack of it, of various principles in the internetcontext. given the nature of their missions and reliance on financial support,their perspectives and concerns will differ from those of commercial orconsumer users of information infrastructure (and there will be differencesbetween segments of each of these communities). in addition, communities maydiffer regarding their preferences for when and/or how a principle may betranslated into action, especially where tradeoffs must be made.to provide some flavor of research, education, and library perspectives onthese dimensions, this chapter provides a brief overview of some specificprinciples. the issues raised in this discussion can be addressed by technical,market, and/or policy mechanisms (respectively addressed in chapters 2, 5, and6).although the discussion below highlights research, education, and libraryperspectives, resolving key issues will require finding common ground betweenthose perspectives and others relating to industry and/or the general public. thediscussions launched by the administration's information industry task force(iitf); by various interest, professional, and trade organizations; throughvarious electronic discussion groups; and by congressional hearings are all partof the process of weighing and balancing different perspectives.2 achievingconsensus on fundamental values is an essential element of the process ofdeveloping the policy framework for an nii.equitable accessaccess to networks and services should be equitable, affordable, andubiquitous. this principle, expressed in various ways, is perhaps the mostuniversally expressed but also the most elusive in implementation. success maybe difficult to gauge, given the lack of precision or consensus on whatconstitutes equity, affordability, or ubiquity.3the equitable access principle, its components, and its variants refer to anelectronic parallel to telephony's universal service expectation.4 some people,for example, are located in areas that are more expensive to serve with any kindof wireline communications. this includes sparsely settled or remote areas,mountainous regions, and other hardtoreach places. basic telephone servicecosts more to provide in these locations than in the cities and suburbs. as amatter of policy, basic telephone service is made available at about the sameprice regardless of the conveprinciples and practice149about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nience of location, and the committee believes that the same should be true forthe nii.the experiences in research, education, and library uses of the internetdemonstrate that each community brings new resources and will influence thefuture direction of the network. consequently, efforts and strategies that seek toseparate out the communities they serve, especially those that are perceived asmost profitable, will serve the public interest less than more inclusive strategiesfor involvement in information infrastructure. moreover, serving the publicinterest through broad access should eventually serve private interests, byexpanding markets and values associated with the infrastructure.5 this is a keyreason for avoiding a situation in which the internet continues to exist butdiverges from the rest of the information infrastructure.at the most basic level, access to information implies access toinfrastructurešaccess to a network (including associated software) andinterconnection of that network to other networks and to resources that candeliver desired information. the nature and degree of access will depend ontechnical factors (e.g., standards), economic factors (e.g., charges, subsidies,incentives, and so on), facilities, human resource requirements (e.g., trainingand expertise), motivation, choice of applications and system platforms, andpolicies (which will influence all of the above). cost, always a pacing factor inbroadening access to new technology, is considered the key barrier to broaderaccess today.at the next level, access to information raises questions about the mix andrange of information services available over the network. today's research andeducation communities rely on networks primarily for messaging (electronicmail), accessing information resources and services (e.g., databases), and filetransfer services. in this environment, the users of the infrastructure are theprimary producers of the information transferred over it. tomorrow it is clearthat the mix of services will change in two ways. first, the format will change;there will be more video, audio, multimedia, and realtime services, in contrastto the flat text and binary data files that dominate internet traffic today. second,there will be more thirdparty providers of information, which will be offeredon a free or atcost basis by government and on a revenuegenerating/profitmaking basis by commercial providers.6 thirdparty sources of information(databases, numerical, fulltext, bibliographic, weather, news, and other kindsof information) have been in use for many years in libraries, originally on a dialup basis but most recently via the internet, and demand has been growing. ofcourse, they have also been used by various businesses, often on a dialup basis.for the research and education communities in particular, an increasingemphasis on networkbased access to information raises questionsprinciples and practice150about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.about whether there is a need for a minimum level of accessšand what thatlevel is, how basic it is in terms of the quality of service (speed, support forvideo or multimedia, and so on), the locus of access (on each desk or in eachclassroom or in such communal and institutional facilities as libraries), and thebreadth of reach (within a state or region, national and/or international,connections to which information provider gateways, and so on).because some types of research and education are inherently moredemanding than others in terms of their bandwidth requirements, equal accessto relatively low bandwidth service (e.g., for textual electronic mail) alonewould not meet the needs of many users. although it may be possible, drawingon grantaward and other records, to measure the number of researcherscurrently funded to undertake highperformance computation andcommunication, it is much harder to assess how many would do such workwere the infrastructure more affordable to them. similarly, the lowbandwidth/lowbudget applications typical of the k12 experience suggest that the primaryand secondary schools have needs that are typically quite modest. however,presented with better infrastructure options, the k12 demand might well lookdifferentšand if given adequate local access capabilities, it could growdramatically.in the 1988 report toward a national research network, the computerscience and telecommunications board (cstb) made it clear that there is abasic need for communication that is shared by all and should be available at aprice that all can afford:7to encourage the development and use of a widely accessible networkservice, the committee suggests that the nrn [national research network]might provide (1) a universal basic service at some low to moderate speed forelectronic mail at a low cost to users and (2) higher levels of service with anappropriate charging structure. a low charge for basic service would lessen theinitial resistance that might otherwise be felt by firsttime users and yetdiscourage the overloading that occurs with free networks. (p. 2)although the above statement was formulated with an emphasis on theresearch community, the essential principles hold more broadly. the presentcommittee endorses the concept of a minimum set of services, as discussed inchapter 2, that is available to all.differences in outlook on equity and ubiquity derive from differences infinancial status and ability to payšhence, the many concerns voiced in theresearch, education, and library communities about affordability. how networkand information access are priced will affect the ability of new users andcommunities to engage with the information infrastructure.principles and practice151about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.linking access and service to ability to pay would be inherently exclusionary.this problem lies behind consumer group and state regulatory efforts tomoderate the pace of infrastructure advances and tariff changes. on the otherhand, industry efforts to contribute to educational access, in particular, showboth awareness in industry of the political appeal of enhancing education andthe fact that there are unpredictable alternatives to public financing alone.although the popular debate over the nii has acknowledged a risk ofpolarization into information "haves" and "have nots," a more varied spectruminvolving "have mores" and "have lesses'' may be more realistic.how ubiquitous is the access will determine, in part, the nature of thebenefits: people with desktop or other immediate forms of access will be able toengage in more spontaneous, intermittent, and possibly more interactive uses ofthe infrastructure than people who must go to a communal point of access andwait their turn. for example, one access point per school represents a fardifferent kind of "ubiquity" than one per teacher or student. access points forstudents, in turn, beg the issue of access for parents or guardians, which canincrease the impetus for homebased access.8as the issue of homebased access underscores, ubiquity assumes thatthere is a way of scaling services. to date, there has been a tradeoff betweeneffective speed of service and extent of service reachšslowerspeed links on theinternet already have become associated with service to less affluent users.while performance on the internet could be enhanced if access were limited torates of 56 kbps or above, this might disenfranchise groups (such as schools)that can barely afford to be connected.from a practical perspective, the key variable is timing. currentadministration and congressional activities aim at stimulating or acceleratingthe achievement of universal access to likely nii services. at the present timethere is no compelling argument for a government program to accomplishuniversal network access to all individuals immediately. costs would beprohibitive, and the absence of a universal culture of use means that benefitswould be swamped by costs. rather, what is required is assurance that thoseindividuals who desire access can obtain it in a costeffective andstraightforward manner.9the 1988 cstb report pointed out that the equity issue could be divisive:10if access is granted on the basis of ability to pay, the network may foster a"richgetricher" outcome. – [a] situation where large or "rich" users providetheir own individual solutions to networking would prevent an nr[e]n fromachieving the benefits of scale or access promised by the concept of a trulynational network. (p. 24)principles and practice152about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this committee concurs with that assessment.today, with the move to commercial service, there is the prospect of evengreater differentiation than there was in 1988. the committee is pleased to seethat the equity principle is captured in the structure and activities of the iitf;the articulation of administration goals for connecting schools, hospitals,libraries, and clinics; and related programs at the national science foundation(nsf) and the national telecommunications and information administration(ntia), including the ntia telecommunications and informationinfrastructure assistance program that was launched in 1994.flow of informationaccess to information through the infrastructure should be governed byrights and responsibilities relating to freedom of expression, intellectualproperty rights, individual privacy, and data and system security.commercial providers of networks and information services and theresearch, education, and library communities differ in their outlook on the flowof information. while commercial providers focus on the business potential ofinformationšincluding associated revenue streamsšthe research, education,and library communities emphasize free sharing of information in the course oftheir activities, and there is a concomitant emphasis on broad sharing ofinformation.11 creation, discovery, and analysis of information are fundamentalaspects of research and learning; organization, storage, location, and provisionof information are fundamental purposes of libraries; and discovery,communication, analysis, and creation of information are fundamental aspectsof education. in the research community in particular, much more informationis available and used than is formally published. rapid communication of dataand results over a network are becoming the norm, confounding conventionalpublishing cycles.12 the research, education, and library communities havepioneered in the development of electronic library card catalogs, digital librarycollections, and electronic publications aimed at these communities.for decades, publishers and commercial information services providersalso have been exploring ways to create, produce, and deliver information overnetworks; their activities have included the development of abstracting services,provision of rapid access to news relevant to businesses, and valueaddeddelivery of legal and financial information aimed at paying clienteles fromindustry as well as academic markets.13 more recently, they have perceived awidening popular market.14 additional commercial markets relating to networkbased delivery of information resources to the educational community are alsobeing explored.15principles and practice153about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.because of the need to recoup their investments and generate additional capitalfor service improvements and innovations, controls on access and use are veryimportant to these businesses, as is the ability to charge for access and use.funding for the digitization and electronic supply of noncommercialmaterials is an ongoing concern facing both publishers and consumers of thosematerials in the research and education communities.16government informationthe treatment of governmentgenerated information offered throughcommercial services illustrates various tensionsšthere has been an ongoingdebate in the library, publishing, and consumer advocacy communities abouthow and by whom information collected or produced by the government shouldbe made available. some of this debate occurs in conjunction with a broadermovement to realize electronic libraries.17 the research and educationcommunities may have special claims to easy, affordable access to governmentinformation, a large amount of which consists of data of interest tošand/orgenerated byšvarious kinds of researchers and some of which, in turn, hasproven, through activities associated with the national research and educationnetwork (nren) and high performance computing and communications(hpcc) programs, to have a variety of educational applications (box 4.1).such companies as mead data central and westlaw have made aprofitable business of packaging and enhancing legal and other informationoriginating in the government for resale. they have maintained that addingvalue to information should be done in the private sector, rather than bygovernment, because of the opportunities for promoting competition, theconcern that government should not be in the valueadding business (e.g., datainterpretation, analysis, and other enhancements), and the concern thatgovernment control of the information it generates could result in a monopolyover information made available to the public.18 note that government supplydoes not mean free information; some states, for example, are consideringcharging for data they supply electronically, in the process assessing the balancebetween straight costrecovery and generation of additional revenues and thebalance between serving the general public and serving commercial customers.19public libraries and public interest groups, with the agreement of theinformation industry, have argued that basic governmentgenerated informationshould be made available directly, without adding value, to the user, either forfree or at the cost of documentation.20 given that the government has alreadyincurred the costs of creating and processing the information for governmentalpurposes, the economic benefit to societyprinciples and practice154about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 4.1 government informationgovernment programs can stimulate the development of electronicdatabases of government information that support research andeducation, and they can support the development of sophisticated datamanagement and searching software that will make the softwareaccessible and usable by the research and education communities.*much of the research data available is federally owned andcontrolled, making the data ideal material for experimental, internetprojects. furthermore, since the federal data are largely in the publicdomain, intellectual property problems will not interfere with or confoundthe research results. finally, with the increasing use of and reliance oninformation technologies by federal agencies, it will be important toprovide an additional dissemination channel for effective, equitable, andtimely access to federal information resources.such channels are contemplated by: the clintongore technology initiative, "technology for america'seconomic growth, a new direction to build economic strength," whichstates, "government information is a public asset. the government willpromote the timely and equitable access to government information viaa diverse array of sources, both public and private, including state andlocal government and libraries." recent proposed legislation seeking to stimulate and spur networkbased applications of libraries, education, health care, and governmentinformation. revised omb circular a130, "the management of federal informationresources," providing guidance to agencies in their collection,maintenance, and dissemination activities and articulating a clear andstrong statement in support of public access to government information. the government printing office electronic information accessenhancement act, s. 564 (p.l. 10340), which moves the governmentprinting office forward into the delivery of online federal dataresources, including the federal register and the congressionalrecord. it calls for the development of an electronic directory of federalpublic information. these and other online data files will be free todepository libraries and available at the incremental cost ofdissemination to other users.* this objection is derived in part from discussions among task force members of a jointinitiative in the area of intellectual property rights by the association of americanuniversities and the association of research libraries.principles and practice155about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is maximized when government information is publicly disseminated at thecost of dissemination to both end users and valueadded redistributors.21under the administration's national performance review, the niiinitiative, and legislative proposals, a number of steps to enhance the flow ofgovernment information over the internet are already being explored. theseefforts should be monitored and evaluated in terms of their costs and impact.22internet delivery of government information, like other channels, reaches only aportion of the desired clientele due to various accessibility and affordabilitybarriers, but it provides a laboratory for beginning to assess what works andwhat does not. in particular, internet dissemination may help to exploreopportunities for reconceptualizing the kind as well as the form and delivery ofinformation of broad public interest, allowing the government, commercialproviders, and the public to move beyond the form and content of "governmentinformation" based on traditional printed packages.23privacycontrasts in outlook between research, education, and libraries andindustry have a different flavor in the area of privacy (box 4.2). on the onehand, there is broad agreement about the need for confidentiality for sensitiveinformation (independent of infrastructure use, per se) about individuals (e.g.,information about personnel or personal matters) or organizations (e.g., tradesecrets or other proprietary information).24 storing and communicating sensitivepersonal information lead to the possibility that information will be divulged, orthat information might be modified, sometimes with lifeor welfarethreateningconsequences.on the other hand, information about what consumers do is routinely ofinterest to businesses, as reflected in the proliferation of frequentbuyerprograms, pointofsale information gathering among retailers, and so on. thecollection, analysis, and redistribution of information about individual behaviorall have commercial value and have become the basis for a number ofcommercial database services. for example, market research and demographicdata can be used to better target products and produce better or customizedproducts; such data are becoming increasingly valuable. moreover, individualswill sometimes give up privacy as a consideration for obtaining a service (e.g.,medical insurance, credit), although they may not understand the ramificationsof that decision.25a principal point of contention appears to be information about patterns ofnetwork and information service use, information that is likely to be collectedroutinely through accounting mechanisms associated with use (and especiallypurchase) of network and information services. suchprinciples and practice156about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information collection has been an issue in the deregulation of telephony, wherethe debates have revolved around "customer proprietary network information"and "automatic number identification" information; these debates have begun tobe carried forward into considerations of the larger nii policy.26 electronicnetworking makes possible more frequent and more extensive collection of userbehavior data as an automatic byproduct of use, and it facilitates the amassingof data from multiple sources accessible over networks. as a result, privacyimplications of such data gathering and analysis are attracting broaderattention.27 the treatment of information about infrastructure usešinparticular, who owns and accesses box 4.2 confidentiality in context: accesscontrol needscommunity: key rationale:research avoid being scooped avoid mischief and preserve integrity of databases and researchwriteups protect individual researcher privacy avoid giving away market research prevent competitive advantage in grantseeking derived fromknowledge of researcher's patterns of information useeducation protect privacy of student records protect individual educator privacy, privacy of educator interactions prevent unauthorized disclosure of test and homework answers avoid mischief and preserve integrity of educational materials prevent unauthorized access to sensitive material (e.g., pornography)while preserving first amendment rights ensure that intellectual property rights requirements are metlibraries protect privacy of library user records (e.g., who borrowed or accessedwhat)hospitals/health protect privacy of patient records protect privacy of physician consultations, records avoid mischief and preserve integrity of medical records, test results,and so on protect eventual flows of fundsprinciples and practice157about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what informationšis an issue that needs further exploration and resolution , ashas been recognized through the organization of the administration's iitf.28a central issue with regard to protecting privacy is the balancing oflegitimate business opportunities against individual rights, which need to bemore clearly defined in this context. as roger noll explains,policy regarding privacy faces the classic tradeoff in values that is commonto all forms of information. a right to privacy enhances the value of personalinformation to individuals, but dissemination of the information withoutcompensation provides value to others. – the policy dilemma, then, is afundamental conflict over which values count the most. –29the research community is not universally aware of or concerned aboutprivacy, but it has included individuals who have been particularly vocal inraising such concerns, in part because their experience with networking hasunderscored the risks.30 the library community has a tradition of protecting theconfidentiality of borrowing records and has worked successfully to providelegal protection for the borrowing community. for example, many states havelaws prohibiting the release of information about what an individual is reading,watching, or listening to (this restriction could apply to video rentals and otherinformation access activities). (within the education community, the greatestconcern about privacy may relate to the confidentiality of student records,which generally is protected under law.) within the medical community, theneed to protect the privacy of patient records is attracting growingrecognition.31 given this experience base, efforts to assess and decide onprivacy policy (such as those undertaken under the iitf aegis) should explicitlyinvolve participation from the research, education, and library communities.first amendmentthere is general agreement that the first amendment, which fosters thebroad dissemination of divergent viewpoints, applies as much to the electronic,multimedia environment as it does to the print environment. translated into aprinciple for information infrastructure, the first amendment suggests thatgovernment should permit no one to exercise monopoly control over the contentcarried over the network; content determination and editorial control issuesshould be the province of competing information providers.32 monopolizationof content is a fear that arises in the context of vertical integration (combinedprovision of content and conduit, as in the case of cable and broadcasttelevision, which are regulated in different ways toprinciples and practice158about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protect public interests in content). a related issue is placement on the networkand in address directories, which ideally should be provided withoutdiscrimination or favoritism. it is in the public interest to have a variety ofinformation sources.an important lesson from the internet experience is that users should havethe ability to place information on the networkša capability that hasdifferentiated the internet, whose users have emerged as both authors andpublishers. a corollary is a right of users to offer services over the network.33how to extend this feature into a larger, commercial environment raises manyquestions, since the first amendment provides for freedom to publish by mediaowners, but it does not necessarily provide a right of access to media. what theinternet experience shows, however, is that the convergence of digital mediaenables an effective separation of content from the carrier. people areincreasingly able to create, deliver, and express in text, images, and soundregardless of the mediumšone can define an information product by what itdoes rather than by the medium to which it is bound; there may not be aphysical medium.34the internet experience also illustrates the value of broadbased, manytomany expression, in contrast to telephony, which is generally pointtopointcommunication, which inherently limits the scope of one's audience. theinternet provides individuals with access to mass communication channels, afeature particularly evident in its use during popular uprisings in the people'srepublic of china and the former soviet union.however, open interfaces and nondiscriminatory access to media canproduce outcomes that trouble some for various reasons (such as 900numberpornography services in the case of telephony); some of these are subject tolegal protections, and others are expected to be addressed by currentinformation policy efforts. in k12 education, content restrictions are driven bythe presence of minors and varying sensitivities about how much accesschildren should have to "adult" material of various kinds. to date, schoolnetworking projects have acted to restrict access to pornographic and othercontroversial information available via the internet (which is not necessarilypossible) and also to educate children, teachers, and parents about appropriatematerials.35 exploration continues. it is worth noting that libraries have a largebase of experience in this domain, having foughtšusually successfullyšcensorship battles in every information format introduced to date. librarianshave developed both policies and tools and put them into regular practice.within the nren environment, the scope of expression has been explicitlyconstrained. the most notable attempt to do so is through acceptable usepolicies that have arisen in part to control how governmentfunded networks areused. for example, nsf has imposed an honorcode acceptable use policy(aup) that has restricted the content ofprinciples and practice159about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication over the nsfnet and militated against the conduct ofcommercial transactions over the internet; similarly, research networksestablished by the department of energy and the national aeronautics andspace administration (nasa) limit traffic to missionrelated transactions.although aups have caused controversy (from allegations of censorship toobservations that they are impossible to police), it is presumed that they willdiminish with the decline in federal support for network infrastructure.36 thatis, the federally supported networks with aups, such as the anticipated nsfvery high speed backbone network service (vbns), will constitute a shrinkingportion of the internet (and nii). the current nsf cooperative agreementestablishing network access points will allow the aupconstrained vbns to beconnected to networks the rest of whose traffic is free of the nsf aup.during times of technological change, the interpretation of constitutionalprotections, such as the first amendment, is normally developed by a longlitigation process with case law being developed and further interpreted. overthe past 200 years this model has served us well primarily due to the relativeslowness of technological change. the environment to be created by the niisuggests that the models implicit in case law may need to be revisited. anumber of questions need to be addressed, for example, what is a bulletin boardoperatorša publisher, a book store owner, or a new type of enterprise? and,what are its liabilities and responsibilities with respect to the information it iscustodian of? what are the responsibilities of the new unregulated data carriers,including email service providers, with respect to the material they carry? thespeed with which these issues are faced will affect the growth of the niiculture. decisions that are excessively restrictive may slow it down or changeits nature. a balance must be found between the rights of the operators andthose of the users.37intellectual property protectionthere is a broad public consensus that there should continue to be protection of copyrighted materials, and that the protection of copyrights ofmaterials distributed in the networked environment should reflect the rights ofboth creators and users.38 there is also broad appreciation that a robust marketfor networked information and resources is fundamental to the success of theevolving nii. much less certain is how intellectual property protection can orshould evolve to fit the networked environment. observed legal scholar thomasdreier,39how do digital technology and networks affect [the] background againstwhich copyright was previously applied? obviously, digital technology alonedoesn't, since a work stored on a material carrier in digital formprinciples and practice160about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.also travels the route from private via public to private. rather, the problemcaused by digital technology as such is one concerning the ease ofreproduction. however, it is the network which brings about the substantivechange. it links the private sphere of the authoršor of the person or entityoffering the work in its marketable formšdirectly to the private sphere of theperson who enjoys or reuses the work. thus, the public sphere on whichcopyright relies to such a great extent is eliminated, and little more is left thanthe umbilical cord of the connecting netline which runs through what used tobe the noweliminated former public sphere. it also follows from thedisappearance of the public sphere that any person enjoying or reusing aprotected work via a network, reaches from his or her own private spheredirectly into the private sphere of the author who makes the protected workavailable. (p. 193)intellectual property in the networked environment is bound up with howintellectual property protection should evolve to cover digital media generally.for example, copyright law applies to the multimedia environment as it appliesto the print world, but some have raised questions about the application ofintellectual property protections to the hybrid products made possible by digitalconvergence. how these questions are resolved will affect businessdevelopment and process planning.the area of intellectual property rights represents one of the greatest areas of difference among the research and education and commercial communities. to begin with, it is worth noting that there is broad agreement onone aspect of intellectual property protection: the importance of protecting dataintegrity. it is critical that creators know that what they produce is what networkusers get, and for users to be assured that what they are getting is what theythink it is. the research, education, and library perspective was articulated bythe university of california's clifford lynch as follows:40in discussing issues of access and integrity in networked information today,there is a very strong bias towards issues specific to scholarly information; thisis to be expected, given that the academic and research communities have upuntil now been the primary constituencies on the internet. these are relativelysophisticated communities, and communities with an ethos that is stronglyoriented towards citation, attribution, and preservation of the scholarly record.indeed, – this ethos ties these communities to the system of print publication,and emphasizes that networked information must offer the same integrity andaccess if it is to become an acceptable replacement for print. – (p. 16)concerns relating to integrity suggest a need to protect against thedissemination of an altered original work without authorization, or if this is notpossible, a means for "certifying" the authenticity of the data.41 (mechanisms todo this may be developed under the security umbrella; see chapter 2.)principles and practice161about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.where there is fundamental disagreement about intellectual propertyprotection is in the area of charging for both acquisition of the item itself andthen for each use, since property rightsša form of ownershipšcarry with theman inherent ability to reap value through sales. charging for copyrightedmaterials delivered over the internet was contemplated in the highperformancecomputing act of 1991.42 the opportunity for financial compensation is thereason that intellectual property protection, especially copyright, is broadlyrecognized as nurturing the quantity and diversity of information creationgenerally in the commercial marketplace.in an electronic environment, the potential for violation of the law (and forrelated theories in the law such as misappropriation) is greatly exacerbated. it isincreasingly possible for virtually anyone to make a perfect copy of aninformation product. indeed, the ability to make multiple perfect digital copies,accessible instantly to millions of users worldwide, is an exciting prospect, butit can also be a license to steal intellectual property cheaply, easily, and in away that destroys incentives for future creativity. this battle has already beenfought by the software industry, which has persuaded at least largeorganizations to buy or license appropriate numbers of copiesštheireducational and legal efforts attest to the possibilities for (re)educating thepublic.recognizing that the internet has grown up within a culture that thrives onsharing information and research, commercial information providers haveapproached the network with great caution. commercial authors and publishersare concerned that their works will be accessed, easily downloaded, andredistributed without appropriate authorization and remuneration.43 the scale ofa network such as the internet makes this prospect a substantial deterrent tomaking information available. publishers and commercial information serviceproviders believe that if this issue is not adequately addressed, not only willmany information providers be unwilling to trust their assets to these networks,but they will also, in fact, have a strong incentive to keep their property fromever being included. this obviously runs counter to the most central goals of thenren and nii efforts.in the research community, the relatively low emphasis on remuneration isone factor behind a greater willingness to publish electronically. others includea need for rapid dissemination of information and broad circulation of newideas, "food for thought," and research results.44 these factors have given riseto a substantial amount of experimentation with and demand for electronicpublishing capabilities, services, and support.45universities and their faculties, students, and libraries play multiple rolesin relation to intellectual property: as creators, users, disseminaprinciples and practice162about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tors, and archivers. u.s. research and education have a special place incopyright law through provisions for fair use, libraries, archives, classroom use,and some performances and displays. while universities eagerly lay claim topatents (revenueproducing), they often forego any claim on copyrights (costsaving), and faculty often readily transfer copyrights to publishers in exchangefor achieving publication and the chance for published knowledge to beattributed to them.the end result is that universities sometimes find themselves in a situationwhere they cannot afford to buy backšthrough serials and other acquisitionsšthe research information their faculty have generated in their service. inaddition, the campus environment is one of a general lack of knowledge aboutand understanding of the current copyright law, its fair use provisions, and theramifications of electronic publishing. where these issues are being addressed,several options are being considered (box 4.3).in contrast to the academic situation, there are more formal transactionsinvolving rights and remuneration in the commercial publishing arena.however, electronic publication has raised new questions in that arena that mayaffect all kinds of authors. specifically, authors may be less knowledgeable thanpublishers about options for republication and associated revenues throughelectronic databases and other electronic vehicles.46 thus, the author may focuson the original publication, and not a far broader publishing process throughelectronic databases.overall, however, authors as well as publishers are experimenting in thecommercialization of these paths and in the charging for and control of theintellectual material flowing and stored in electronic form. publishers areexperimenting with new ways to distribute information and manage copyrightover electronic networks; they are experimenting with developing copyrightmanagement mechanisms using digital technology and aimed at detecting,monitoring, and inhibiting improper use.47 some of those experiments revolvearound the academic community. for example, the elsevier tulip project,involving several u.s. universities, is exploring technical and economic issuesrelating to the use of campus networks and the internet to distribute journals.springerverlag has an experimental project (red sage) based on a belllaboratories system for delivery of content from 24 journals over the internet.it can manage journal page image content on a network and alert users byelectronic mail when subjects that interest them are covered in journals they donot ordinarily read.48the possibilities for republication raise questions about shifts in the costsand benefits of publishing.49 efficient mechanisms for negotiating and payingfor partial or complete copying, for "reproduction" rights, and so on are still indevelopment (they exist in certain closed electronicprinciples and practice163about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.delivery systems, such as for the nexis and dialog services), even thoughtechnology provides ultralow cost mechanisms for reproduction and copying.early in 1994, for example, dialog information systems announced its intentionto adopt a charging system based on the number of authorized users, effectivelyselling the right to share electronically the documents obtained through itssystem. although such an approach would, if enforceable, reduce loss ofrevenue from unauthorized copying, it adds to the growing body of questionsabout redistribution and reprint rights.50box 4.3 copyright management options underuniversity policy and supportfaculty ownership. the faculty member, as the author under thecopyright law, retains copyright. the faculty member is then free to licenseuses within the university (and higher education) or assigns or licenses tothe publisher the right to reproduce and distribute the work as necessary.joint faculty/university ownership. the faculty member and theuniversity share jointly rights in copyrighted works. such joint ownershipwould be limited to that work generated within the scope of the facultymember's employment.university ownership. the university, as copyright holder, makes alldecisions relative to publication, licensing, royalty agreements, and so on.rights are transferred to the university for works generated within thescope of the faculty member's employment.ownership by a consortial body. the faculty member assigns rightsto a consortial body, e.g., the national association of state universitiesand land grant colleges or the american association of universities,which then acts as a collective rights society to manage copyrightedworks in the best interests of universities and their faculties.experimentation within the research and education communities suggeststhat in the future, the modes of information consumption may change or theremay be greater variety in modes. for example, there is a tendency toward morecasual publishing growing out of liberal electronic mail, public file repository,gopher server, and mosaic/worldwide web experiences. (see box 2.2 inchapter 2.)there also appear to be more "synthetic" applications that involve usingsmall amounts of material from multiple sources, and more shortlived uses ofinformation (in some cases because the information is frequently updated, inother cases as interactive databases or other informaprinciples and practice164about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tion resources proliferate). socalled "hot links" allow users to reach out fromone kind of document into other, related material through the network; themosaic interface to the worldwide web illustrates this phenomenon. inaddition, markets are demanding products by the piece (e.g., single articles)rather than the conventional publishing package, and pieces are being integratedby users.the combination of new applications and a broadening user base challengeconventional approaches to pricing for information services. for example,current expectations about amount of royalty per sale or use may beinappropriate in an environment where a far larger number of people may seekto use the information and/or where the uses may be more shortlived than hasbeen customary with paper or other fixedmedium products. overall, all playersin the nii publishing area must reevaluate their economic expectations andadapt them to the realities of the electronic world.broader consideration of ethicsthe committee anticipates that the emerging nii will dramatically increaseconfrontations among conflicting rights and needs of society. these conflictswill not necessarily be about new issues, but rather about a change in themagnitude and urgency of those that already exist. core issues will revolvearound ability to access information, the cost of that access, and respect forintellectual property, privacy, security, and information integrity. triggeringconditions may include the increased ability to collect and collate data on allaspects of our lives and the increased ability to cause harm by altering publicand private records. technological fixes to these problems are not in sight. theethical, legal, and social implications of this technology are paralleled by thosearising from discoveries in molecular biology. some of these issues willprobably be worked out in the marketplace, some in the courts. as in otherdomains, government monitoring and possibly more active involvement maybecome necessary. more important, the courts unquestionably will needguidance in issues that demand a high level of technological knowledge, but arenot simply technological problems with technological fixes. and there willcertainly be a need to increase public awareness of many complex issues.building from the iitf information policy efforts and depending on theirresults, consideration should be given to a program to fund research and publiceducation in this area to provide the guidance that will be needed. a reasonablemodel would be the ethical, legal, and social implications (elsi) program ofthe human genome project.51 the goals of an elsi component to the niiwould be as follows:52principles and practice165about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1. address and anticipate the implications for individuals and society ofthe nii;2. develop policy options to assure that the information is used for thebenefit of the individuals and society.3. enhance and expand public and professional education that is sensitiveto individual rights and responsibilities associated with the nii.examples of such efforts would be workshops, panels to frame policyoptions, training grants for those with a technological background to acquiretraining in ethics and law (and vice versa), studies about how currentopportunities for abuse are being exploited, public education programs, andpilot programs for introducing the study of such issues in the schools. withinnsf's computer and information science and engineering directorate, thereare programs (e.g., within the networking and crossdisciplinary activitiesdivisions) that could house such a research program, although the scope of theproblem may dictate a more broadly based institutional home, such as a nationalcommission.notes1. this development has been anticipated by the incorporation of activities relating to informationpolicy under the administration's information infrastructure task force as well as by thecorresponding broadening of technical activities under the highperformance computing andcommunications umbrella.2. see, for example, u.s. department of commerce. 1994. 20/20 vision: the development of anational information infrastructure. government printing office, washington, d.c., march. thisvolume contains papers presented at a special conference that was requested by the administration tostimulate debate over the broad principles and goals advanced in the fall 1993 policy statement onthe nii (information infrastructure task force. 1993. the national information infrastructure:agenda for action. washington, d.c., september 15).3. the issue of metrics and evaluation is recognized by the administration, which posed the problemto speakers at its march 1994 20/20 vision conference.4. although the analogy is frequently made today to universal telephone service, it should also berecognized that that entitlement, to the extent it is one, does not extend to universal access to 900number or other special services, nor are newspaper publishers obligated to distribute free ordiscounted copies to the indigentšwho can and do read the paper in public libraries. also,recognizing that today's universal access for voice telephony took time to be implemented, it islikely that in some transition period there will be inequalities.5. for example, this tack has been taken by the electronic text archive developers at the universityof virginia, who hope that their apparent success will stimulate commercial publishers. see seaman,david. 1993. "gatekeeping a garden of etext delights: electronic texts and the humanities at theuniversity of virginia library." gateways, gatekeepers, and roles in the information omniverse:proceedings from the third symposium, november 1315, washington, d.c., pp. 6367.6. of course, continued "publishing" by informationproducing individuals is still expected anddesirable.7. computer science and technology board (cstb), national research council. 1988.principles and practice166about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.toward a national research network. national academy press, washington, d.c. (the computerscience and technology board became the computer science and telecommunications board in1990.)8. a significant percentage of the population is now network literate and has a computer at home.according to the department of commerce, over 31 million u.s. households owned personalcomputers in 1993; twothirds of home pcs are believed to support people who work from theirhomes. see u.s. department of commerce. 1994. u.s. industrial outlook 1994. governmentprinting office, washington, d.c.while the homeworking, networkliterate sector of the population will probably never be sufficientto motivate the universal, highbandwidth networking of the country (which might, however, bemotivated by entertainment and consumer activities), it is a sector that must be assured reasonableaccess to the open data network, for reasons of public policy such as balanced access to networkinformation. today, it is very difficult for individuals to procure this service, to some extent forreasons of cost but more basically because there is no standard way of purchasing the service.general consumer access does not appear to justify any special subsidy. the consumer should beasked to pay for attachment, assuming that the cost will be reasonable. what is required is aprogram to develop a welldefined means to provide this service. for example, if a specific initiativewere undertaken by the government to drive the deployment of lowcost networking into schools andpublic libraries, it could promote the development of technology suited for the network attachmentof individuals (assuming the small number of schools per central office did not diminish the impactand appeal).9. existing and likely demand levels present a natural pacing factor, but it should be recognized thatthere may be an exaggerated lag in the development of desire for access. in particular, educators, forexample, in schools in unaffluent areas and educators without exposure and training relating to thepotential of networks and information resources may not know enough to desire access.10. cstb, 1988, toward a national research network.11. traditionally, some sharing has been limited as a function of competition for tenure and credit,but this resistance has been diminishing in the face of pressures promoting collaboration.12. electronic publishing will change many dynamics affecting the scholarly record, thedissemination of research results, and the evaluation of the work of researchers. some of theconfusion now arising is reflected in the following comments (made at a modern languageassociation convention in toronto on december 29, 1993) of bill readings of the university ofmontreal: "if an article is never technically 'in print,' how do you know it was actually 'published'? ifrevisions and new footnotes and retractions and formal responses become parts of the electronicarchive, doesn't 'publication' cease to mean a finished artifact and become instead an unendingdialogue of readers and authors? what then becomes of journal editors and their screening panels,the socalled 'gatekeepers' of scholarship, when space and cost considerations vanish and you onlyneed one reader to legitimate publication on the internet? many accuse academics of only writingfor themselves. . . . the virtual university gives new meaning to the quip." see trueheart, charles.1993. "the writing on the cyberspace chalkboard," washington post, december 30, pp. c12.13. a fundamental issue in relation to acquiring, storing, and sharing information resources in theelectronic environment is ownershipšwho owns the information has had an enormous impact onthe prices charged to the customer. a number of costperunit studies of various kinds of scientific,technical, and medical (stm) journal pricing suggest that the notforprofit producers sellinformation significantly less than the forprofit publishers, specifically the large, offshore europeanstm publishers. see okerson, ann. 1993. "networked information, scholarly publishing, andelectronic resource sharing in academicprinciples and practice167about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.libraries: a dilemma of ownership," paper distributed by association of research libraries,washington, d.c., june.14. within one week alone in early 1994, there were several announcements of new services,including a los angeles timespacific telesis electronic shopping service; the launch of a tvevening newscast by the philadelphia inquirer, and the formation of an alliance to develop anelectronic publishing service by the washington post and oracle. glaberson, william. 1994."newspapers race for outlets in electronic marketplace," new york times, n.d., pp. d1 and d6.15. for example, encyclopedia britannica inc. recently announced plans for electronic distributionto universities and some public libraries over the internet. of the several encyclopedias alreadyavailable online, encyclopedia britannica is the largest. the britannica online service being testedat the university of california at san diego features hypertext links that cannot be matched bytraditional text versions; links among the macropedia, micropedia, index, and propedia broad outlineof world knowledge; and wais and mosaic access. at the time of the announcement, the pricingwas uncertainšoptions for pricing on a subscription basis and reference by reference (enabled bywais and mosaic) were being considered. see markoff, john. 1994. "britannica's 44 millionwords are going on line," new york times, february 8, pp. d12.16. participants in a 1993 workshop noted that there are many questions about the division of laborbetween public and private sectors in creating, storing, organizing, marketing, and distributingnoncommercial information. see library of congress. n.d. "delivering electronic information in aknowledgebased democracy," summary of conference proceedings, july 14, 1993.17. the high performance computing act of 1991 and other pieces of legislation have increasedsupport for and exploration of electronic libraries.18. some of these arguments are reflected in the paperwork reduction act (pl 96511) and officeof management and budget (omb) circular a130 (revised in 1993) on federal informationresources management. the information industries association has published a pamphlet entitled"serving citizens in the information age: access principles for state and local governmentinformation," which provides guidelines in support of "three fundamental tenets": a broad publicright of access, a right of nondiscriminatory access, and a prohibition on government control ofinformation access and use.19. rohter, larry. 1994. "florida weighs fees for its computer data: some see profits; others,too high a price," new york times, march 31.20. see, for example, bass, brad. 1993. "edgar/internet effort leads public access to federaldata," federal computer week, november 1, p. 9.21. one relevant interagency proposal is for a government information locator system (gils)describing each agency system containing publicly accessible information plus other cataloginginformation. the proposal contemplated a "wholesale" service, as opposed to direct enduser access.power, kevin. 1993. "how will we navigate the federal data maze?" government computernews, november 22, p. 47. the omb plans to issue a directive establishing the gils and outliningwhat agencies have to do to comply with it, including creation of agency inventories of informationdissemination products and automated information systems. sikorovsky, elizabeth. 1994. "omb toissue guide to establishing a governmentwide locator system," federal computer week, april25, p. 6.22. for an assessment of options, programs to date, and dimensions on which evaluations might beconducted, see u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1993. making government work:electronic delivery of federal services. otatct578. government printing office, washington,d.c., september.23. fisher, francis dummer. 1994. "open sesame! how to get to the treasure of electronicinformation." in 20/20 vision: the development of a national information infrastructure.principles and practice168about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. department of commerce, national telecommunications and information administration.24. according to a 1993 louis harris survey, 53 percent of americans are very concerned abouttheir privacy. that survey marked the first time such concern was registered by a majority in 23years. privacy concerns were greatest for dealings with banks, health insurers, and hospitals amongvarious types of businesses. see "mind your own business,'' wall street journal, october 5, 1993.25. a significant feature of the draft "principles for providing and using personal information'' andtheir "commentary," distributed for comments by the information infrastructure task forceinformation policy committee working group on privacy in the nii on may 4, 1994, is the"protection principle," which states that "users of personal information must take reasonable stepsto prevent the information they have from being disclosed or altered improperly. such users should:(1) use appropriate managerial and technical controls to protect the confidentiality and integrity ofpersonal information" (p. 3). thus, although the iitf also provides an education principle,recognizing that individuals may not understand the impacts of networked information, it arguesthat individuals should take an active responsibility for information concerning themselves. seeappendix b.26. see, for example, "privacy comments urge industry selfregulation." 1994.telecommunications reports, april 4, pp. 323, which documents comments submitted in ntiaproceedings relating to privacy and the nii. telephone companies have argued against additionalregulation; the national cable television association and others have called for technologyneutralapproaches; distinctions have been posed between actions relating to data misuse versus actionsrelating to collection, transmission, and analysis of data, per se.27. various frequent buyer programs, including the :original frequent flyer programs started byairlines and more recently grocery storebased systems, are examples.28. there is also the prospect of legislation to prohibit the association of the user's name with thespecific user data themselves.29. noll, roger g. 1993. "the economics of information: a user's guide." pp. 2552 in theknowledge economy: the nature of information in the 21st century. institute for informationstudies, nashville, tenn.30. for example, the computing and communications community has organized an electronic forum,risks, devoted to sharing information about and discussing a variety of risks relating to privacy,security, safety, and the reliability of computerbased systems. there are other electronic discussiongroups specifically focused on privacy.31. institute of medicine. 1991. the computerbased patient record. national academy press,washington, d.c.; and institute of medicine. 1994. health data in the information age: use,disclosure, and privacy. national academy press, washington, d.c.32. the taxpayer assets project, for example, sent a letter to congressman markey expressingconcern about increasing vertical integration in service provision, inasmuch as telephonecompanies, cable companies, and wireless carriers can own rights to programming content availablethrough their facilities (november 10, 1993, email).33. however, most users who want to offer information will not necessarily want to make thecommitment involved in offering a service (e.g., running a computer in their homes with thereliability expected from a service provider). new services providing disk storage and reliableaccess might emerge as information intermediaries.34. baron, david. 1993. "digital technology and the implications for intellectual property." pp.2936 in wipo worldwide symposium on the impact of digital technology on copyright andneighboring rights. wipo, geneva.35. schwartz, jolm. 1993. "caution: children at play on information highway," washington post,pp. a1 and a26.36. this trend is evident in the anticipated proliferation of network access points in the newnsfnet architecture.principles and practice169about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.37. the computer science and telecommunications board is addressing some of these issuesthrough its project "rights and responsibilities for participants in networked communities,'' forwhich a report is anticipated in mid1994.38. the copyright act strikes such a balance and in particular, section 107 stipulates fair useprovisions that should be considered in a networked environment. it is too early to consider or toimpose restrictive agreements that limit access, limit creativity, or undermine fair use provisions asthese could be detrimental to longstanding policies that promote public access.39. dreier, thomas k. 1993. "copyright digitized: philosophical impacts and practical implicationsfor information exchange in digital networks." pp. 187212 in wipo worldwide symposium onthe impact of digital technology on copyright and neighboring rights. wipo, geneva.40. lynch, clifford a. 1993. accessibility and integrity of networked information collections.background report/contractor report prepared for the office of technology assessment, july 5.41. imagine the disasters that could occur if, for example, chemistry laboratory manuals weretampered with. consider the liability issues. consumers should have reason to believe that theprocedures for conducting a potentially explosive experiment, for example, are accurate to the bestof the chemist/author's knowledge and have not been altered by someone using a home chemistryset. users must be able to choose sources of information with a reasonable degree of confidence.42. in the interest of promoting the development of information services, such as federal scientificdata, directories, and commercial reformation services in support of research and education, "[t]henetwork shall provide access, to the extent practicable, to electronic information resourcesmaintained by libraries, research facilities, publishers, and affiliated organizations . . . [and] haveaccounting mechanisms which allow users or groups of users to be charged for their usage ofcopyrighted materials available over the network and, where appropriate and technically feasible,for their usage of the network" (pl 102194, section 102).43. this issue arises with other modes of electronic dissemination. for example, the availability ofcdrom publications at the library of congress was achieved only after two years of negotiationswith publishing and library entities; physical security and access restrictions were part of theagreement. see minahan, tim. 1992. "with copyright protections in place, library receives firstcdrom publications," government computer news, november 22, p. 10.44. for example, james noblitt, head of the institute for academic technology at the university ofnorth carolina, was recently quoted as saying, "these days the world changes every six months andtextbooks come out every three or four years. the technology is now in place to keep up withchange, but textbooks can't do it." cox, meg. 1993. "technology threatens to shatter the world ofcollege textbooks," wall street journal, june 1, pp. a1 and a5.45. perritt, henry h., jr. 1992. "market structures for electronic publishing and electroniccontracting on a national research and education network: defining added value.'' buildinginformation infrastructure: the nren and the market. harvard university press, cambridge, mass.46. bald, margaret. 1993. "the case of the disappearing author," serials review 19 (3, fall):714.47. there are a variety of joint universityindustry projects aimed at developing technological meansof providing online authorization, tracking, and/or collection of royalties. however, the results ofthese efforts are treated as proprietary information. in addition, the corporation for nationalresearch initiatives has been working with the library of congress/copyright office and arpa onnetworkbased copyright management.principles and practice170about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.see also oman, ralph. 1993. "reflections on digital technology: 'the shape of things to come.'"pp. 2124 in wipo worldwide symposium on the impact of digital technology on copyright andneighboring rights. wipo, geneva.48. "electronic publishing case studies: implications for periodicals publishing," psp bulletin 7(3,winter 1993):35.49. see, for example, "writer sues publishers over articles in databases," wall street journal,friday, december 17, 1993, p. b5(w).50. riordan, teresa. 1994. "fee plan to share online data," new york times, april 6, pp. d1 andd6.51. the idea was first suggested to the committee in a june 1993 briefing by richard civille, centerfor civic networking groups, and later explored and expanded by biologist and committee membercharles taylor.52. the human genome project initially budgeted 3 percent of its budget for its elsi componentand has increased this to 5 percent for the next 5year period. the committee specifically refrainsfrom making recommendations about funding amounts at this time, recognizing that in its inherentfocus on the nature of life the human gertome project presents more uncomfortable ethical andpolicy challenges than the nii, but the portion chosen should be a correspondingly significant partof the nii budget.principles and practice171about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5financial issuesthe evolution of the internet has several financial dimensions. theseinclude, in the context of this report, the changing role, targeting, stability, andlevel of federal funding to support the supply and use of informationinfrastructure, as well as the changing exposure of internet users in the researchand education communities to infrastructure expenses on the demand side. asfederal infrastructure activities expand from a national research and educationnetwork (nren) to a diffuse and privatesectordominated nationalinformation infrastructure (nii) program, the research and educationcommunities present both specific policy concerns and insights into the largerproblem of financing access across the population.federal and other funding for networking todatefederal financing for information infrastructure fits into a large complex ofdecisions: choices are made about spending on research and education versusother activities, on different kinds of research, on different kinds of education,and on elements that enter into research and education as inputs, such asnetworks. of all these choices, the federal role in supporting research in generalis perhaps the most established. decision making associated with the federalresearch and development budget has placed a high value on both thedevelopment and use of networks to support the research community, inparticular. federal support has yielded enormous benefits: increasedunderstanding of how networks and networkbased resources can be used,enhanced efficiency and effectivefinancial issues172about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ness of research through easier sharing and communication, and qualitativechange in the nature of research undertaken. these are hardtoquantify benefitsthat must be compared to the more obvious costs. however, the difficulty ofmaking that comparison in practice inhibits the adoption of improvedinformation technologies.1in the coming months direct financial support by the federal governmentfor the internet will begin to diminish.2 key developments are the shift tocommercial service anticipated in 1994 for what has been the nsfnetbackbone and, over the next four years, the national science foundation (nsf)supported regional networks (see box 1.3 in chapter 1). thus we find theuncomfortable situation that those parts of the research and educationcommunity that have benefited most from nsfnet face the prospect ofchanging to a new mode of payment for networkbased services whilepresumably maintaining current commitments and continuing to contribute tothe expanding information infrastructure. although the actual amount of federalsupport is smaller than most in the research community (in particular) believe,the nsfnet transition has prompted considerable uncertainty and anxiety.these concerns are a legacy of federal internet support, which has created adependence on the internet.meanwhile, new federal programs (such as the telecommunications andinformation infrastructure assistance program of the nationaltelecommunications and information administration (ntia)) and newindustry efforts (such as the pacific bell plan to wire up schools in its serviceareas) will result in further redistribution of the resources supporting the use ofinformation infrastructure. pacific bell announced in february 1994 a $100million program for "linkage for computer communications andvideoconferencing" to nearly 7,400 public k12 schools, public libraries, andcommunity colleges in its service area by the end of 1996.3 as a result of thesedevelopments, some communities that have found network access difficult,such as the k12 schools and hospitals, should gain greater access to networkbased information resources and services generally and advance their use of theinternet in particular. however, actual amounts of new or redirected federalfunds may be relatively limited. for example, in a february 1994 speech,president clinton affirmed his support for extending connectivity to libraries,but added that he was "afraid that the lion's share of that work will have to bedone at the state and local level."4to the extent that redistribution of federal funds helps others to join thenetwork without overconstraining the participation of incumbent users, benefitswill be experienced more broadly. (the alternative, of course, is a zerosumsituation in which early beneficiaries, such as certain segments of the researchcommunity, suffer uncompensated reductions infinancial issues173about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.support so that new or inadequately supported beneficiaries can gain support.)the broader distribution of benefits is a stated goal of current niirelatedinitiatives. realizing that goal requires the integration of the nren objectives,which were built on government funding, with the mission of commercialenterprises, which presumes private funding.funds associated with the nren program have been allocated for threepurposes: to construct and grow the infrastructure, to pay the ongoing costs ofnetwork operation, and to underwrite fundamental research and development.5box 5.1 presents relevant federal funding figures. the federal government hasplayed a leadership role in the internet environment by contributing funds fordevelopment of technologies from protocols to routers, and for construction ofsuch components as the nsfnet backbone, mission agency networks (e.g.,esnet, nasa science internet), and the federal internet exchanges. networkconstruction investments, in particular, have been small from a nationalperspective (tens of millions of dollars), in comparison to investments for otherinfrastructure elements, including telephone and cable networks, that have beenprivately financed (tens to hundreds of billions of dollars). the transition tocommercial internet service shifts attention from federal investment in networkconstruction to support for network operation, maintenance, and use. see"influence on network deployment" in chapter 6.the establishment of regional networks in cooperation with stategovernments and industry illustrates how the federal government leveraged arelatively small investment for the benefit of a large and dispersed community.the nsf could not afford to finance broad, direct institutional connectivity tosupercomputing centers, its initial research networking concern, and so itcatalyzed a set of midlevel (i.e., between the intrainstitutional and nationallevels) networks that was charged with developing other sources of supportover time (see appendix a).6 today there are several regional networks thatindividually receive the equivalent of $3,000 to $6,000 per year in backbonesupport from nsf along with other assistance.7notwithstanding the broadly recognized federal role, the internet hasbenefited already from substantial private investments, often throughpartnerships aimed at extending the infrastructure and experimenting with newservices and modes of delivery. for example, ibm and mci contributedmillions of dollars to the nsfnet backbone through ans, in which they havehad equity interests.8 the gigabit testbed program funded by nsf and theadvanced research projects agency (arpa), credited with accelerating theindustrially driven development and deployment of asynchronous transfer modeand sonet technologies, involves substantial commitments of money, time,and talent from telecommunications companies. the launch of certain state andregionalfinancial issues174about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks, such as nysernet, and confederations of some, such as farnet,also drew on substantial private investment. thus, privatepublic partnershipshave been essential to internet growth for some timešthe federal internetinvestment has always been bounded and leveraged. the private componentwill inevitably rise with investments in network infrastructure and investmentsin the commercial provision of information resources.box 5.1 federal funding for the nren programtotal federal funding for the nren program was $114.4 million infy93 and is expected to be $142.1 million in fy94, with significantamounts from this funding expected to cover the extra costs associatedwith making the transition from the larger nsfnet to commercial serviceand a separate research network (the vbns). the budget request forfy95 is $176.8 million. these figures cover all aspects of the nrenprogram, including research, application development, and networkoperation among the national science foundation (nsf), the advancedresearch projects agency (arpa), the u.s. department of energy, andthe national aeronautics and space administration, which account for thelargest segments of the nren budget, and other highperformancecomputing and communications (hpcc) agencies (the national institutesof health, national security agency, national oceanic and atmosphericadministration, environmental protection agency, national institute ofstandards and technology, and department of education). the arpaand nsf receive the largest shares of the nren program budget; thearpa portion of this program was $43.6 million in fy93 and $48.7 millionin fy94, and the nsf portion was $40.5 million in fy93 and $47.9 millionin fy94. the new information infrastructure technology and applications(iita) component of hpcc, intended to foster governmentindustryuniversity collaboration in the development of "technologies needed toimprove effective use of the nii," was budgeted at $156.0 million in fy94,with arpa slated for the largest segment, $95.6 million. nsf has the nextlargest requested segment, at $19 million. the fy95 hpcc budgetrequest emphasizes the iita component in the proposed increments withan 81 percent increase, resulting in a total iita request of $281.6 million.** committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federalcoordinating council for science, engineering and technology, office of science andtechnology policy. 1994. high performance computing and communications: towarda national information infrastructure. office of science and technology policy,washington, d.c.; and committee on information and communication, nationalscience and technology council. 1994. high performance computing andcommunications: technology for the national information infrastructure. supplementto the president's fiscal year 1995 budget. office of science and technology policy,washington, d.c.financial issues175about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.despite the exponential growth of the internet, commercial networks thatprovide internet service have grown more slowly than some believe they mighthave. the withdrawal of nsfnet backbone support was motivated byarguments that such federal funding constituted a marketdistorting subsidy,inhibiting the entry of competitive providers.9 nevertheless there are today atleast threedozen commercial providers of internet interconnection service.these range from internetaccess specialists, such as alternet, ans co+re,delphi, panix, and psi; to local or regional networks, such as westnet,barrnet, cerfnet, losnettos, nearnet, nysernet, sesquinet, andsuranet; to fullservice telecommunications carriers, such as at&t, mci,and sprint. entry into the internet interconnection market indicates thatcommercial service without subsidy appears viable even if, as is often the casein new markets, it takes time for service to be profitable.inferences from internetrelated business successes should be drawn withcaution. successful delivery of internet service to the research and educationcommunities is not necessarily an indicator that the same service will succeedcommercially, because the research and education communities are not amicrocosm of society. they are unusual in that their use of the internet has beensubsidized, their priorities and values regarding the kinds and conditions ofnetwork use are nonproprietary (see chapter 4), and most internet users areserved en masse from university or industrial campuses. competition amonginternet access providers for a budgetconstrained clientele suggests that thereare negligible margins to support donations of services, crosssubsidies, orhypothetical new taxes or other mechanisms aimed at generating support forneedy users.the planned privatesector, multibilliondollar investments in enablinginfrastructure suggest that it is easier for businesses and investors to see profitin home entertainment than in the informationsharing activities on the internet.this situation is notable given the minimal experience with the newentertainment services touted for the information infrastructure.10 indeed,financial analyses in the wake of the aborted bell atlantictci merger suggestthat investors may become more conservative about profits and opportunitiesrelating to the cable industry (and even telephone companies), potentiallyconstraining the flow of capital.11cost of network infrastructurethe cost of network infrastructure is fundamental to both investmentrequirements and pricing options. key cost elements include circuits, switchingand other internal systems, user systems (computer and 2comfinancial issues176about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.munications equipment on customer premises, and associated goods andservices, including training), and various highlevel and application services.the relationship between cost and price is relatively well established intelephony given its long history and the influence of regulationšbut thatrelationship is poorly understood by many, and often seemingly indirect. therelationship is even murkier in the internet, which is free of some of theextraordinary requirements found in telephony,12 and at best a subject ofspeculation in the emerging nii. nevertheless, some examination of costs isessential to understand how different pricing options relate to economicefficiency, profitability and investment prospects, and the ability of the federalgovernment to leverage private action in support of policy objectives.the massive programs of infrastructure development that are beginning totake shape, motivated in part by the possibility of interactive television andvideo on demand, could bring the benefits of internet or internetlike services toa much large community.13 the achievement of these benefits is not guaranteed,given that many choices must be made by multiple parties concerningarchitecture and deployment (see chapter 2) and that the various enterprisesmight face higher costs in the short term to provide the kind of open accessenvisioned in chapter 2 as desirable for the long term.most costs of the internet are fixed costs (that is, they are independent ofusage). fixed costs for longdistance internet communication are dominated bythe costs of transmission lines (relatively expensive) and routers (relativelycheap within nsfnet).14 the routers, which interconnect pointtopointcircuits obtained from telecommunications carriers, perform packet switching.the cost of network service to any individual can be divided between thecost of network access and the cost of longhaul communication. today'snetwork access circuits are either dedicated transmission lines or are shared.because the sharing that is achieved through packet switching is not common inaccess networks today, the costs of access are higher than they might be. bycontrast, longdistance communication within the internet uses packet switchingto achieve transmission efficiencies that are not possible in the networks usedfor telephony (box 5.2).today, longhaul circuits operate at 45 mbps, which costs, at tariff rates,about $45 per mile per month. very approximately the total number of t3circuit miles in the nsfnet backbone is about 16,000 miles and so might costabout $720,000 per month.15 network operations increase this amount whileacademic discounts and donations reduce it. this order of magnitude suggeststhat the cost of longhaul communication for the several million americans whouse the internet is on the order offinancial issues177about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5.2 the importance of sharinga network is a shared resource. it is composed of expensiveresources, such as highspeed longdistance trunks, which are too costlyfor even the largest users to purchase exclusively. instead, the network isorganized to share those resources among all the users in a costeffectiveand productive manner. different networks have different approaches tosharing, but the concept is always present.the idea of sharing expensive resources is a very familiar onešmostpeople do not own their own airplane, hospital emergency room, orhighway system. the need is occasional, and sharing is a reasonableapproach. however, people also understand that this sharing can lead tolimitations in access to the service: there is not always a plane goingexactly where you want at the time you want to leave. and even if there isa suitable plane, there may be excess demand, in which case somepotential users may be deferred or delayed. queues for service form evenat emergency rooms.in the current u.s. telephone system, there is almost always enoughcapacity to serve all users, but under unusual circumstances, such asmother's day or a natural disaster, the system can become overloaded,and some calls cannot be placed. most consumers, even if they find thisfrustrating, understand that it is a reasonable compromise that produceslower overall costs.the technical term for overload is "congestion." congestion and itscontrol have been a major topic of study in the network researchcommunity, since proper utilization of network resources is key to costeffective operation.most network costs are fixedfrom the perspective of the network provider who actually constructsand installs the transmission facilities, most costs are fixedšrelated not tothe instantaneous level of usage but to longterm traffic statistics.* rightsofway must be obtained, workers must be paid to install and maintainfacilities, and so on. all these costs are unchanged whether the links areloaded or idle.this situation implies that the network provider must manage theusage of its expensive resources, because both congestion andunderutilization are undesirable. congestion leads to user dissatisfaction,and underutilization leads to reduced revenues. so long as the networkremains uncongested, the greater the number of users it supports (or,alternatively the more traffic each user offers), the greater the potential forrevenue and for costrecovery and profit.again, the comparison with the airline industry is informative. airlinesmust pay for planes and operating costs whether they fly full or empty. sothey employ a variety of schemes to sell every seat. occasionally, theyoverbook a flight (which is the equivalent of congestion), and to deal withthat problem they offer rewards to passengers who will voluntarily defertheir travel to a less crowded time.financial issues178about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network traffic is burstyin digital packet networks such as the internet, resources areallocated to users on a millisecond basis, whenever the computer has aburst of data to send.measurements show that network traffic generated by computers isextremely "bursty." (that is, most of the time a computer has nothing tosend, but every so often, the computer transmits a short burst of data.)this makes sharing a highspeed transmission link among many usersvery desirable, since each burst from a user can be sent at the link speed,so that it reaches its destination with the least delay. not only is theoffered load bursty, but it also comes in all sizes. a user doing a remotelogin to a host is probably generating a peak data rate of a few hundredbits per second. a video stream might be 10,000 times bigger, at a fewmegabits per second. and a fast bulk data transfer between today's highperformance workstations might be 100 times faster than that, at a fewhundred megabits per second peak rate. this lack of a suitable model ofdata traffic makes the analysis of the statistics of sharing rather complex.* the number of trunks installed and the number of operators employed at any time aredetermined by a planning process that itself is based on measured traffic.a few dollars per person per year. however, the bigger cost barrier lies inthe access circuits, rather than in the longhaul portions of the network.the committee's vision of an nii characterized by an open data network(odn) architecture and including both entertainmenttelephonecable tv andgeneral data communications services implies a need for twoway service that iscomparable in speed to that needed for compressed videošon the order of 2 to4 mbps, based on current industry discussions.16 at present most peoplemanage with much more modest speeds, such as those accommodated with dialup modems (typically 9.6 or 14.4 kbps) over voicegrade lines, because theseare compatible with existing telephone plant; those homes with integratedservices digital network access can communicate at 128 kbps (or twice that,after compression),17 and reasonably priced ethernet service over cable hasbeen introduced in portions of california and massachusetts. but as experiencewith the internet demonstrates, networked file systems quickly lead to lengthydata transfers and the need for higher transfer rates. in the near futureinteractive graphics and multimedia documents will be a common means ofinformation exchange that demand high speed. accordingly,financial issues179about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend on university campuses is toward internet access at 1.5 mbps and 45mbps. pressure for these data rates to and from people's homes will emerge(box 5.3).the scale of the nii challenge is a principal reason that the federalgovernment has chosen not to contract for a separate network but to transfer theburden of network construction and operation to commercial interests.18 theresearch and education communities illustrate the scalability problem eventhough they are only a part of it: these communities are widely distributedacross the united states; they occupy 110,000 k12 school buildings and over3,000 highereducation campuses; and the research and educationalinfrastructure for those who have already left school involves some 15,500public libraries. these facilities house approximately 47 million schoolchildren, 15 million highereducation students, and 3 million teachers andfaculty.19 moreover, most of these same individuals also work at homešchildren and older students do homework, and faculty grade work and preparefor the next day of teaching. serving a widely dispersed community reduces theopportunities for sharing. if only a few sites in a community are connected to anetwork (e.g., only the schools and libraries), it will be necessary to allocate tothese few users not only the cost of the local access link from each site, but alsothe cost of the link from the community to a more distant network access site.this argues that there will be considerable economies of scale in servingeducation and libraries through a larger nii whose economic justification comesfrom other commercial users. it would be prohibitively expensive to providehighspeed data communication service to a large number of widely dispersedhomes and campuses for research and education purposes unless there could besome economy through sharing with other users of a nationwide datacommunications infrastructure.to these quantitative concerns must be added qualitative ones: thepriorities, timing, and location for adding new facilities and capabilities to thecommercial networks may not be directly aligned with the preferences or needsof the research and education communitiesšindeed, this differential was adriver of the nren program.20 these realities suggest a risk that somemembers of the research and education community will, in the short or longrun, not be served as well by commercial services as they are by the internettoday. the costs of enabling upgrades to the local loop are a key barrier to therapid and widespread deployment of nii services. see box 5.3.clearly, service providers must cover their costs of capital and operation,which implies some system for charging network users. the price of access to acommercial internet service today (like the price of access to a regionalnetwork) depends greatly on the distance to the nearest netfinancial issues180about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.work node. that may be tens or hundreds of miles because there are relativelyfew points of network connection. geography is a major reason for costdifferences experienced by the university of colorado and the massachusettsinstitute of technology (mit). with the introduction of commercial internetservice, mit, in cambridge, massachusetts, anticipates that its costs mayincrease on the order of $10,000 per year (assuming both a network point ofpresence in boston and a bandwidthdriven access charging scheme), whereasthe university of colorado, in a more rural setting with greater distance to thenearest network node, estimates that its annual costs could rise by as much as$100,000.21 averaged across all connections to commercial internet servicestoday, the average charge for access at 56 kbps is $15,000 per year and theaverage charge for 1.5mbps access is $36,000 per year. as access to highspeed services widens (scale again), the nationwide average cost forcommercial internet accessbox 5.3 access links and where the sharingoccursaccess links (the "lastmile" connections to customer sites) representan important aspect of system costs. for access links to small sites suchas residences, there are few opportunities for sharing the cost amongseveral sources of traffic. this creates a tension between two objectives.if the access link is of large capacity, which is preferable (albeit costly) topermit bursts of traffic into the network, this raises the possibility that thetraffic source could produce not bursts but a continuous stream of traffic atthis high speed. providers are thus motivated to impose a high charge forsuch a link. alternatively, the access link can be engineered at lowspeeds, which protects the provider but limits the traffic source. onesolution to this dilemma is to engineer a new form of access link thatpermits high burst rates, but that either prevents or charges for highcontinuous traffic flows.*large institutions (for example universities or corporate sites) have aneasier time with the economics of sharing. with a site housing a largenumber of users, the very bursty traffic flows from these many sourcesbecome combined into a somewhat smoother aggregate stream acrossthe access link into the external network. the institution can thus justifypurchase of a highspeed link and allocate the cost across the total pool ofusers.* note that loop transmission architectures are complex and may require, for cost and/orefficiency reasons, electronic and/or optical multiplexing that is accomplished viaequipment deployed within the loop (so that the fiber is no longer dark). also, hybridfibercopper loop architectures may be feasible.financial issues181about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at 56 kbps might drop from today's price of $1,250 per month to a figure that ismore like $50 per month.today's cost estimates should not be projected far into the future, sincenew technologies (such as the introduction of more fiberoptic facilities andsuch digital transport services as atm) will be cheaper than digital servicesover voice networks. both networkand informationrelated costs are likely tochange, for such reasons as increasing competition, deregulation, changes inenabling technology, and increases in scale. emerging plans for reconstructingthe cable tv and telephone access networks will enable at least 1.5mbpsaccess for each video channel; they open the door for interactive services.22reconstructed access networks for cable tv, for example, should be able tosupport internet access and internetlike services at much lower cost than isevident today.23 efforts are already being made to exploit such connectionsusing special hardware (such as new kinds of modems supporting internetaccess over cable systems) and services.24although the above discussion has focused on line costs, another costelement, under the current internet structure, is associated with the physical andbusiness aspects of the interconnection of regional, commercial internet access,and other networks. at present, interconnection is provided by the federalinternet exchange (serving federal backbone networks) and the commercialinternet exchange (serving commercial internet access providers) locations.the recently announced interregional coren is intended to serve regionalnetworks, and the new nsf plan calls for network access points (naps) tointerconnect various networks with the anticipated vbns and with each other.interconnection entails associated equipment and labor, which create costs. inthe telephony environment it has also involved other costs (e.g., settlementpayments covering traffic transiting the interconnection), some associated withregulation. added cost elements in the telephony environment contribute to theobserved differential in cost between sending a fax via internet versus via thetelephone network. see box 5.4.as the shift to commercial service unfolds, there is no reliable informationon how prices will change and what impact those changes will have on patternsof network use. to understand and plan for both the internet and the nii, itwould be useful to have a comprehensive study of internet service economics,how the cost of that service can be expected to evolve in the coming years, andhow it will be affected by continuing growth of the user population, the shift tomultimedia communication, and the restructuring that is taking place in thetelecommunications industry.25 some preliminary efforts at relevant analyseshave begun, but comprehensive and authoritative analysis would help to dispelmyths and assess the costeffectiveness of potential courses of action.financial issues182about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5.4 interconnect charges in the sharingparadigmissues of sharing and congestion also arise inside the network.because the network is not implemented as one monolithic entity but ismade of parts implemented by different operators, each of these entitiesmust be separately concerned with achieving good loading of its links,avoiding congestion, and making a profit. the issue of sharing andcongestion arises particularly at the point of connection betweenproviders. at this point, the offered traffic represents the aggregation ofmany individual users, and thus costeffective sharing of the link can beassumed. however, if congestion occurs, one must eventually push backon original sources. options include pricing and technical controls oncongestion; there may be other mechanisms for shaping consumerbehavior as well.since each of the network providers carrying the user's traffic mustrecover costs, the user payments must be shared among all the relevantnetwork providers. one way for this to be accomplished is for eachprovider who carries traffic for a user to bill that user separately. however,this approach presents a serious technical challenge for connectionlessnetworks, such as those that use the internet protocols, since the networkprotocols of today (such as the internet protocols) do not have thenecessary information in the data packets to permit trustworthyaccounting, and accounting at the packet level may require mechanismsof considerable cost and complexity.the alternative in use today among the interconnected providers isflatrate payments. this approach is consistent with the observation thatmost costs are independent of level of usage, and it provides to bothparties the assurance of known payment levels.paying the pricewhereas the committee's vision of an open nii suggests ready access tothe network by individuals wherever they may be, beginning with their homesand places of work, the goals of research and educational networking havecentered on access by an institution (e.g., a school or a laboratory), which inturn provides access to individuals within the institution. having recognizedthis, the nsf connections program (and even the ntia telecommunicationsand information infrastructure assistance program and other elements of theadministration's nii proposals) focuses on achieving some kind of aninstitutional connection as a first step; similarly, nsf's stephen wolff hasspoken26 of a threepronged strategy for community access: publicaccessterminals in a school, a public library, and a county extension office.financial issues183about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the apparent institutional focus arises not because it is sufficient, butbecause it is more affordable and practical than attempting immediately toconnect all relevant individuals within publicly supported education, research,library, and healthrelated institutions.27 also, institutions typically provide theneeded expertise for support; a substantial but often unrecognized cost relates totraining and ongoing support for users.28however, it is important to recognize that institutional access presents adifferent concept of national scale. it also is associated with certain kinds ofgaps in support, such as the lone researcher at a small college who might not beable to get access (whereas new investigators or investigators in new fields atconnected institutions might). that is, all institutions are not alike: someinstitutions are able to afford good access and some cannot afford any.29moreover, those with difficulty affording access, per se, have difficultyaffording those complementary goods and services that allow them to realizethe benefits of access. these range from adequate local infrastructure, to usertraining and support, and to access to certain information resources and servicesavailable over the network. the pacific bell proposal to provide connectivityfor public schools and libraries was notable for its provisions to "field dedicatedresource teams" to assist in the use of the capabilities being provided as well asto collaborate with universities and colleges to enhance the treatment ofeducational technology in the teaching curriculum.today, most individual users of the internet gain access through theinstitutions that employ or educate them and do not see the costs or chargesassociated with their individual use of the network. institutions for research andeducation do pay for backbone access: they typically pay access charges, oftenthrough a regional network, and they have had free use of the backbonenetwork, which supports longdistance communication. by contrast,commercial users of the internet (e.g., corporations) pay both for access andlongdistance communication (since the nsf's acceptable use policy hasrestricted use of the nsfnet backbone).many institutions, such as high schools and public libraries, have onlyindirect access to the internet (through a timeshared machine attached to theinternet and operated by a service provider, usually accessed at low speed, e.g.,9.6 kbps or less). these users typically pay for dialup access (telephoneservice) and pay a fee that is a function of the time spent using the network.30depending on location and usage, such connections can be very expensive. forexample, a pilot project for connecting rural libraries in new york state to theinternet found that several participating libraries were paying $175 to $350 amonth in longdistance telephone charges because there was no point ofpresence in their local area, a figure that could increase with usage.31economic analysis argues that individuals must encounter accuratefinancial issues184about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.costs in order to make appropriate choices or tradeoffs among alternatives andin order to be as effective as possible in their use of whatever level of funding isavailable. if alternatives appear to be free, individuals will choose those thatappear the best to them, regardless of cost; a free alternative is alwaysconsumed to excess. if a and b are both free, a and b are consumed to excess.if a is free and b has an appropriate costbased charge, a is overconsumed andb is either underconsumed or consumed at a proper level. thus, it can be hardto assess what choices would otherwise be made in an environment where costor price information is distorted. among the choices to be made within theresearch and education communities are efficient tradeoffs among the variousinputs used in producing research, education, or library services, includingthose that complement the use of networks (e.g., desktop systems and otherresources for gaining access) and those that substitute for networking (e.g.,other means of communication and gaining access to information).the provision of access to the internet without recouping full costs fromusers (institutional or individual) laid a foundation for two phenomena. one isthe extraordinary growth in networking and applications that excites peopleabout the internet. the other is the growth in a sense of entitlement to lowcost(even nocost) access within the research and education communities. theseoutcomes stem from the focus on the internet as a researchrelated enterprise;"free" access to arpanet and its successors was granted to the institutionalcommunities not only to facilitate the conduct of research, in part by broadeningaccess to such shared resources as federally funded supercomputer centers, butalso because of the research value of seeing how use would develop. thisaccess subsidy was apparently provided without making compensating changeseither in the overall levels of institutional support or in the allocations of thatfunding among inputs for which network access and network resources weresubstitutes or complements. this situation implies both that there was a netincrease in the effective level of funding to the institutional community and thatallocation decisions among inputs have been distorted. for example, morenetwork resources and their complements are being used than would be used(even at the same effective overall funding levels) if direct payments for suchresources were required.thus, the internet experience with respect to cost supports conflictinginterpretations: as an experiment, it suggests a potential for substantial increasesin the amount of networking, which is believed to generate increases in thequality and value of networkbased activity, but the basis for that expectationlies in what economists might view as excessive use of networking to date,inasmuch as pricing to users was below cost. howfinancial issues185about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ever, as in other network settings, the internet experience also points to thebenefit of initial subsidies to jumpstart use in situations where the value ofconsuming a product (in this case, networking) increases as a function of theparticipation of other consumers.imminent shortterm increaseswith the move to commercial service, institutions are expected to absorbthe costs previously covered by the nsfnet backbone payments and thosecovered by a declining schedule of support payments for the regional networks.together, these nsf payments amount to about $30 million;32 divided amongconnected universities, the increase in cost is expected to average a fewthousands of dollars. although absorbing this increase may cause somehardship in the short term due to transitional budgetjuggling33 or forinstitutions for which service is inherently costly (e.g., those far from networkaccess points), the order of magnitude is sufficiently low to suggest that therewill be little hardship on average for institutions already connected to theinternet. in addition, nsf has discussed recouping funds from the scheduledreductions in support for regional networks and making them available on acompetitive basis to institutions seeking to effect highbandwidth connections.thus, the change in nsfnet support is causing more apprehension thancircumstances appear to warrant.recommendation: transitional supportthe committee recommends that temporary subsidies of education and research institutions be considered in cases where the commercialization of theinternet generates exceptional funding distortions.the last decade has seen a powerful transformation of the activities ofhigher education and research in those segments where networking has becomeintegral. side effects of the shift away from a federally funded nsfnetbackbone may include temporary disruption and financial hardship for somemembers of these communities, although overall the impact is expected to belimited.costs of local infrastructure and access to servicesthere are two other elements of concern to internet users: localinfrastructure, and the costs of accessing services once network access isfinancial issues186about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.achieved. although financial support for the nsfnet backbone and theregional networks constitutes a significant amount of money, it is dwarfed byother elements of the cost of using the internet. wide area network servicetypically does not include installation, operation, and maintenance of the localinfrastructure on customer premises. local area networks (lans), workstationsand other desktop equipment, communications and interface software, and thestaff that manage or support these systems cost far more than wide area networkaccess and use.34 for example, one industry survey suggested that the typicalcorporation's average fiveyear cost of owning a personal computer is $40,000,reflecting substantial installation and learningrelated costsšwhich have risenover time with the complexity of the technology.35 this situation is recognizedin research as part of a larger, chronic problem in attaining and upgradinginfrastructure (facilities, hardware, software, and support). local infrastructureelements must usually be paid for out of funds that are distinct from those thatpay for wide area communication obtained from a commercial provider.the cost of the local infrastructure is of particular concern to peoplebuilding up the capability to use the internet for the first time. for example, it isparticularly acute for the k12 education community, which has lackedadequate electrical power and telephone access, let alone access to computingand communicationrelated equipment, software, and technical support. a pilotproject to connect rural public libraries to the internet involved an investment ofabout $3,000 for a single basic package of hardware and software per site.36 theabsence of targeted support for local infrastructure means that observedspending reflects tradeoffs and choices made among a wide set of alternatives,given the available budgets. however, those tradeoffs and choices may beuninformed when decision makers have not experienced network access.experimentation, yielding insights into both the potential benefits and the costsof information infrastructure, may help people to learn how to lower costs.local infrastructure is essential because many of the most visiblenetworking services involve capabilities provided outside the backbone networkand often go right to the end user's computer.37 capabilities such as multimediaelectronic mail and distributed database retrieval place a very heavy reliance onthe end user's systems; the networks are relegated to pathways for the flow ofbits, while much of the action (and investment) takes place outside the network.thus, a critical infrastructure challenge and cost is in developing the intrasiteinfrastructure. in california, for example, that challenge pertains to 136 highereducation campuses and approximately 7,500 school sites and 800 libraries; arough estimate is that the cost will exceed $2 billion using today's technologiesand costs. assuming these costs can be met, the availability of smallfinancial issues187about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scale, personal computercommunications systems is what enables individualsto introduce new information resources and services, one of the major benefitsassociated with the internet and the nren program.it is important to note that the cost of network access is only a piece of thecost of information infrastructure accessšthere are additional costs associatedwith access to and use of information resources, costs that may be separate fromor bundled in with network access. database vendors, for example, provideaccess to their offerings at prices that may include a monthly subscription feeplus connect time and document or page charges or, increasingly, may be pricedon a flatfee (per month or other subscriptionperiod) basis.38 because of theeconomies of scale in the production of information, varying prices charged todifferent classes of usersšincluding charging lower prices for some whootherwise could not purchase the informationšmay be desirable for optimizingthe production of information products.39 although the price charged reflectsmany considerations (ranging from ownership of intellectual property to thecosts of assembling and packaging the information for customers), the actualcosts of getting into and extracting information from a database are very, verylow. most of the marginal costs for an individual user are associated withphysical access (including, in addition to communications links, the softwarethat adds a user's address to the network for billing and connecting purposes).not all information resources require additional payments. in the internetenvironment, there are many information resources offered without charge byindividuals, government agencies, and a variety of organizationsšdata,research results, "shareware," "freeware," certain government information(increasingly becoming available over the internet), and so on. even in thecommercial environment, advertisersupported services allow for someresources to be available without additional charges.it is easier to gauge changes at the institutional than the individual level,although both will affect the level and kinds of use of networking in theresearch and education communities. within institutions, questions remainabout how increases in costs will be absorbed, what administrative andmanagement changes will be made in response to an increase in costs, and theextent to which individuals who are disproportionately large users of networkservices may confront sudden large bills for their use. in this area, the centralquestions are, (1) should individual users face charges based on their level ofuse? and, (2) is there a preferred approach to pricing for infrastructure accessand use? the second question, in turn, has two parts: (1) how should individualuse charges be covered? and, (2) is there a preferred mechanism for delivering asubsidy, if any?financial issues188about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.usagebased pricinggiven the "bursty" nature of data communications traffic (see box 5.2) andthe wide variation in demand for capacity over time and in terms of bandwidth,any network that attempts to realize effective sharing must include sophisticatedmechanisms to shape user behavior . the rate at which traffic is offered must beregulated to generate reasonable link loadings without serious congestion.these controls can take several forms, including pricing and technicalmechanisms.40 another argument for user charging is the expectation that, withfinite resources, achieving a truly national information infrastructure willrequire as broad a base for cost recovery as possible. if the nii is really going tobenefit a wide range of people, revenues should be derived at least partiallyfrom the individuals using the services. the highperformance computing actof 1991 contemplated that the nren could "have accounting mechanismswhich allow users or groups of users to be charged – where appropriate andtechnically feasible, for their usage of the network."41 see box 5.5 for a list ofkey cost elements in the internet context.as noted above, economic analysis argues for usagesensitive chargingwhere costs are usagerelated. such charges both enable users to chooseappropriately among alternative purchases and provide a check on excessivenetwork use. if unlimited network use is available for a flat fee, there may belittle incentive for restraint; in the network context, the result is congestion, ason an overused freeway, which imposes costs on other users. specifically, thosewho overuse the network may reap all of the benefit but suffer only a fraction ofthe cost imposed on the network in the form of congestion.42 congestion hasnot been a major problem on the internet recently, both because of increases incapacity intended to accommodate growth (and overcome past congestionproblems) and because most applications have been tolerant of the congestioncontrol mechanisms in the network, which delay traffic in response to heavydemand or load. since most internet costs are relatively independent of level ofuse, in the absence of congestion the incremental cost of extra traffic isessentially zero.43internet congestion appears to depend on the time of use relative to periodsof peak load. this situation is similar to other network contexts, where, forexample, variation in pricing for peak and offpeak use can help to balancenetwork load and accommodate users with fewer resources. however, someapplications (such as nontimesensitive file transfers) are more suitable for offpeak timing than others (e.g., realtime communication, some email).the internet has evolved, perhaps by accident, with a payment modelbased primarily on a fixed price for access and a service model thatfinancial issues189about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shares the available resources equally among all those who at one moment wantto use the network. in times of low traffic, the amount of service that any persongets under this regime is not determined by the funds that he or she hasavailable but by the capacity that exists to serve that user. (see discussion onbesteffort versus guaranteed bandwidth service in chapter 2.) by contrast, thetelephone network charges either according to the amount of use that is made ofthe network, or at rates independent of usage (at least up to some volume); nomatter how many users there are, it offers a constant quality of service. theinternet offers variablequality service (and uses technical means to controlcongestion) for a fixed price, and the telephone network offers a fixed quality ofservice priced according to the amount used.box 5.5 matching prices to costsin general, the prices that users face should reflect the resource coststhat they generate so that they can make intelligent decisions aboututilization of resources. in the case of the internet, there are several coststhat might be considered: the incremental costs of sending extra packets. if the network is notcongested, this is essentially zero. the social costs of delaying other users' packets when the network iscongested. this is not directly a resource cost but should certainly beconsidered part of the social cost of a packet. users bear this costthrough delay and dropped packets and would often be willing to pay toreduce congestion. the fixed costs of providing the network infrastructure. as has beenobserved, this is basically the rent for the line, the cost of the routers,and the salary for the support staff. the incremental costs of connecting to the network. each new user (ornetwork of users) connection to the internet involves costs for accesslines and switching equipment. the cost of expanding capacity of the network. this will normallyconsist of adding new routers, new lines, and new staff.source: mackiemason, jeffrey k., and hal r. varian. 1993."pricing the internet," prepared for a conference, public access to theinternet, john f. kennedy school of government, harvard university,may 2627, 1993. prepared april 1993; november 26, 1993, version.this distinction will become less clearcut and less sustainable asworkstations are equipped to support audio and video communication. internetusers will probably wish for predictable quality of service as anfinancial issues190about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.option when they begin to use their computers as substitutes for telephones andvideophones and as audio, video, and multimedia applications proliferate.moreover, it would be more efficient to assign higher priority to scarcebandwidth resources for services with a higher value (such as realtime medicalimagery versus leisuretime game images).44 both schemes have their meritsand should be available in the internet after the switch to commercial service;the implication is that there will be correspondingly different pricing schemesfor different kinds of use (e.g., very low prices for text email and higher pricesfor realtime video).45it is useful to point out that besteffort service and flatfee service are notsynonymous; it is possible to have usagebased besteffort and flatfeeguaranteed service arrangements. note also that any kind of trafficor usagesensitive pricing scheme presumes that detailed accounting information isavailable to support it. pricing structures and their relationships to differentmodels for delivering services constitute an area under discussion within theinternet community.46flatfee pricingmost research and education institutions are highly resourceconstrained:they depend primarily on public financing, they must hold to fixed annualbudgets, and, like many in industry, they have difficulty with costs that are notpredictable over the course of a year. research libraries' experiences with directcharging for commercially supplied information servicesšwhich librariesconsider very expensivešand recognition by some researchers that theygenerate substantial volumes of traffic lead to deep concerns about the volumeand incidence of direct user charges. consequently, research and educationinstitutions would prefer to obtain networking and information services for aflat annual fee rather than be charged directly and variably for the traffic thatthey generate.commercial providers of internet access, like providers oftelecommunications services generally, offer a range of charging schemes;variation in pricing is one dimension along which providers compete.47 thereare flatrate schemes that vary according to the speed of the access line (whichis presumed to correlate with volume of communications traffic), and usagesensitive schemes that are based on the number of messages transmitted (orother transactions), the time spent using the network, or the number of packetstransmitted. there is a trend toward flatrate schemes, in response to emergingcommercial customer demand and complaints that usagesensitive charging istoo expensive and inhibits use.48different payment structures share risk between the user and the providerin different ways. a usagebased structure has risk for the user,financial issues191about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in that unexpected usage (e.g., from misunderstanding or poor planning) cangenerate large expenses, which may not have been budgeted. at the same time,usage fees have risk for the provider, in that if the users curtail usage to controlcosts, the revenue to the provider will drop. flat fees or accessbased rates havethe mutual advantage that the cost to the user and the revenues to the providerare known in advance. in exchange, flat fees offer the risk of congestion, if theusers are not prevented from offering excess traffic. with flatrate schemes, theprovider assumes more risk (associated with variation in usage) than with usagebased schemes, but the impact depends on how much cost varies with usešandfor much use there is little such variation. also, lowvolume users effectivelysubsidize highvolume users when both groups pay the same fee.one issue as these developments unfold will be how costs vary by kind oftraffic. technically, a bit is a bit, as is observed in chapter 2, but voice andvideo bits are priced very differently today. voicelevel charges discouragevideo traffic (which requires far more bits), whereas videolevel pricing wouldallow voice to be carried essentially for free. these differentials contribute tocarrier concerns about proposals to unbundle the basic transmission facilitiesfrom some form of basic service.given observed market conditions, the committee assumes that a variety ofpricing schemes will be available to consumers of internet service.49 itrecognizes that flexibility in the way that internet service is priced would allowthose that make light use of the network to avoid the extra cost implicit in a flatrate price that is also designed to accommodate heavy users. flexible pricingalso could permit a situation in which those with fewer resources receive lowerquality service or service with fewer guarantees as to delay or bandwidth, whilethose with more might achieve more quality or service guarantees; with flexiblepricing there might be a series of service packages offered at different prices.a set of service packages with different flat fees and correspondingdifferent levels of service covered by the fee would be desirable. this wouldallow users to be differentiated according to need, so that a person who wants tosend video will pay more than a person who sends only electronic (text) mail.the concept is consistent with the twotier service recommendation of the 1988computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) report, toward anational research network;50 a proliferation of users, capabilities, and services(both current and anticipated) suggest a need for several pricing packages, notjust two.network providers can use pricing and other means to balance load and toshift usage to offpeak periods.51 in addition to congestionrelated variation inpricing based on time of use, suggested above, another timing issue relates tomaking longterm versus spontaneous arrangements to use aboveaverageamounts of network capacity. users who anticifinancial issues192about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pate only occasional demand for very high speed service can be encouraged tomake an explicit reservation in advance, as an alternative to paying for theoption of sending that traffic spontaneously. it is necessary to determine how tohandle a situation in which someone generally has lowlevel needs but, forexample, once or twice a year wants to do a video conference.52a flat fee for network access offers other advantages relating to the largergoal of developing the nii. experience with data networks is still developing,and people are uncertain about how much network capacity is consumed when aparticular program or application is executed. flatfee charging removes thetension that is otherwise present in these circumstances, and it frees the user toexperiment with new capabilities without fear of bankruptcy. moreover, asnoted above, although costs of new applications involving audio and video willbe relatively usagesensitive, dominant applications today (email, file transfer)typically are not.in contemplating pricing options, there is an assumption that growth in thevolume of users will result in lower average prices, given that there areeconomies of scale. another assumption is that an increasing number of serviceproviders creates competition that will also place a check on prices. further,pricing schemes may motivate new protocol developments that can result inlower costs. all may take time to unfold, and neither assumption is inconsistentwith some degree of continued government support for research and educationusers over the near term. as a result, the ideal pricing structure is likely tochange over time. the argument for flatfee charging, in the near term, tostimulate experimentation and use, extends beyond the research and educationcommunities to business and the general public. usagesensitive pricing mightbe preferable in the long run, when networkbased applications are as matureand familiar as voice telephony, photocopying, postal service, and otherinformationrelated transactions for which usagesensitive charging alreadyexists.53covering user charges (subsidies and mechanisms)although the level of financial support is relatively small, symbolically thewithdrawal of nsf support for the nsfnet backbone and eventually theregional networks signals a need for users to acknowledge and cover the costsof their use of networkbased resources. in the public financing context ofresearch and education, many fear, this situation may constrain the use ofnetworking and networkbased information resources inasmuch as budgeting iszerosum in the short term. however, other current cost factors may change (forexample, changes in state regfinancial issues193about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ulations may lower costs to research and educational users), and spending onnetworkbased resources may result in less demand for other resources (such asbooks, as has been seen in the library environment).eventually, use of networkbased resources in research and education maybe budgeted like use of other communications and information resources. thishas already happened in some instances, and it is typical of forprofitenterprises. on the other hand, a number of mechanisms are available to supportnetworking and access to networked information resources should suchexpenditures be targeted as a matter of policyšwhich would be consistent withthe overall policy decision to promote an nii. the drawback to subsidizinginfrastructurerelated expenses specifically is that there are many informationproducts involved in education and research, and subsidizing one subset is doneat the expense of others that may be at least as useful.many academics receive federally funded research grants awardedcompetitively based on proposals. a grant proposal typically includes line itemsfor cost components such as travel, telephone use, photocopying, andcomputing. there is also provision for institutional overhead. in the future,network or information infrastructure access will probably show up either as anadditional line item or as a component of the institutional overhead. as it is,today mission agency (e.g., doe, nasa) funding is generally not directed tonetwork users as such (except in the case of backbone support), but to researchprincipal investigators who must decide on the prioritization of network needsversus other programmatic needs, given some constrained funding level.54 theadvantage of including network and information access along with other costitems is that it allows the individual researcher to choose how best to allocateresources and to make choices among networks, telephones, and otheralternatives.practical arguments are often mounted against a grantbased approach. forexample, if networking is treated as a line item, there is some concern that theresources available to the recipient will be reduced to cover institutionaloverhead costs, as happens with other kinds of expenditures. another concernwith individual project recovery is the administrative burden of tracking yetanother cost item. these are among the arguments that were advanced inopposition to the suggestion made in the 1988 cstb report to provide networkservice vouchers to individual researchers to be used in covering networkrelated costs. also, as discussed in "equity" below, a researchgrant vehiclecould serve only that portion of the research and education communities thatreceives such grants.55it is important to distinguish arguments raised against a specific kind ofmechanism (e.g., a voucher for an individual researcher) from argumentsconcerning a generic type of mechanism. as mackiemason andfinancial issues194about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.varian point out, the concern about internet access by "poor" users relates to thedistribution of wealth, not pricing. vouchers or lumpsum grants are oftenrecommended by economists as a relatively efficient mechanism forredistributing resources.56 vouchers effectively provide a new currency, in thiscontext one useful only for networkrelated services.given the administrative problems in routing funds to individuals, it maybe more convenient to target funds to service providers rather than to end usersdirectly. this approach seems relatively straightforward in the case of networkservice providers, but raises additional implementation considerations if"service provider" is expanded to include information service provider.57 thatconvenience has been implicit in federal procurement of network facilities andservices through the nren program to date.one possibility tied more closely to infrastructure use is a system ofvouchers that are directed to service providersša much smaller group than theenduser populationšbased on the number of subsidyeligible users theyserve.58 such a system would place the administrative burden on the serviceprovider, while allowing users the freedom to choose a service provider andthereby preserving competition among providers for customers. a limitation ofa providerbased voucher system is that it covers only a portion of the relevantcosts, the costs of the networkbased service. local costs for equipment,software, and support as well as costs for information resources would still haveto be covered through conventional budgeting, including grant provisions andother sources of funding.deriving specific fundscompounding the distortions that may arise from targeting funds for use ofinformation infrastructure are problems in generating those funds. afterconsidering the pros and cons of specific options, the committee decided againstrecommending specific options for generating funds that explicitly or implicitlyamounted to taxation. for example, taxing communications providers(including increasing existing taxes) could yield revenues to defray expensesincurred by research and education users of the internet, but at the likely cost ofslowing investment, raising prices, and triggering other side effects common toexcise taxes.if there are to be subsidies for research and education users, consistentwith the nren program and also with the connectivity goals advanced for thebroader nii, funding out of general revenues would have the benefit ofencouraging more explicit balancing of claims for limited federal funds. (thecommittee recognizes that there are ongoing discussions in government andindustry on possibilities for a broadbased pool to support universal access forlowincome individuals.) general revefinancial issues195about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nues and tax incentives also allow for a broader spreading of costscommensurate with the broad distribution of benefits anticipated for the nii.equitya central issue in the move toward greater user responsibility forinfrastructure expenses is the incidence of costs. (see "equitable access"discussion in chapter 4.) there is concern, under the new arrangements forinternet service, that what users get may depend on how their work is funded.the nren program illustrates one divideandconquer approach: the nsfintends to provide direct support for very high bandwidth scientific research.for this it has commissioned construction of a small network, the vbns. otherinternet users will receive backbone network service from commercialproviders. clearly, nsf recognizes that some needs are easier to meet"affordably" through the marketplace than others. it implies that as a matter ofpublic policy, some big users will receive substantial direct public support fortheir networking. the rationale for this arrangement reflects the nature andvalue of the research program.to the extent that a funding agency has redirected funds to cover the costof internet use, grantees may see no substantial change as a result of the switchto a commercial internet and user charges. if you do research and your funderthinks that you need highpowered networking, your grant may provide forvbns access privileges, you may get more resources for networking, you mayget access to esnet or nasa science internet. if your state government orinstitution wants to play in the information age, you may get basic connectivity,perhaps more. but if you don't satisfy a funder's test and if you don't live orwork in the right place, you will have to finance access and services yourself.individuals in the research and education communities routinely confrontdifferences in financial support, both by field and by institution, and in what isconsidered affordable. even telephony is regarded as expensive by some schooladministrations. highenergy physicists and earth scientists have relativelygenerous support for networking, and for computing, whereas historians aremore likely to have none. a computer scientist in one of the leading universitydepartments would expect to have a leadingedge workstation, whereas acomputer scientist in a fouryear college may at best have access to a lessermachine, and those studying natural languages may have access to the mostbasic of personal computers. within the research community, some disciplineshave a relatively healthy level of grant money that could be used to supportnetworking needs, while other disciplines are more resourceconstrained.isolated researchers in rural small colleges face greater difficulty gaining accessto networks and using them to collaborate than others better situfinancial issues196about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ated. budgeting for k12 education, small colleges, and public libraries tends tobe even more constrained than for research. recognition of these disparitiesfueled the growth and broadening of the nren program from its roots insupporting supercomputer center access for an elite group of researchers.the discrepancies among specific disciplines or institutions may be seen asa reflection of higherlevel budget decisions about where limited federal fundsare best spent, allocations that result from the political process of determiningwhere federal and state funds are spent among research, education, and otheralternatives and within the categories of research and education. in that context,there are winners and losers, richer and poorer groups. the difficulty faced byk12 schools, small colleges, and public libraries in becoming connected fliesin the face of a fundamental premise of the u.s. public educational system:there should be equal opportunity for all studentsšin large schools and small,in rural areas and in the cities, regardless of income. observed lack of suchequality affects access to books, teacher salaries, athletic programs, class sizes,and so on, which compete with internet access for scarce resources.many within the research and education communities believe that theresearch and education enterprise at large benefits from the broadest possibleinvolvement in information infrastructure. achieving that broad involvementwill require some means of addressing the financing needs of those unable toafford to participate, recognizing that such subsidized participation may belimited in scope or volume. the payoff may be neither direct nor immediate,but it may involve a lowering of costs and federal financing needs over the longterm, as suggested by telecommunications economist roger noll:an educational system that produces a declining fraction of people whothink reasonably clearly about decisions under uncertainty and about makinginferences from information is fundamentally inconsistent with an informationtechnology sector that offers increasing rewards that are available only to theeducated. of course, federal policies are always in some loose sensecompetitive substitutes, but in this case the complementarities are especiallystrong. a public policy that emphasizes enhancing the network and highendterminal equipment largely for business purposes, but that is not accompaniedby a program to enhance public education, and in particular to get computersinto the schools and to create data bases and software for use by ordinarycitizens, is unbalanced at best. the social value of new information technologyis maximized if the maximal number of people can use it, and the act ofmaximizing the number of informed users also serves to minimize the extent towhich redistribution of wealth will motivate the adoption of the technology.thus better education in how to use information is an essential component ofrational public policy toward the information sector.59financial issues197about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. according to roger noll, "[an] important characteristic of information is that it canbe used to make better use of other valuable resources. information that saves time orleads to better decisions increases the opportunities available to a user, thereby reducingcosts in the sense the term is used in economics. thus, a more expensive computer or atelephone network that can transmit more information per unit of time may reduce costs.but in a large organization, an office head contemplating the purchase of a newcomputer or telephone system may see only a budget constraint, and not the implicitvalue of the increased productivity of office employees that these technologies allow.and, a state public utilities commissioner may be held accountable for only the priceincrease that must accompany an enhancement to the network if the telephone companyis to remain solvent, not the reduction in total costs that the enhancement can bringforth" (p. 29). noll, roger g. 1993. "the economics of information: a user's guide."pp. 2552 in the knowledge economy: the nature of information in the 21st century.institute for information studies, nashville, tenn.2. federal support for elements of today's internet has been reduced in the past, fromdecommissioning of the arpanet to diminishing support for internet engineering andstandardssetting activities, a trend that led to the establishment of the independentinternet society.3. the pacific bell announcement was linked to a state government challenge to link andequip every classroom in california for "fullspeed superhighway access by the year2000." to meet that objective, the pacific bell announcement anticipates not only basicdata and video connectivity, but also access to videoondemand and other forms ofinteractive multimedia for public schools and libraries as the company deploys itsinteractive broadband network. assuming the proposal is approved by the californiapublic utilities commission, pacific bell would wire targeted locations within eachinstitution, install service (four isdn lines) for free, and waive usage charges for oneyear after installation. it also intends to work with the public utilities commission todevelop a special educational access rate. "pacific bell to link public schools andlibraries to communications superhighway," february 14, 1994, press releasedistributed electronically.4. white house office of the press secretary. 1994. "remarks by the president insatellite meeting with california newspaper publishers," february 12, electronicdistribution.5. as noted in toward a national research network, advanced nren (the original"phase iii") technology requires research and innovation. computer science andtechnology board (cstb), national research council, 1988. toward a nationalresearch network. national academy press, washington, d.c. (cstb became thecomputer science and telecommunications board in 1990.)6. mandelbaum and mandelbaum describe how both the regional networks as they arecurrently organized and the larger threettier model for nsfnet were "not an a prioriconstruct." mandelbaum, richard, and paulette a. mandelbaum. 1992. "the strategicfuture of the midlevel networks." pp. 59118 in building information infrastructure.harvard university press, cambridge, mass.7. briefing to the committee, june 1993, stephen wolff, national science foundation.8. the merit proposal to nsf included provisions for $5 million from the state of michigan for facilities and personnel, approximately $6 million from mci in reducedcommunication charges, and $10 million from ibm in equipment, installation,maintenance, and operation. in september 1990, merit, ibm, and mci formed advancednetworks and services (ans) inc., a nonprofit corporation that was assigned merit'sresponsibilities under the cooperative agreement with nsf. see office of inspectorgeneral, national science foundation. 1993. "review of nsfnet," nsf, washington,d.c., march 23.9. some observers, for example, have raised concern about how the nsfnet cooperafinancial issues198about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tive agreement was structured and implemented. these concerns were manifested in electronic discussion groups over the internet and eventually in congressional hearings in thesummer of 1992 and an investigation by the nsf independent inspector general (whichgenerally supported nsf decisions and actions) in 1993.10. for this reason, there are a number of pilot projects being undertaken by cable and otherproviders apparently intended to gain a better understanding of consumer behavior and preferences.11. one assessment, quoting several financial analysts, suggests that the combined winter rollbackof cable rates by the federal communications commission and the demise of the bell atlantictelecommunications inc. merger "will transform what had been a dynamic growth and investmentoriented business into a more defensive cautious industry." it pointed to the prospect of difficultygenerating the cash to invest in building the information superhighway and expressed skepticismabout potential demand for consumer and entertainmentoriented services over it. gilpin, kenneth.1994 "market place: a onetwo combination staggers the cable television industry," new yorktimes, march 7.on the telephone company side, regional bell holding company bonds lost some appeal asinvestments because of bond buyer concerns arising from the current turmoil and confusion intelecommunications (although some analysts suggest that those concerns may be overblown).hardy, eric s. 1994. "the superhighway's slow lane," forbes, march 14, p. 136.12. the internet does not include settlements and charges associated with the provision of universalaccess subsidies, which are found in telephony. on the other hand, consumer advocacy groups oftenallege that the magnitude and burden of some telephony cost elements are both hard to sort out andsometimes reflect arbitrary accounting conventions.13. that larger community will embrace educators, researchers, and their associates through links totheir homes as well as their employers or schools.14. mackiemason, jeffrey k. and hal r. varian. 1993. "pricing the internet," prepared for aconference, public access to the internet, john f. kennedy school of government, harvarduniversity, may 2627, 1993, november 26 version. note that there are also some labor costsassociated with the support of those facilities and the relatively low cost of a network operationscenter.an illustration of how capabilities relate to costs may be found in experiences with nsfnet. theexpansion from t1 to t3 service increased costs "dramatically," with $7 million of the $8 million inadditional cost to upgrade service at the first eight sites attributed to the direct costs of transmissionservices (circuits, equipment, installation, and maintenance). "the three primary reasons for thiscost increase were the new highperformance router technology, the costs of the additional capacityand speed on the mci lines, and the requirement that the local lines [between internal and externalswitches] be able to handle t3 speeds." office of the inspector general, national sciencefoundation, 1993, "review of nsfnet."15. mile count of 16,200 from jordan becker, advanced network and services, personalcommunication, april 3, 1994.16. in the digital service hierarchy, the first step in this direction would be service at 1.5 mbps.17. historically isdn commanded a substantial premium, but that is changing in several areas.18. there are also philosophical reasons in support of a privatesector approach, which was initiatedunder previous republican administrations.19. snyder, thomas d. 1989. 1989 digest of education statistics. national center for educationstatistics, washington, d.c., december; u.s. department of education, national center foreducation statistics (nces). 1993. the condition of education, 1993. nces 93290. nces,washington, d.c., june.financial issues199about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20. there is no general mechanism for guaranteeing that research (or education) applications thatrequire the most advanced capabilities will be able to obtain them when or where needed.regulations typically prevent the telephone companies from contributing (donating) the advancednew services while under tariff, and the window of opportunity for untariffed services is limited tovery short periods for technology testing and experimentation. those sites that do not have adequateconnections in place will usually be unable to pay for them on an individual case basis as thecharges will usually be much higher than when a planned buildout occurs for major portions of acommunity. finally, sites that are in rural areas or those locations for which no good economicrationale can be made for a buildout may forever be disadvantaged without administrative remediesto offset the extra cost.21. however, mit also notes that its charges for connecting to the internet via its regional network,neap, net, could be an orderofmagnitude higher if either the nearest point of presence were innew york or the access fee were assigned to nearnet members on the basis of usage. othercampus computing and communications managers queried informally by the committee presentedsimilar degrees of uncertainty about costs. personal communication, james bruce, mit, february1994.22. obviously, the practicality of commercial internet service that reaches most people's homesdepends critically on the nature of the lastmile connection (see chapter 2), in particular, the way inwhich the cable tv and local telephone networks evolve and interconnect. unfortunately, recentplans and announcements have revolved around a form of interaction in which the traffic fromcustomer premises requires only limited bandwidth. thus there is a fear among internet users thatthe new facilities will fall short of what is needed for internetlike services and, by extension, for anoptimal, effective nii.23. most cable tv networks broadcast analog video. they are not designed to make individualconnections to homes and have no operating reverse channel. so interactive data services such asthe internet cannot use the cable tv network today in general.24. see, for example, continental cablevision. 1994. "continental cablevision, psi launch internetservice: first commercial internet service delivered via cable available beginning today incambridge, massachusetts," news release, march 8. this service will involve a metropolitan areanetwork on continental's fiber trunk lines, which continental characterizes as an "offmansubscription to the internet." more generally, a variety of special modems is being developed for usein trials for data communication over cable; programs have been announced by prodigy and coxcable communications as well as compuserve information service and america online inc. see"online services announce migration to cable tv; move driven by lowcost zenith homeworksmodem," pp. 89 in information & interactive services report, december 17, 1993.25. since the committee generated this idea, it has learned that such a study may be requestedthrough telecommunications legislation under consideration in 1994.26. remarks by stephen wolff during a national net '93 educom conference, extending thebenefits, held april 1416, 1993, in washington, d.c.27. whereas it can be argued that businesses and other forprofit user organizations may also seekinstitutional connections, they are more likely to be able to provide the local infrastructure necessaryto distribute access within an institution to the individuals that need it.28. mcclure, charles r., et al. 1994. connecting rural public libraries to the internet: projectgainšglobal access information network, project evaluation report prepared for nysernet,inc., information management consultant services inc., manlius, new york, february 15.29. for this reason, it is sometimes suggested that qualified outsiders be given access to institutionswith adequate local infrastructure during periods of otherwise low use.financial issues200about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30. there is a trend toward more affordable serial line ip (slip) access for some local publicinstitutions such as high schools.31. mcclure et al., 1994, connecting rural public libraries to the internet.32. the original authorization limit for nsfnet approved by the national science board was $14million; it was increased in june 1989 to $20 million based on the increase in traffic fromseptember 1987 (75 million packets per month) to february 1989 (600 million packets per month)and the increase in number of institutions connected to regional networks. in may 1990 the nationalscience board approved an increase in the authorization limit to $28 million in connection with theupgrade to t3 service, a limit that is expected to be met. see office of inspector general, nationalscience foundation, 1993, "review of nsfnet."33. the transition will be eased by the planned gradual decline in support for regional networks.34. for example, mit's internal costs may exceed its payments to nearnet by an order ofmagnitude.35. fisher, lawrence m. 1994. "reining in the rising hidden costs of pc ownership," new yorktimes, march 27, p. f10.36. the package included a macintosh color classic computer, a laserwriter printer, an externalcdrom drive and cable, and a computerfax modem for hardware; a multipurpose softwarepackage; communications software; and a graphics/videohandling package (quicktime starterkit). mcclure et al., 1994, connecting rural public libraries to the internet, p. 7.37. the prominence of local facilities in the internetbased research and education context points toa fundamental contrast between the telephony and nren models of communication: the telephonecompany model employs intelligence in the network (owned by the provider) and assumes "dumb"user facilities; the nren model assumes a relatively "dumb" network and intelligent user facilities.these models are reflected in the approach taken to users or customers: somewhat oversimplified,the telephone company customer is a consumer, and the nren customer is a participant (who, forexample, puts his or her material on the network for others).38. pricing for information services is structured in different ways, and pricing structures arevolatile. some are more subscription oriented (one upfront fee covers usage over a period); someare largely by the transaction, although there may be additional startup and/or annual or monthlyfees. transaction costs may be by the page (e.g., $1.00 to $2.00 for lexisnexis) or by the record(e.g., $0.12 to $30.00, depending on the database, for dialog). there are also charges for connecttime in some instances, which may range from less than $1 to several dollars per minute.39. according to roger noll, "charging higher prices to users with more intense demands [forinformation products], and lower prices to users who might otherwise be excluded, maximizes thediffusion of the information product." noll, 1993, "the economics of information: a user's guide,"p. 36.40. congestion control mechanisms inside the network can push back on the traffic sourcedynamically as congestion is detected inside the network. the internet, which lacks any pricingcontrols, depends on these pushback techniques to control offered load and limit congestion. thetechniques are imperfect, however. not only is the congestion control algorithm not enforced by thenetwork, but it is also not even part of the protocol architecture of applications that do not use tcp.udp and video traffic have no current implementation of this, and in fact are "unfair" to the hoststhat do implement congestion control.41. pl 102194, section 102.42. however, the analogy with a freeway system is imperfect, because it takes littlefinancial issues201about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.effort to set a computer on an infinite network capacityconsuming task, whereas highway usedemands time from the driver.43. mackiemason and varian, 1993, "pricing the internet."44. mackiemason and varian, 1993, "pricing the internet," p. 16.45. to some observers it seems that paying users will not be happy with besteffort service.experience suggests that user satisfaction depends on the quality of service delivered, in which caseit is argued that usagebased charging is the efficient approach. unknown is how strong thatrelationship may be, and what it implies for consumer response to alternative pricing strategies.46. see shenker, scott. 1993. "service models and pricing policies for an integrated servicesinteract," june 8 version, prepared for a conference, public access to the internet, john f. kennedyschool of government, harvard university, may 2627, 1993; and cocchi, ron, et al. 1993."pricing in computer networks: motivation, formulation, and example," august 30.47. in retrospect, pricing mistakes may have contributed to poor market performance for x.25 andisdn offerings.48. interestingly, however, in the consumer market, prodigy and genie were reported to haveabandoned flatfee for metered systems based on connect time in early 1994. vola tility in pricingappears to be the norm in networkbased services, given imperfect understanding of nonconstantconsumer behavior and its impacts on network load and on revenues. see, for example, lewis, peterh. 1994. "a traffic jam on the data highway," new york times, february 2, pp. d1, d5.49. the committee recognizes that price and cost often seem to have had a tenuous relationship incommunications. for example, recent public discussion of the apparent costs of sending a fax byinternet versus over the telephone system points to the fact that the phone system allocates morecosts more fully than does the interact. although the phone system entails some extra costsassociated with mandatory crosssubsidies, the true magnitude of those costs is subject to debate, asis any particular allocation of costs.50. cstb, 1988, toward a national research network.51. shenker, scott, david d. clark, and lixia zhang. n.d. "a scheduling service model and ascheduling architecture for an integrated services packet network"; cocchi, ron, et al., 1993,"pricing in computer networks: motivation, formulation, and example"; and estrin, deborah, andlixia zhang. 1991. "design considerations for usage accounting and feedback in internetworks,"ifip international conference on integrated network management, april, pp. 719733.52. for example, those with fewer resources might have to rely more on longerterm prepaidarrangements, while those with more resources would have more flexibility to afford spontaneousand more expensive arrangements, and so on.53. specifically, there may be an analogy to the kinds of access charges seen in the telephonesystem that combine basic network access in the local loop with usage charges for longhaul orspecial services (e.g., the exchange network facilities for interstate access tariff and its progeny).54. note that the highperformance computing act of 1991 provided that. "[a]ll federal agenciesand departments are authorized to allow recipients of federal research grants to use grant moneys topay for computer networking expenses." pl 102194, section 102(f).55. at&t and other companies have been reported as favoring some form of targeted individualassistance delivered along the lines of "telephone stamps" intended to assure that benefits areprovided to genuinely lowincome people. pearl, daniel. 1994. "debate over universal accessrights will shape rules governing the future of communications," wall street journal, january14, p. a12.56. mackiemason and varian, 1993, "pricing the internet," pp. 1617.financial issues202about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.57. the network is a generalpurpose vehicle for many services. information services are morespecific, begging the question of which services might be eligible for coverage in a financial supportprogram.58. einhorn, michael a. 1993. "toward greater achievements: new policies for the internet."59. noll, 1993, "the economics of information: a user's guide."financial issues203about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6government roles and opportunitiesthe national information infrastructure (nii) initiative presents the federalgovernment with an opportunity and an obligation to alter, enrich, and extendthe existing elements of u.s. communications and information infrastructure.pursuing that opportunity is an enormous undertaking, and the longlivedinvestments and interdependencies involved emphasize the need for effectiveupfront consideration of technical aspects and of striking a balance amongmany interests. although the narrower national research and educationnetwork (nren) vision was captured in a specific program of publicsectoractivities, it was barely visible to many observers.1 by contrast, the nii asenvisioned by industry, public interest advocates, the research and educationcommunities, the administration, and this committee is a far broader and moreexciting concept that promises to alter and enhance activities across society andthe economy. as yet, however, no coherent program or plan of execution existsfor the nii.it is necessary now to lay the proper groundwork for construction of anational resource whose complexity and significance for the nation for decadesto come are only partly captured in the oftused term "informationsuperhighway." there is a clear opportunity for the federal government to actas a catalyst for wise development of the nii and as an arbiter among thevarious interests that must be balanced for the nii to serve a broad array ofnational needs. the federal government must effect a delicate balance betweenthe freeforall chaos likely to result from a handsoff posture and theovercontrolled bureaucratic process that can result from being too heavyhanded.moreover, the need for greatly expanded technological leadershipšgovernment roles and opportunities204about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the kind that drove the nren programšboth in the development and use ofnetworkrelated technologies has emerged with the nii initiative. this need isnoted both in the 1994 report on the high performance computing andcommunications (hpcc) program2 and in the fy95 clintongoreadministration's budget proposals, whose introduction comments on the end ofthe cold war and the growth in international competitiveness as motivations fora strong research effort.3both the nren and nii efforts build on a history of department ofdefense (dod) support for networkrelated technology and associatedtechnology transfer; the internet, in particular, constitutes a major technologytransfer success story. the federal government now has a unique opportunity tobuild on that success through investment to further advance the underlyingtechnologies (to support the technological underpinnings for the services thatwill ride over the network(s) and to connect users with the information theyseek) and to develop quality information resources (e.g., databases consisting ofgovernment information or modules for educational curricula for whichinformation infrastructure is a tool) that will further the use of the networks (seechapter 4).4 the open data network (odn) outlined in chapter 2 provides acontext for such investments; the emphasis on architecture, interfaces, andservices provides a general and flexible framework that can accommodate manytechnologies, applications, and types of providers and users.in broadening the policy focus from nren to the nii, the federalgovernment can play a variety of roles, each lending itself to a variety ofmechanisms. key roles, which are not mutually exclusive, include: providing leadership and vision, balancing interests and airing competing perspectives, and influencing the shape of the information infrastructure.these roles are considered in turn below. given the expertise of thecommittee and the scope of this project, specific issues relating to regulationand deregulation are not examined in detail,5 although the influence ofregulation on competition and deployment of new technology is acknowledged.leadership and visionleadership and vision are hard to define and harder to deliver, but thehistory of both the nren and nii initiatives underscores the value of both. thenren program owes its existence to the vision of enlightened research fundingagency program officers and their congressional supporters. given the flurry ofprivate and publicsector activity in this area in the year and a half following theelection of president william clintongovernment roles and opportunities205about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and vice president albert gore, the nii initiative illustrates what can begin tohappen when leadership at the highest levels is combined with vision.fundamental to the administration's vision is the notion that an nren program,per se, is not enough to meet either the needs of the research and educationcommunities or of the nation at large; it must be combined with other elementsfrom a broader domain to achieve those goals.the administration has taken many steps to catalyze an nii. it has: expressed its vision for the nii through speeches, white papers, andother policy statements containing highlevel goals and principles (seebox 1.4 in chapter 1); created a new vehicle, a crosscutting interagency informationinfrastructure task force (iitf) to explore areas where policy mayneed to be formulated or changed and to gather inputs from within andoutside the government; accelerated and expanded the use of information infrastructure withinthe federal government (for dissemination of governmentgeneratedinformation and services to the public, communication within thegovernment, and communication between the government and thepublic); and begun to use the federal budget process to define and redefine thenational interest, notably by expanding the hpcc program in 1993 toinclude the information infrastructure technology and applications(iita) component; launching the national telecommunications andinformation administration (ntia) telecommunications andinformation infrastructure assistance program to advance anddemonstrate options for connecting such public (and publicly financed)institutions as schools, hospitals, and libraries; and aggregatingrelevant programs relating to both research and development anddeployment under a new nii category in the federal budget.all of the above activities convey and reinforce a sense of importance andpriority for information infrastructure. however, they address only some of thewhat and the why, and leave uncertain much of the how, when, and by whom,of the implementation of an nii. aside from providing a statement of goals andvision, it is far from certain how the administration can lead or guide the privatesector, on which the bulk of the nii investment hinges. the proposed legislativeand regulatory changes6 can set only gross parameters for private action; in fact,with respect to financing and control, the growing privatization of the internetconstitutes a stepping back from direct influence by government. moreover, thebroad reach of the nii, which includes organizations that generate, transport,and use informationšand which may be necessary to engovernment roles and opportunities206about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sure sufficient private investmentšfurther complicates the problems ofgovernment coordination and effective leadership. it also raises questions aboutimplications for the original constituencies of the nren program.if, as discussed in chapters 2 and 4, the nii is to inherit the strengths of theinternet architecture and culture, an aggressive approach is necessary. however,such an approach leaves open the possibility of a research and educationenvironment supported largely by the internet, on the one hand, and acommercial, massmarket environment geared to entertainment servicessupported by a far less open network, on the other hand.if the committee's vision of an open nii is to be achieved in a timely manner, it is essential that more than highlevel goals and principles bearticulated. developing an odn architecture requires significant departuresfrom past patterns of private investment in infrastructure. although technologycan be used to enable an integrated infrastructure, economics tends to promoteseparation rather than integration, with investments and the development ofcapabilities driven by whoever is best capitalized. the availability of capitalreflects the working of the marketplace, but the nren program legacyaddresses those groups for whom the market does not necessarily work well.fundamental to the challenge of providing leadership and vision is thecommittee's perception that there is a gap between the nren and nii visions,with the nii even less defined than was the nren. specifically, the nrenprogram has focused on the physical wires, switches, and network problems;the nii focuses on a larger, more complex infrastructure involving people,processes, and information resources that exploit the network. there is a uniquerole for the federal government in bridging that gap and in providing leadership.leadership in development and deployment of infrastructureto bridge the nrennii gap, the federal government must address boththe nii's architecture (its design and implementation) and deployment (whichreflects pricing, marketing, support, subsidies, and resource distribution). asdiscussed below, this entails actions by multiple agencies. how the architectureis defined will influence deployment by determining the shape of productspeople can buy, their pricing and therefore affordability, and so on.key architectural issues include what features or characteristics should bea part of the nii, what services should be present, and what it means for atechnology to be a part of the nii (see chapter 2). only part of the problem isthe one of physical infrastructure, and here the analogygovernment roles and opportunities207about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to a railroad system may be more apt than that of a highway, inasmuch as thereis a problem assuring that the pieces will all fit together. other parts relate to thecapabilities the physical facilities will support, from communicating to doingthings with information. architectural and technology needs are not static; theywill require ongoing research and development.the goals for deployment are less precise than those relating toarchitecture. key issues relating to deployment include financing, control (offacilities and services), and their interrelationship; these factors may all varyover time and affect the timing for the achievement of deployment goals. anessential role for the federal government in deployment is to assure access toinfrastructure, adequate maintenance, essential technical services, a clearmigration path, and technological development.the nsfnetinternet transition concerns the research, education, andlibrary communities specifically with regard to its financial implications. herethere must be a recognition that the information infrastructure will fail to reachits potential if in its development we forget these key communities. there is aneed for guidelines and oversight to make sure that we take care of nrenconstituenciesšthe research, education, and library communitiesšduring thetransition. some targeted financial assistance may be needed, as recommendedby the committee in chapter 5. further, the full economic benefit of the nii willoccur only when all organizations, including small business and government atevery level, become part of the infrastructure, as well as most individuals; annii can constitute an information bazaar, with powerful positive economic andsocial consequences.7 however, achieving this scope may take a concertedeffort at local and state levels, as well as at the national level.development of infrastructure at the state level, driven in part by aninterest in achieving greater efficiencies for state government functions(government as a distributed enterprise) and in part to support local economicdevelopment, will contribute to the nii as it relates to the k12 education andpublic library communities (in some cases, for example in north carolina, statenetworks serve the research community in addition to delivering variousgovernment services); somewhat less certain in terms of scope, scale, andstaying power are regional networks. state and regional efforts may affect stateregulatory actions bearing on technologies in the "last mile" (some of whichmay be influenced by potential legislation and efforts by the federalcommunications commission (fcc)), the emergence of greater competition inthe local exchange, and the possibility that more than one physical plant (e.g.,cable and telephony) may be upgraded).8 see appendix d for an overview ofstate and regional developments and issues.government roles and opportunities208about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrated below are opportunities for the federal government to influencethe broader complex of federal, state, and local actions in the area of education.these opportunities apply equally well to research and libraries.leadership in educationwithin the context of nurturing an nii, one area appears to call for afocused leadership effort as well as additional resources: education. theadministration's goal of connecting all classrooms by 2000 and various industryprograms' support for the use of information technology in schools are helpful,but a consistent, focused effort is warranted in this area at a time when manyperceive much promise but too few financial, technical, and human resources torealize it. a clearer and more effective effort within the department ofeducation would constitute an important first step.the department of education is in principle the best federal entity to bringtogether considerations of access, content, and support for k12 education.although actions taken by others, including industry, may enhance access andconnectivity, the timing and consistency of their efforts are uncertain.moreover, access and connectivity are necessary but far from sufficient: theintegration of networking into k12 education requires that mainstreameducational services be available over the network. providing such services, inturn, requires a highly organized effort to create the software, secure stategovernment and community approval of materials and instructionalenvironment, train thousands of teachers, and provide handson assistance toteachers confronting new applications.9 integrating networking into educationalso requires an ongoing program of research into the design andimplementation of infrastructure technology and applications for education,because the problem of providing and supporting access to networkbasedresources in education is larger and also contains more unknowns than supportfor research networking. the introduction of the iita component into thehpcc program has infused resources and talent into this research area,although the proliferation of educational applications activities among researchagencies raises questions about direction and the potential for duplication ofeffort.achieving a specific locus of responsibility and accountability within thedepartment of education (ed) will be an essential first step. consistent withthis objective, the administration has appointed a respected individual as specialadvisor on technology in the office of the deputy secretary of education. thecommittee recognizes that progress and effective action at ed will require amuch greater level of technical expertise and experience than has been availableat that agency. proposedgovernment roles and opportunities209about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.legislation (s1040, the technology for education act of 1994) would establishan office of educational technology headed by a director of educationaltechnology reporting directly to the secretary of education. that bill wouldprovide federal funding for education planning, equipment purchases bydisadvantaged schools, educational technology research, and development ofeducational software, as well as grants for local school districts planning toincorporate technology into education. until sufficient internal technicalcompetence is established, ed should build on relevant programs at thenational science foundation (nsf), the department of energy (doe), thenational aeronautics and space administration (nasa), and other agenciesinvolved in the nren and hpcc programs that have explored networkapplications for science and math education.10 in addition, closer coordinationwith the department of commerce (doc), which has been assigned aleadership role in the administration's nii activities, could help to better andmore systematically engage industry in this area, building on the broadeningbase of voluntary action emerging from industry.recommendation: k12 educationthe committee concludes that there is a clear and present opportunity toimprove k12 education by the integration of networking into the u.s.educational system. consistent with recent legislative proposals and theselection of education as one of the emphases in the national informationinfrastructure initiative, the committee recommends the following:the federal government, through the department of education, shouldtake a leadership role in articulating to other federal agencies, statedepartments of education, and other members of the educationcommunity the objectives and the benefits of networking in k12education. it should define a national agenda that can guide efforts atthe state and local level.since this leadership requires technical competence, the department ofeducation should, in the short term, pursue collaborations with thenational science foundation and other research agencies, but in thelong term should acquire internal technical expertise at a sufficientlysenior level.the department of education should set an aggressive agenda forresearch on telecomputing technology in education. this researchshould address benefits and applications of highbandwidthcommunication and services and the transfer of related technologies toeducational applications.the federal government should continue, and if possible expand, federalfunding through matching grants, leveraging state, local, and industrialfunds, to stimulate grassroots deployment of networks in the schools.government roles and opportunities210about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.balancing of interestseffective actions undertaken by the federal government must build on aconsensus on goals, values, and the balance of public and private interests.toward that end, the federal government can play an important role in gatheringinput from all segments of society and the economy and in weighing andbalancing different interests. an objective of the balancing process will be thecritical assessment of the alternative nii visions offered or implied by differentgroups and options for achieving the effective integration of those visions, asoutlined in chapters 1 and 2. the nature of the processšhow adequatelydifferent perspectives are treated and how the process is structuredšwilldetermine its effectiveness.the move from an nren to an nii focus broadens the set of involvedagencies and constituencies. in the short term, there is a sense of chaos resultingfrom the proliferation of many parties with competing agendas, but the processis expected to resolve and reconcile many differences over the long term. in themeantime, the expectations of the electorate are being raised. a benefit fromthat broadening of input is a fuller national consideration of competing interestsand needs relating to information infrastructure. this fuller consideration isespecially important to support decisions relating to societal equityšincludingaccess to networks and the information resources available on them (seechapter 4)šand federal budget allocations (see below).diverse and fragmented public and private intereststhe growth of networking in public and private contexts and thedevelopment of an integrated nii involve a number of entities whose roles arechanging. they include the federal government; the state governments; schools,libraries, universities, and other educational institutions; regional and other midlevel network providers; and the commercial sector, including both providersand users of networkbased services and other nongovernmentalorganizations.11 there are thus a large number of stakeholders that include, orwill be affected by the actions of, the major entities that will most directly shapeelements of the information infrastructure.the proliferation of stakeholders, the rapid growth of the internet, and theprospect of broad interconnection among different kinds of networkinfrastructures raise many questions about the internet, in particular. there is ashift from a voluntary community that has effectively run the internet to a set ofmore formal and informal organizations (including government agencies,telecommunications companies, and public interest groups) that want toparticipate.12 some want only to have access to the emerging nii atgovernment roles and opportunities211about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an affordable cost. others want a say in the development and operation of theinternet and/or the larger information infrastructure. and some would like tocontrol the entire enterprise, including the transport network plus theinformation services available on the network.several entities are advancing plans relating to information infrastructure.prominent among them are the administration's crossagency iitf; themultiagency high performance computing, communications, and informationtechnology (hpccit) subcommittee (under the office of science andtechnology policy (ostp)national science and technology council (nstc)committee on information and communication (cic) r&d umbrella), forwhich a longawaited advisory committee may eventually provide industry andacademic input; the multiagency federal networking council (fnc) and itsassociated advisory committee (fncac); federal mission agencies whoseprogrammatic needs drive network implementation in their portions of thenren program; and an assortment of private entities, including trade,professional, and advocacy groups, such as the council on competitiveness, thetelecommunications policy roundtable, the coalition for networkedinformation, educom, the electronic frontier foundation, computerprofessionals for social responsibility, the computer systems policy project,the internet society, the crossindustry working team, and so on, as well asdirect representation from the entertainment, cable, telephone and othertelecommunications, and informationproviding and publishing industries.13this existing set of involved parties is bewilderingly large and diverse, and it isgrowing. it is also fragmented, with most entities focusing on specific sets ofissues or perspectives.a consequence of the broadening and fragmentation is that the concerns ofthe research, education, and library communities are not consistently addressedand are in danger of not being heard. events to date suggest that thesecommunities are barely present at the table for key discussions, notwithstandingthe rhetoric about serving public interests and the political appeal of investing ineducation. the risk that the research and education communities may beisolated or underrepresented is magnified by the prominence of players in theinfrastructure arena that have minimal if any historic relationship with thesecommunities (notably the entertainment, cable tv, and commercial softwarefirms that have been prominent in the recent flurry of mergers, alliances,investment programs, and new service announcements). with so manystakeholders and with such an emphasis on achieving a broad base of privateinvestment, it is not surprising that the recently established nii advisorycouncil has negligible representation from research and education (althoughperhaps it is inevitable that such a highlevel advisory committee would haveonly token representation from the broad set of constituencies).government roles and opportunities212about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, it is critical that the federal government not back away from theresearch and education communities. it has achieved successes in research thatshould be reinforced and built upon, and based on that experience thecommittee offers the value judgment that the potential benefits for education atall levels justify a focused, sustained effort to develop and use informationinfrastructure in that arena.to assure that federal budget allocations reflect both efficiency and equityconsiderations, it is desirable that there be a broad balancing in the choicesmade between research and education and other kinds of programs; withinresearch and education for information infrastructure and other kinds of input;and within research for networkrelated versus other kinds of research anddevelopment. early debates over the nii make clear that fuller considerationmakes policy analysis more complicated, increases the risks of politicization,and aggravates the problems of coordination within the federal government (andamong federal, state, and local levels).coordination and managementthe scope of the nii initiative introduces considerable problems ofcoordination, control, and accountability within government even if thegovernment's role remains contained. the evolution of the narrower nrenprogram illustrates this problem. although there is an interagencycommunication mechanism in the form of the fnc, and its associated fncac,as well as the larger hpcc coordination processes,14 this committee isconcerned that there is no truly effective mechanism for coordination of nrenefforts among agencies that is guided by input from the research and educationcommunities. some of the uncertainty about the collective future of nsfnet,esnet, and the nasa science internet reflects their different degrees ofvisibility across the research and education communities: nsf (and itsnetworking efforts) is far more visible across the board. meanwhile, theintroduction of new federal programs serving nren communities (such asntia's telecommunications and information infrastructure assistanceprogram) increases the difficulty of coordination within the federal governmentalone, not to mention between government, industry, and academia. the shift toan nii emphasis only exacerbates this problem.although specific current federal efforts to promote an nii are hard to pindown, the centerpiece is clearly the iitf. the iitf appears designed to providea policy framework for meeting general public infrastructure needs, attackingthe broader nature of the nii challenge, interacting with many stakeholders, andserving as a vehicle for coordination and communication across the governmenton several interconnectedgovernment roles and opportunities213about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy issues. the current focus appears to include lowestcommondenominator approaches to the most basic connectivity or industrydirectedprovision of services to households. however, as now empowered, the iitfneither fully embraces the research perspectives that have grown with thehpcc and nren programs nor satisfactorily addresses the education andlibrary communities' needs for more than minimal access. by contrast, thevision of the open data network articulated by this committee in chapter 2 isnot a lowestcommondenominator approach: it incorporates a need for anevolving low end, but it lays the foundation for a richer construct for the future.the challenge for the country is to shape the architecture of the network so thatthe nii that results meets not just shortterm commercial objectives, but alsolongerterm societal needs.15 it is important to appreciate these differences inoutlook now, since progress dictates that rough agreement on an nii vision beachieved sooner rather than later.as this report is being written, the iitf is divided up into committees andworking groups, with an overall focus on telecommunications and informationpolicy to enable the nii to meet broad social and economic objectives. the iitfserves an important function, but from the perspective of realizing the odnenvisioned, it raises three concerns: (1) by design, it is nontechnical; (2) it hasthe strengths and weaknesses of a crossagency entity; and (3) it is an evolvingconstruct with an uncertain future.uncertain technical expertisethe technology component of the iitf appears confined to a relativelynew technology policy working group (tpwg), which is charged withaddressing issues of technology policy. officials distinguish this mission fromthe research and development coordination activities and responsibilities of thehpccit, which has overseen the nren program and other elements of thehpcc program.16 the tpwg is at least potentially a bridge to the technicalexpertise and agency representation within the hpccit and other componentsof the national science and technology council (specifically, the cic) underthe ostp. for example, it appears to involve some of the same individuals, atmiddle and uppermanagement levels, as the hpccit. this linkage isvaluable, because the people with experience in new networkbasedtechnologies and applications are those who have been using itšnotably,individuals at researchfunding and certain other mission agencies. however,the tpwg is a small component of the iitf, and its ability (or, indeed, theability of the nstc) to bring essential technical expertise to bear on nii policyformulation appears uncertain. this uncertain connection is a grave concern,given the need for ongoing input into evolving architectural, deploygovernment roles and opportunities214about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ment, and associated technology development dimensions of the nii. sincedevelopments over the next several (formative) years will require morecreativity than consolidation, realizing the nii potential envisioned by theadministration and the committee will require continuing involvement ofplayers with the best technical understanding of what the issues are. thus thecommittee is concerned lest the policy pendulum swing too far from thetechnologyoriented programs and competences that have been a major strengthof the nren program.in addition to the nii's intrinsic dependence on technology (see''influencing the shape of the information infrastructure," below), the iitf'scurrent regulatory and legal emphases themselves have technical dimensions.for example, the policy objective of universal access can be met only with acharacterization in technical terms of what that access is. hasty or fragmentaryactions without the benefit of informed technical insights risk being ineffectiveor counterproductive. the quality of the input and deliberations relating to botharchitecture and deployment will be critical.crossagency and uncertain structurethe need to blend multiple perspectives has given rise to a variety ofinteragency structures.17 however, it is hard to lead by committee; existing andrecent crossagency bodies tend to have provided communication andcoordination functions (important as they are) at best. a structure with morepermanence, responsibility, and accountability than an advisory committee,coordinating council, or task forcešcombined with ongoing support from theoffices of the president and vice presidentšis needed to sustain a dynamic niidevelopment process.moreover, the committee is further concerned that once the iitf hasaccomplished its mission, any ongoing oversight and coordination role maydevolve to a single existing agency (such as the doc or one of its components,the national institute of standards and technology (nist) or the ntia,18 or, assuggested by the draft report of the federal internetworking requirementspanel (firp), the office of management and budget (omb)).19 the concept ofa greater omb role is intriguing because of the crosscutting nature of omb'sscope, but the agency's mission and emphasis on fiscal conservatism, whileimportant for the tough tradeoffs that an nii initiative can engender, seem atodds with the need to promulgate a visionary program; integrate technical,economic, social, and legal perspectives; secure broad involvement acrossgovernment, industry, and academia; and attend to other technical aspects of thenii challenge. also, the agency has not been a major user of networks itself,implying limited experience and insight in this arena.government roles and opportunities215about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.yet the designation of omb is symptomatic of the problem of finding anappropriate, effective institutional focus: because mission agencies dependenton networks have been frustrated with traditional procurement processes andinstitutions, the firp apparently sought an entity with some access to technicalskill, some relation to actual network users, and the capability or authority toidentify and assign actions or roles in support of government networking. thefirp's draft recommendations attest to the problems of aligning experiencewith charter. given the inherent limitations of the mission orientation, keyconstituencies, experience base, resource constraints, and so on characterizingindividual agencies, the committee believes that no one existing agency can playthe broad and ongoing role envisioned.nevertheless, specifically expanding and empowering the advancedresearch projects agency (arpa) and nsf to contribute more broadly to thenii could assure a dynamic outlook on the underlying technology andarchitecture as well as prepare for the ongoing process (including specification,implementation, and support) of upgrading that technological base. nii creationstill presents leadingedge research challenges and is very interdisciplinary,arenas in which arpa, in particular, has succeeded, and to which nsf cancontribute substantially through its support of both network research andnetworkbased research.20recommendation: leadership and guidancethe vision of a national information infrastructure (nii) as articulated bythe administration emphasizes significant u.s. social and economic concernsbut leaves largely unaddressed a number of critical technical issues. thetechnical roots associated with the nren program and other components of thelarger hpcc initiative must be effectively and consistently factored into thatvision.the committee recommends that the federal government expand its nii agenda to embrace the open data network (odn) architecture as a technical framework for the design and deployment of the nii. required is a stablemechanism to provide the following:continued federal leadership in stimulating the development and deployment of an odn architecture for the nii, integrating thetechnical, economic, and social considerations basic to achieving atruly national u.s. networking capability.continued federal involvement in the development of standards for thenii. the committee does not conclude that the government should setthe standards, but rather that it should support and participate in theongoing standardssetting processes more effectively, bringing to thosegovernment roles and opportunities216about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.processes an advocacy for the public interest and for realization of anopen and evolvable nii.to this end, the committee further recommends that the federalgovernment designate a body responsible for overseeing the technical andpolicy aspects of the evolution of the nii and its applications.the information infrastructure task force (iitf), which focuses on policyissues, is not sufficient for this role; from the perspective of realizing the odnarchitecture, it raises three concerns: (1) by design, the iitf focuses onnontechnical issues and is dominated by nontechnical perspectives; (2) it hasthe strengths and weaknesses of a crossagency entity; and (3) it is an evolvingconstruct with an uncertain future. the national science and technologycouncil (nstc), and its component committee on information andcommunication r&d, which oversees the high performance computing andcommunications information technology activity, is also not sufficient for thisrole; it raises these concerns: (1) its mission is to coordinate r&d programs,and (2) it, too, has the strengths and weaknesses of a crossagency entity.what appears to be needed is a body that will effectively blend the technical competence of the nstc with the policy capabilities of the iitf andbe able to function for the extended period of time required to develop anddeploy an nii with an odn architecture.influencing the shape of the informationinfrastructurethe federal government can influence the shape of the nii in terms of botharchitecture and deployment. in both instances, standards, procurement,regulation, and investment incentives are key mechanisms. this report focuseson standards and procurement, in addition to related research investments, astools for shaping nii architecture and deployment; full consideration ofregulations, which are effectively a more formal approach to standards, andinvestment incentives was beyond the scope of the committee.although most of the public debate over the nii has addressed issuesspecific to the u.s. context, the nren program has demonstrated the benefitsof easy international connectivity, including international information sharing,collaboration in research, and educational exchanges at all levels; it has alsoillustrated how difficult it can be, in some parts of the world, to achieve evenphysical connectivity. expanded international interconnection will requirebilateral and multilateral agreements, involving the department of state, otheragencies, and perhaps other bodies,government roles and opportunities217about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most likely building on existing and prior law (although physicalimplementation will be effected with private investment21). see appendix e.even more importantly, the prospect of broader international connectionunderscores the need to address issues that will arise with informationorientedapplications, which will be affected by differences in legal regimes, values, andso on. intellectual property rights, transborder data flow,22 privacy, and securityare among the areas that will present challenges for the internationalinformation infrastructure, challenges that u.s. information policy makingshould anticipate.influence on architecture and standardsas discussed in chapter 2, the committee's vision of an open datanetwork entails achieving a more general and flexible architecture than appearslikely to emerge independently from privatesector actions. in part for thisreason, a central activity will be the development of appropriate standards andguidelines. the process of setting standards is the only way that a highlevelvision of the nii can be translated into a useful deployed infrastructure. thisreport attempts to sketch a vision, but clearly this vision is partial and must betranslated into a concrete architecture and a set of defining standards. thusdefining the vision and creating standards must be to some extentinterdependent. of course, setting standards is not the same as getting themadopted. however, the history of the internet standardssetting process,characterized by vision and leadership by arpa program managers andcreativity among those in the research community that they funded, illustratesthat sometimes the two activities can go handinhand.the committee sees the involvement of the government as critical inshaping future network standards. if the nii is to succeed, the government muststay involved in the process and find some better way than now exists torepresent the broad interests of society in the standardssetting process.setting standards for infrastructure involves a broad range of entities withdifferent competencies, constituencies, time scales, and effectiveness, all ofwhich interact in a context in which standards setting is largely voluntary. thus,part of the jurisdiction lies with the federal communications commission, partwith domestic voluntary standards committees (the american nationalstandards institute, institute for electrical and electronics engineers, and soon), part in international bodies (the international telecommunications union(itu) telecommunications sector (formerly ccitt), part with such voluntarygroups as the internet engineering task force (ietf), and part with a variety ofad hoc and more formal industry consortia. the situation is complicated by thefactgovernment roles and opportunities218about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that, particularly in areas such as information infrastructure, u.s. actions mustrelate to a larger, international standardssetting process.no organization at the moment holds the charter to set a global vision ofthe nii. the internet society represents one effort to provide coherence in thisdimension. it reflects a bottomup grassroots approach that has so far markedthe growth and evolution of the internet; it is also moving toward more formal,liaison relationships with the international organization for standardization andthe itu, steps that would enhance its involvement in international standardssetting (although within the internet society, the ietf has traditionally focusedon lowerlevel protocol and architecture issues, and as characterized inchapter 2, upcoming challenges relate to the middle and higher levels). sincethe current broad base of stakeholders precludes direct control by thegovernment, the government must decide what organizations it will support tobring into existence a vision for the nii as well as the supporting standards, andit must work internationally to establish the working relationships and themandates that can make the nii a reality.the committee is not recommending that the government charter one of itsstandardssetting agencies, such as nist, to directly set or mandate all of thestandards anticipated for the open data network. indeed, past attempts toinfluence the process directly in this way have not been effective. the attemptto force the use of open systems interconnection (osi) protocols by thepromulgation of a federal government version, gosip, must be seen as amisguided attempt to exercise a governmental mandate. in the commercialmarketplace, the contest between the osi and tcp/ip protocol suites is over:the osi market has largely disappeared,23 and vendors who invested enormoussums in trying to develop this market are understandably upset. the difficultiesof both abandoning previously chosen directions and deciding on standards forfuture directions are illustrated by the winter 1994 controversy over the draftreport of the firp, which suggested that nist abandon its position mandatingthe procurement of technologies implementing the osi suite.24against this backdrop comes an administration effort to strengthen theinvolvement of nist in the nii initiative. this can be seen in the significantexpansion proposed for the fy95 nist budget, the prominent role of nist'sdirector in the iitf activities, and the firp's draft recommendation that nistidentify federal preferred standards profiles and aim "to converge thegovernment to a single interconnected, interoperable standards basedinternetworking environment."25 nist manages the development of federalinformation processing standards (fips), and the fips system would be avehicle to promote niicompliant technology as suggested in chapter 2.the issue of a more active government role in setting standards isgovernment roles and opportunities219about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.controversial. many standards are being set in industry, particularly at theapplications level (such as data standards emerging from the pc applicationssoftware environment). many in industry believe that the ad hoc bottomupstandardssetting process that has characterized the u.s. computer industry andinternet context has been key to today's global leadership in those arenas. thereis also concern in the business community about the ability of governmentofficials to make the right choices (whether for standards or regulations), a viewcaptured in a wall street journal editorial contending that "it is truly hubris forthese politicians to think they can somehow fine tune or stage manage therapidly developing world of advanced technologies."26 even withingovernment, opinions differ as to the appropriate timing and direction ofstandards setting. for example, a federal communications commission officialparticipating in a forum on wireless communications observed that the fccpreferred encouraging to mandating standards in a new industry, while an ntiaofficial was quoted as asking whether the fcc should do more than provideencouragement.27on the other hand, standardization has been immature and conflict or lackof consensus has been apparent in such crosscutting concerns as management,security, and network naming, areas where industrydriven standardization maybe neither sufficient nor sufficiently timely. moreover, the objective ofproviding a truly national, consumeroriented set of services increases thedecisionmaking stakes because consumeroriented standards tend to be slow tochangešthe consequences of these decisions are evident for relatively longperiods of time.28 these are among the factors arguing for explicit attention tothe direction, degree, and consistency of standardssetting actions acrossgovernment.influence through procurementamong the vehicles for promoting adoption of the odn architecture isgovernment procurement of relevant, niicompliant technology for its ownuses. two kinds of procurement are at issue: procurement for the conduct ofgovernment as an enterprise, for which fips (and in missionrelated defensecontexts, military standards) are promulgated, and procurement of "researchnetworks" that combine service to both internal and external parties withexploration of advanced technologies. this latter approach has been usedsuccessfully in the nren program, which has both demonstrated technologyand stimulated associated market development; it is consistent with the goals ofthe national performance review for broader use of networkbased technologyin the conduct of government activities; and it is compatible with thepreliminary recommendations of the firp.29government roles and opportunities220about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impending transformation of the nsfnet illustrates both how therelative federal government role has changed in the supply of infrastructure andhow the need continues and expands for the government to support the researchand education communities through effective communication about plans andprospects as well as appropriate delivery of financial assistance. two key setsof issues relating to procurement are discussed below: influence on the internet,and the fit between government approach and kind of network.a third set of issues is subordinate to both of these other sets; it relates tothe specifics of approaches chosen by individual agencies to meet missionneeds. today, nsf, doe, and nasa each operate or contract for the operationof a dedicated backbone network providing services such as file transfer,electronic mail, and remote resource access. when the federal backbone effortsbegan there were no commercial providers capable of offering requiredservices. now components of the internet, agency backbone networks haveserved as testbeds for experimentation with network services, algorithms,software, and hardware.these agencies have taken different approaches. for example, nsf hasdeveloped cooperative agreements that delegate operation of a dedicatednetwork (nsfnet and ultimately the vbns) that satisfies a specifiedperformance goal. doe has attempted to procure, for an enhanced esnet,telephone company facilities involving specified technologies (includingasynchronous transfer mode (atm)), in anticipation of commercial offerings; ithas proposed taking a virtual private network approach. these arrangementshave been made as separate logistical activities, based on the assumption ofmore or less separate user communities.30the variation in approach across agencies raises questions aboutcoordination. however, subject to the concerns discussed below, it is notobvious that any one approach is inherently superior unless it can be establishedby engineeringeconomic analysis that there are clear economies to mergingthese efforts.31influence on future oversight of the internetthe federal government (and specifically the nsf) role has diminished tothe point that it no longer appears that the government can simply "turn off" theinternet by removing payment; the governmentfunded portions have shrunkcompared to other portions as the entirety has grown. with the trend tocommercial networking and more indirect governmental involvement, the useof infrastructure procurement decisions to control and plan the internet's growthwill end. this is a critical problem in the transition to commercial services.without some other means to provide overall guidance for internet planning,chaotic growth may effectively disable the internet and prevent future success.government roles and opportunities221about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the federal government is still seen as providing overall guidance and thushas the power to pass this role along to a successor in a coherent manner, or toretain it. however, the government's position is rapidly eroding with theincrease in commercial and foreign country interests in the growth and use ofthe internet. as a result, the government has a greater chance of influencing thesuccession of power than of wielding overall control over the internet. theadvent of the internet societyšin the context of declining and uncertain federalsupport for the internet plus the broadening of international interest in theinternetšpoints to the fact that there are alternatives to direct governmentinvolvement; those alternatives and their ramifications should be fullyconsidered rather than be allowed to emerge by default.the committee thus sees it as an obligation of the federal government toleave a clear line of succession for the oversight of the internet . this is anessential element of planning for the larger nii. the committee concludes that afight over ownership of the internet architecture, which could easily occur inthe power vacuum left if the federal government were to withdraw further,would be intolerably destructive, jeopardizing the future role of the internet aspart of the foundation for the nii.32in today's unregulated and competitive world, monopoly is not a preferredtool to achieve coherence; the committee is suggesting neither that norcompletely centralized control. but it is both appropriate and necessary for thegovernment to stabilize those aspects of the overall internet environment thatpermit the internet to function. at the present time, many commercial providershave been effective at meeting among themselves to shape their part of theinternet, in part through the commercial internet exchange (cix). the cix isnot, however, suitable to take on the role of overall planning for internetgrowth. it is properly seen as representing commercial interests, which are notthe only voices to be heard. also, the cix involves only some commercialproviders. thus, to make the cix the overseer of the internet would seem tosome to put the fox in charge of the hen house. the same argument about biascould be raised against any business consortium, trade association, or equivalent.the second nsfnet solicitation and award (revolving around the vbns;see box 1.3 in chapter 1) recognizes the need for continued centralizedplanning and contains two key components that address this need. one is thedesignation of an organization to manage internet routing (the routing arbiter).the other is the topology implicit in the vbns proposal itself, which providesnetwork access points (naps) as a means to interconnect future serviceproviders.33 whether these aspects of the solicitation are technically correct(and there is some criticism of them from commercial providers), it must beunderstood that this is the lastgovernment roles and opportunities222about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.time that the government can take such a step. the committee does not believethat in the future a government solicitation will be an effective engineeringmeans to shape the internet. with this second nsfnet solicitation, thegovernment is effectively out of the business of overseeing the internet.influence on network deployment and technologydevelopmentit is important to recognize the benefits of direct governmentalinvolvement in network deployment. first, it accelerates the advent of widescale deployment to the point that the benefits of network attachment are realand visible to the users. second, it drives the development of technology, whichmight not otherwise come into existence, since there is no initial market for it.this first goal, accelerated deployment, has succeeded to the point that, foroperational networks serving broad sectors of the community, the role of thegovernment is already changing to that of a facilitator. this is an appropriatetrend and should continue. by the indirect use of grants or subsidies (e.g., toinstitutions in support of network utilization), the government can accomplishthe policy objective of rapid network deployment and at the same timeencourage the development of privatesector network offerings. for example,because the internet has evolved its own technologies for switching and routing,it has achieved faster deployment of new technology than is available publiclyin the public switched network overall.the second goal, technology development, will still justify directinvestment in specific cases. for example, there is a government role in fundingbasic research related to architecture, because architectures having the sharednature and the scale of the nii class are not likely to be funded by industry; thesame holds for research relating to the generality of solutions and level ofintegration of resulting architectures. the government is funding research invery high speed experimental networks, including joint efforts amonggovernment, industry, and academia to promote technology development inareas such as atm and sonet (both of which reflect substantial industryr&d).34 this is effective and should continue. the other option for technologydevelopment is at the other end of the performance scale, that is, thedevelopment of very inexpensive interconnection technology for schools andsimilar facilities for which the objective is wide penetration at low cost.a significant component of public debate, including debate in connectionwith legislative language, over how and how much the federal governmentshould support networking infrastructure has revolved around a model thatdivides networks into two categories: experimentalgovernment roles and opportunities223about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks, which are vehicles for testing out substantially new technologies and/or applications, and production networks, which use mature technologies todeliver services. although this distinction appears reasonable on the surface, inpractice it may be flawed.support for experimental networksat any point in time, there will be a range of network technologies, fromthe very experimental to the commercially provided production networks.today, alloptical networks are very experimental, atm networks are emergingfrom the experimental realm, and internetstyle packet switching is supportedby very mature products. at another time, what is considered experimental,mature, or in the middle will differ, but the range of options will always exist.the two ends of the spectrum are clear, but the middle is more complex.highly experimental networks, which are not yet of any operationalbenefit, are most properly funded by direct research grants from governmentand industry. they are characterized by high risk, they implementprecompetitive technologies, they generate insights that can be widely shared,and, as a result, there is limited commercial incentive for any one company toundertake such projects. the current gigabit testbeds are supported bygovernment grants from nsf and arpa and by direct industrial support,especially for the transmission facilities. other testbed programs appeardesirable (see chapter 2). for example, it is possible to imagine a testbedsupporting access to schools that drives the development of very inexpensiveinterface equipment for voicegrade packet switching. another possibleexperiment would involve wireless interconnection of rural locations.approach to operational networks and intermediate technologiesat the other end of the spectrum, for networks that are operational and thatdo not represent an advance in the current state of the art, it seems reasonable tohave the users pay directly, as they might pay for telephone or cable tv access.direct government funding of such networks seems inappropriate, althoughgovernment subsidies to research and education users may be desirable (seechapter 5).there are, however, some gray areas that require consideration. one issue,related to operational networks, has to do with who does network integration. anetwork can be built by purchasing lowlevel components, like trunks androuters, and hiring staff to build these into a service. the alternative is topurchase the desired service directly. in thegovernment roles and opportunities224about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.latter case, one could purchase the service from a general service provider, as inthe purchase of telephone service, or one could contract to have a specialservice implemented, as in the case of the federal telecommunications system,fts2000.35another gray area concerns network technology that is somewhere in themiddle of the spectrum between the purely experimental and the purelyoperational. at any time, there will exist networking concepts that are by nomeans yet a commercial commodity but that have matured to the point that it isreasonable to let a community of advanced application users exploit them. it isvery important to encourage the use of these intermediate technologies, first tohelp the selected user community, but more importantly to help prove theviability of the concept and push it toward commercialization. the lessons ofthe past decade affirm the value of such proofs of concept. in this case, eventhough the network technology is not strictly experimental, the government mayplay a key role in purchasing and providing such a service to a selected usercommunity (presumably a community for which there is a preexisting rationalefor government support, such as research or education or a community involvedin the pursuit of a specific and welldefined agency mission). for example,dod was the principal customer for early implementations of atm andsonet network technologies; it was able to afford the high cost, and itsinvestments helped to lower the costs, facilitating the commercialization ofthese technologies.there will always be a tension in this middle region, because astechnology becomes more mature the commercial sector will show increasinginterest in offering the service. direct government provisioning may be seen asinhibiting commercial development; this is the allegation raised in criticism ofthe nsfnet arrangements during the early 1990s, when commercial internetaccess providers emerged and alleged that government subsidies undercut them.these arguments continued into 1994 in the context of proposed legislationaimed at nurturing information infrastructure.36the arguments raised by the commercial providers seem to suggest thatthis middle region of maturing technology does not exist. government has beenurged by carriers and other commercial service providers to divide all networksinto research networks and operational networks, with a sharp demarcationbetween them.37 this crisp distinction is not realistic, and it potentially hurts thedevelopment of evolving technology. important new applications may not comeinto existence unless the infrastructure is there. moreover, governmentinitiatedapplications tend to provide the creative requirements that bring to the surfacehidden or latent demand. even if the technology demands of maturing forms ofinfrastructure do not themselves mandate direct government support,government roles and opportunities225about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.demand for the timely development of applications may require it. therefore,the committee urges that the government not be restricted from purchasingintermediate and advanced network technology and providing it to selected usercommunities, so long as policies are in place to direct the technology's eventualmigration to fully commercial services, and to ensure a degree of competition inthe provisioning.research and developmentthere will be expanded opportunities (and, ideally, resources) for federalinvestment to further advance the technologies underlying informationinfrastructure. a strong government role will be valuable in the uncertaintransitional period when it is unclear what nii markets will support and howcommercial firms will act.the nii will become a reality if the research conducted over the past threedecades by industry and universities is continued. this research, much of whichhas been supported by the federal government, has addressed a wide variety ofissues of substantial importance, including technology development andprototyping, fundamental science, and longrange, highrisk studies.networking research was first funded by arpa beginning in the 1960s,expanding to nsf and then nasa, doe, and other parts of the dod in the1980s (see appendix a). this research has laid the foundation for the currentinternet and helped to establish a multibilliondollar industry based on thistechnology. the u.s. leadership in data network technology seems directlyrelated to its preeminence in research in this area, and the committee wouldurge a continued program in experimental network research for this reason. it iseasy to conclude, from the great success of the internet, that all the necessaryresearch has been done. such a conclusion would be incorrect and verydestructive.today, the multiagency hpcc program supports a wide array of researchprojects that will help the country move by the next century to a new,ubiquitous, servicerich communications and information environment. animportant characteristic of many hpcc projects relating to networking is theactive participation by the computer and communications industries. forexample, in the gigabit testbed program, arpa and nsf fund universityresearchers, while industry provides the experimental facilities as well assalaries for those of its employees working with the universities. six testbeds,each with a different focus on technology and applications, have beenimplemented in the past three years. another, similar hpcc universityindustrycollaboration is studying the science and technology of optical networks. theseprojects provide a good model for future collaborations and demonstrate thesynergy that cangovernment roles and opportunities226about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.result from government leadership in helping to set directions, in bringingparticipants together, and in providing financial support for the universitycomponents.important results have come about from speculative basic research fundedby the federal government without industrial participation. while such researchis not always a good candidate for universityindustry collaboration, it isessential to ensuring that a foundation will be laid for the next generation ofexperimental testbeds. moreover, a vigorous program in academic research isnecessary to ensure a continued flow of new professionals into the universityand industrial sector. given the recognized importance of informationinfrastructure to the nation, it seems critical to ensure that an adequate numberof graduates enter the field. however, there is anecdotal evidence that graduatestudents are choosing not to enter the field of networking, and that new phdsare being discouraged from academic careers because it is so difficult to obtainadequate funding.38the committee recognizes a number of critical objectives that can be metthrough a strong continued program in research and development. thegovernment must maintain and expand a vigorous program of research incommunications, networking, information infrastructure, and basic systemsresearch. this program should (1) include a strong experimental component,with prototype development and testbed experimentation, and (2) involveacademia and industry, with specific attention to the factors that have led to thegreat success of the past governmental efforts such as the internet: vision,leadership, technical strength within the government, and cooperation amongthe sectors of the government to achieve a common goal.despite highlevel administration support for the principle of technologicaladvance, concerns expressed within the congress and the administration raisequestions about the availability of resources in general for infrastructurerelatedresearch and development and about the future of the hpcc program inparticular.39 federal support for hpcc or its essential components relating tocomputing and communications technologies will help to determine how wellfounded are assumptions about the continued rapid advance in the highperformance computing and communications technologies that underpin thefeatures of an nii.a number of key areas in which specific technical innovation is required inorder to accomplish the goals of the nii are discussed in chapter 2. these keyareas include the following: core architectural issues for the nii, including the definition andvalidation of a suitable bearer service, a framework for security, andsolutions to key problems in scaling, such as addressing, routing,management, heterogeneity, and mobility;government roles and opportunities227about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. new technologies for access circuits and related network technology,which could provide costeffective delivery of highpeakrate traffic toand from the end locations; key middleware services, including new models for organizing andexploiting online information, models for managing intellectualproperty rights, and a framework for electronic commerce; and computer and communications security.beyond the specific objectives identified for the nii, there are a number ofareas in which advanced research may lead to fresh capabilities for the networkbeyond the ones envisioned today. such capabilities will be key to the evolutionof the nii into yet more powerful and useful constructs over time. in addition toa directed effort addressing the specific technical needs of the nii, a broadprogram of advanced network research should be maintained, as the committeehas recommended in chapter 2.40conclusionthe nii initiative presents exciting opportunities for the federalgovernment to reap far greater returns from the nren program than thoseexperienced to date and to meet a broad range of social and economic needs.the nsf and other hpcc agencies have opportunities to lead in thedevelopment of general and flexible architectures and to experiment with theirimplementation. nist and other agencies have opportunities to promote moreeffectively the kind of standards that will be needed to assure the broadinteroperability characteristic of the open data network described by thiscommittee. above and beyond the roles that seem obvious for individualagencies is a need for sustained leadership and effective coordinationšformanagement in the best sense, reflecting the recognition that the federal role isone of catalyst rather than performer for most of the actions necessary toimplement the nii.notes1. one informal measure of the confusion surrounding the nren program was reflected in thecommittee's efforts, among its members and those from government and elsewhere who briefed it asits early meetings, to define the program. these internal discussions revealed considerable lack ofcertainty and agreement.2. committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinating councilon science, engineering, and technology. 1994. high performance computing andcommunications: towards a national information infrastructure. office of science andtechnology policy, washington, d.c.3. note that a byproduct of leadership in the development and use of infrastructural technologiesshould be strength in the international markets. research, development, and application are onlysome of the steps that can be taken towards that end. other areas, involvgovernment roles and opportunities228about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ing the national institute of standards and technology, the departments of commerce and defense,and other federal agencies, include assuring that as much u.s. technology as possible can beexported for sale in foreign markets and assuring that international connectivity between the u.s.information infrastructure and counterparts overseas is maintained and advanced.4. until now, federal investment has not played a big role in developing information resourcescompared to private investment, except in scientific research and certain government informationarenas.5. cstb held a workshop examining the spectrum of positions and options in the areas of regulationand public investment, insights from which will be captured in a forthcoming report.6. the "telecommunications policy reform" release from the office of the vice president, january11, 1994, summarizes four proposals: make the preservation and advancement of "universal service"an explicit objective of the communications act; charge the federal communications commission(fcc) and the states with continuing responsibility to review the definition of universal service tomeet changing technological, economic, and societal circumstances; establish a federalstate jointboard to make recommendations concerning fcc and state action on the fundamental elements ofuniversal service; and oblige those who provide telecommunications services to contribute to thepreservation and advancement of universal service. these proposals build on principles articulatedby vice president gore in a december speech, including the following: encourage private investment, provide for and protect competition, provide open access to the network, avoid creatinginformation "haves and have nots," and encourage flexible and responsive government action.7. an encouraging sign comes from a survey sponsored by ibm, which found that nearly half ofsmall business executives queried in january 1994 had heard of and were interested in using the"information highway." roper starch worldwide inc. 1994. "the ibm survey on small businessand the information highway," ibm, january.8. there is now a prospect that multiple providersšat least two, a telephone and a cable company,and quite possibly wireless alternativesšmay invest in local infrastructure. for example, alternativeaccess companies were recently allowed by the fcc to provide switched access services, and mostof the major multiple system operators in the cable industry are already deploying fiber in theirbackbone feeder routes as well as testing technologies to support twoway communications servicesover their existing distribution networks. it is not clear that these redundant efforts will conveyproportionate benefits, especially if the cost of this competition in attractive market areas is furtherdelay in upgrading infrastructure in more sparsely settled areas.9. a related need is training to promote responsible use of networks and networkbased resourcesand services.10. for example, nsf announced in october 1993 a new program on networking infrastructure foreducation, jointly run by the computer and information science and engineering and the educationand human resources directorates. it will be linked to the nren program, and it focuses onscience and mathematics education, through anticipated testbeds, infrastructure, and tooldevelopment.11. see, for example, "farnet report on the nap manager/ra and vbns provider draftsolicitation to the national science foundation division of networking and communicationsresearch and infrastructure," august 3, 1992, paper distributed by farnet, waltham, mass. itpresents a comprehensive overview of financial and other issues related to nren. in particular, thereport points out that "the financial implications of various strategies are not homogeneous..." andthat considerations should be identified from the perspectives of the various entities.government roles and opportunities229about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.also, note that when the federal backbone efforts began there were no commercial providerscapable of offering required services. now components of the internet, they have served as testbedsfor experimentation with network services, algorithms, software, and hardware.12. in research and education alone, a predominantly federally supported backbone and networkcomplex is already being replaced by a broader mix of specialty backbone networks (nsi, esnet,vbns), commercial backbone networks (cix, ans co+re, coren, networks of telephonecompanies), and other players (regions, states, metropolitan area networks, competitive accessproviders, cable companies, and others).13. several groups have issued reports in the past year with the intention of influencing publicpolicy and attitudes regarding the nil. see, for example, computer professionals for socialresponsibility (cpsr). 1994. serving the community: a public interest vision of the nationalinformation infrastructure. cpsr, palo alto, calif.; and council on competitiveness. 1993.competition policy: unlocking the national information infrastructure. washington, d.c.,december.at the same time, individual companies have spent considerable sums trying more directly topersuade government officials to share their views on related issues. for example, "in 1992 alone,federal communication commission records show, the bells' telephone operations poured $40million into lobbying, a sum that the bells' longdistance rivals claim is two to three times as muchas they collectively spend." telephone companies also maintain a presence in every majorcommunity, aiding in their interactions with state and local officials. wartzman, rick, and johnharwood. 1994. "for the baby bells, government lobbying is hardly child's play," wall streetjournal, march 15, pp. a1 and a10.14. ten agencies participate in the nren component as users; each implements its own nrenactivities through normal agency structures and coordination with omb and ostp. multiagencycoordination on related research is achieved through the hpccit subcommittee, the hpccnational coordinating office, and the hpccit highperformance communications working group.operation of the federal components of the internet is coordinated by the federal networkingcouncil (fnc), which consists of agency representatives. the fnc and its executive committeeestablish direction, provide further coordination, and address technical, operational, andmanagement issues through working groups and ad hoc task forces. the fnc has established thefederal networking council advisory committee, which consists of representatives from severalsectors, including library sciences, education, computers, telecommunications, information services,and routing vendors, to assure that program goals and objectives reflect the interests of these broadsectors. committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinatingcouncil for science, engineering, and technology, office of science and technology policy. 1994.high performance computing and communications: toward a national information infrastructure.office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c., p. 34.15. the committee acknowledges that some public interest advocacy groups (e.g., the coalition fornetworked information, electronic frontier foundation) have begun to raise similar concerns, butno one has fully addressed the collective concerns of the research, education, and librarycommunities, let alone those of associated publicinterest communities such as health care.16. the distinction was advanced, for example, during presentations by officials at the march 1518,1994, high performance computing and communications symposium organized by arpa; it hasalso been posited during more informal communications between federal officials and committeemembers and staff in march and april 1994.17. building on successes in developing the hpcc and other initiatives, proposals associated withthe national performance review include the notion of a "virtual agency" composed of relevantoffices and personnel from several otherwise separate agencies.government roles and opportunities230about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18. an independent agency rather than an agency reporting to the administration, the fccšassuming proposed regulatory changes are successfully enactedšwill have continued involvementthrough its regulatory and limited standardssetting mission.19. "draft report of the federal internetworking requirements panel," prepared for the nationalinstitute of standards and technology, january 14, 1994.20. other federal agencies can also contribute to the technology development process; the group ofnren agencies has individually and collectively contributed substantially to networkrelatedtechnology development. the emphasis here on arpa and nsf derives from their more broadlycast missions as well as their histories in this area.21. in an address to a united nations conference on telecommunications, vice president gorereferred to an expectation for a "planetary information network" that would be achieved withoutu.s. funding, through private investment. see nash, nathaniel c. 1994. "gore sees privatization ofglobal data links," new york times, march 22, p. d2.22. a new national research council study, "bits of power," is examining some of these issues inthe context of research networking.23. x.400 and x.500, part of the osi suite, are in some use.24. comments on the draft included criticisms by aerospace firms, manufacturers, and foreigngovernments of the prospect of osi abandonment given investments to date in support of osi aswell as criticism that individual agency choices of protocols could be anarchic; overall, however,comments from u.s. parties supported the draft firp report by a factor of two to one. see messmer,ellen. 1994. "critics assail plan to end fed's osi policy," network world, march 21, pp. i and 63;and masud, sam. 1994. "agencies question wisdom of opening up gosip," governmentcomputer news, march 21, pp. i and 104. the twotoone support figure was reported by firpmember milo medin at an ietf meeting in march 1994.25. "draft report of the federal internetworking requirements panel," prepared for the nationalinstitute of standards and technology, january 14, 1994, p. vi.26. wall street journal. 1994. "blocking the information highway," april 8, p. a14.27. olsen, florence. 1994. "feds define wireless needs as spectrum auction nears," governmentcomputer news, february 21, pp. 4849.28. according to scott shenker, in a discussion of the challenge of making the "right decisions"about networking service interfaces, "once a home consumer standard becomes widely adopted,there is tremendous consumer pressure for that standard to remain stable .... "see shenker, scott.1993. "service models and pricing policies for an integrated services interact," prepared for aconference, public access to the internet, john f. kennedy school of government, harvarduniversity, may 2627, june 8 version.29. "draft report of the federal internetworking requirements panel," prepared for the nationalinstitute of standards and technology, january 14, 1994. the committee recognizes that thereremains a problemšthe problem that motivated the firpšof making premature commitments towhat may prove to be the wrong technologies, as some believe happened with the federal gosipstandards.30. however, since users connect to esnet, nsi, and nsfnet via regional networks, networktraffic may be carried by any of these backbones depending on circumstances. for example, anoutgoing message from a university scientist to a nasa investigator may be carried by thensfnet backbone while the return message may go over the nasa science internet (nsi)backbone. the extension of such sharing to other, commercial service providers raises questionsabout funds flows, the prospects for some kind of settlement arrangements (as is currently found intelephony), and implications for arrangements, such as the voucher concept discussed in chapter 5,that direct funds to service providers.the relationships among the three federal research backbone networks is an important considerationfor the immediate and long term future of research networking. if the nasa and doe backbonescontinue in their present form after nsf withdraws from the currentgovernment roles and opportunities231about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nsfnet backbone, patterns and expectations of use may change. if the commercial replacementsfor relevant applications and/or the new vbns become the new central transfer modes, the nasaand doe backbones may be used lessšassuming, based on current conditions, that they haveslower performance. or, the commercial charges for interregional connectivity may encourage usersassociated in some way with nasa or doe to transfer their network use to these agencies'backbones despite slower transfer rates. there is some concern among researchers who use multiplefederal backbones that the changes in nsfnet may result in differential charging andadministrative rules plus differential connectivity in a context in which users may have relativelylittle input.31. in principle, there could be considerable savings in consolidating multiple networks but a greatdeal of engineering would be needed, as well as determination of the extent to which facilities andclientele are duplicated.32. a worstcase scenario envisions a power struggle destroying routing coherence, only smallgroups able to talk to each other, government stepping back in with a heavy hand, and a newregulatory commission or regime. there is intuitive appeal to contemplating taking a few smallsteps now to get it cleanly into private hands. note that over the last 20 years, the evolution of theinternet has been guided by a group that, while it has renamed and reorganized itself a number oftimes, has clearly provided the continuity and direction for the protocol development and thetechnology deployment. at the present time, this group is manifested as a professional organizationcalled the internet society, under which is found the internet architecture board and all the workinggroups that collectively form the internet engineering task force. this group is responsible for thedevelopment and approval of internet standards, which are published as "rfcs" (requests forcomments), as well as for starting new working groups in areas needing fresh initiatives.33. the architecture is complemented by plans for a "metacenter" connecting the four nsfsupercomputer centers, access to which would be supported by the vbns.34. arpa recently funded bell atlantic to develop a washington area interagency advancedtechnology demonstration network involving 2.4gbps sonet and atm technologies supportingdesktop applications using from 100 mbps to 1 gbps (masud, s.a. 1993. "arpa, five agencieswill test tomorrow's highend network," government computer news, november 22, pp. 1 and52).35. note that k12 schools sometimes prefer the cheaper option of buying basic infrastructure topurchasing the highervalueadded integrated service.36. in march 1994, the senate passed h.r. 820, enfolding s.4, included title vi, the "informationtechnology applications act of 1994," the origins of which date to legislation proposed by albertgore as a senator in 1992 section 102 amends the highperformance computing act of 1991provisions for the nren program, indicating that program funds should be targeted to acquisitionof commercially available communications networking services; "customized" services may becontracted for if commercial services are not available. this formulation is considered to relax thestrict dichotomy between experimental and production networks advanced earlier (beginning in1992) in the development of this legislation.37. "leading telco ceos jointly support clintongore technology initiative." 1993. press releasetransmitted via electronic mail, march 26. telecommunications executives called for "a shift ofemphasis from government's direct support of networks," including " ... a target structure comprisedof separate experimental and production networks."38. national science foundation. 1992. research priorities in networking and communications,workshop report. nsf, washington, d.c., april, p. 5. the broader problem of disincentives facingstudents and faculty interested in experimental computer science is discussed in: computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council.government roles and opportunities232about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1993. academic careers for experimental computer scientists and engineers. national academypress, washington, d.c.39. cstb is currently assessing the hpcc program, pursuant to a legislative request.40. committee members also participated in the winter 1994 nii research forum hosted by nistand sponsored by several organizations, which generated a wideranging list of detailedrecommendations for research that is believed to complement the higherlevel list presented in thisreport.government roles and opportunities233about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government roles and opportunities234about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes235about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes236about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix afederal networking: the path to theinternetdevelopment and growth of the internetša thumbnail sketchthe federal networking legacyfederal networking activities, in the context of this report, originated withthe arpanet program, itself the seed for the larger and more amorphousinternet, which in turn has provided a foundation for the national research andeducation network (nren) program. beginning in the late 1960s the u.s.defense department's advanced research projects agency (arpa) funded thehighrisk, highpayoff development of the arpanet, a 56kbps backbonenetwork.1 the first arpanet node was installed at the university ofcalifornia at los angeles in september 1969, thus launching the first packetswitching network; by 1971 approximately 20 nodes had been installed, andarpa was funding 30 different university sites as part of the arpanetprogram. in the mid1970s, the tcp/ip protocols were developed to linktogether different packet networks. in the late 1970s and early 1980s, researchversions of local area networks and workstations were connected to thearpanet, thus forming what is now more widely known as the internet. atthe time of the transition from the original arpanet protocol, the networkcommunication protocol, to tcp in 1983, only a few hundred computers wereon the nascent internet, which connected only a handful of networks.2use of the arpanet was expanded in the 1970s to the computer scienceresearch community and to segments of the science research communitysupported by the federal missionoriented agencies. as a result of this expandeduse and more regular operations, in july 1975 arpaappendix a237about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transferred arpanet management (previously the responsibility of bolt,beranek, and newman) as well as the network measurement center(previously the responsibility of ucla) to the defense communicationsagency (dca; now the defense information systems agency) with theexpectation that direct experience with packet switching by dca wouldultimately be of wider benefit to the department of defense. meanwhile, duringthe late 1970s and early 1980s, a number of federally supported, disciplinespecific networks were established. among these was mfenet, which wasfunded by the department of energy (doe) to give academic physicists doingresearch in nuclear fusion access to supercomputers at the lawrence livermorenational laboratory. mfenet specified and implemented its owncommunications protocols. two other federally supported networks were thedoefunded hepnet (for highenergy physics research) and the space physicsanalysis network (span) funded by the national aeronautics and spaceadministration (nasa). span and hepnet were part of a global decnetbased network that supported collaboration by scientists working in the spacesciences and physics.the national science foundation (nsf) has played a critical role in thesecond decade of research networking's evolution, funding research intorelevant technologies as well as network deployment and use. in the periodfrom 1980 to 1986, nsf supported the development of csnet, a "logicalnetwork" for computer science researchers. csnet was a network of networks,one component of which used the internet protocols over an x.25 public datanetwork. it also included the arpanet and phonenet, a telephonebasedelectronic mail relaying system. by 1985, csnet had links to over 170university, industrial, and government research organizations and numerousgateways to networks in other countries. in 1987 csnet merged withbitnet, a network serving users from academic institutions that was initiatedin 19801981. csnet operations were continued under the corporation forresearch and education networking, whose operating costs were completelycovered by member organizations' dues. its mission apparently accomplished,csnet service was discontinued in the fall of 1991.3in 1985, nsf initiated a program of networking and computer support forcenters with supercomputers to be used by researchers across the science andengineering research community. this program began with a memorandum ofunderstanding with arpa to allow nsffunded supercomputer centers andselected researchers to use the arpanet. nsf instituted the nsf connectionsprogram in 1986 to broaden the base of network users with their own computerfacilities and eventually to help universities achieve access to supercomputers(by supplying supporting hardware and/or telecommunications lines for direct,pointtopoint connections); also in 1986, it launched the nsfnet networkbackbone proappendix a238about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gram. after significant congestion was experienced in 1987, the backbone wasupgraded to t1 service (1.5 mbps) that became operational in 1988. between1986 and 1987, the pointtopoint connections program grew to include supportfor more complete networking arrangements that would collect network trafficand provide access to the limited nsfnet. that period began with funding forsuranet and nysernet regional network proposals and saw over a dozenregional networks come into being (e.g., barrnet, midnet, pscnet, sesquinet,and westnet).4 the connections program evolved to emphasize connectinguniversities and other research and educational institutions to the internet, andunder the new very high speed backbone network (vbns) orientation (see"continuing evolution of provisions," below) it is expected to supportinstitutional needs for vbns access (with awards based on evaluation ofcompeting proposals).the nsf's funding arrangements have given rise to a threetier structure ofcampus (primarily universities and research institutions), regional, andbackbone networks serving the research community (see figure 1.2 inchapter 1).5 this conceptualization is complemented by commercial networks,international networks, and other interconnections that have resulted in aglobally interconnected mesh of networks known as the internet.6nsfnetšthe research and education communities' link to the internetthe late 1980s witnessed what might be called a rationalization of federalnetworking activities of the previous two decades. initial hardware, software,and reliability problems among regional networks helped to motivate thedevelopment of network operations centers; such a center became an element ofthe 1987 nsfnet backbone solicitation. according to one characterization,"nsfnet has a very special role in the [internet] hierarchy: it acts as a generictransit, routing, and switching network for research and education networks."7synergistic growth of nsfnet and the internetthe concept of what the nsfnet could be and recognition of theproblems it posed for parties operating and using it expanded steadily throughthe late 1980s and early 1990s. the backbone network speed was upgradedfrom 56 kbps to t1 and then t3; this backbone (45mbps) network grew to asize of 19 nodes, including 16 sponsored by nsf and 3 serving interagencycommunication needs. in 1989, 20 years after its birth at ucla, the arpanetwas officially decommissioned; its descenappendix a239about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dent, the nsfnet, inherited its role as the research and education communities'backbone network.through the nsfnet program nsf spurred the growth of the internet andprovided a national demonstration of the feasibility of the technology and themarket potential for open data networking. nsf also nurtured the broadening ofthe community served by the nsfnet through its requirements that thesupercomputer centers and regional networks it supported develop their marketsand move toward selfsufficiency; the phased withdrawal of financial supportfor regional networks, now linked to the termination of support for thensfnet backbone, is the latest manifestation of nsf's promotion of selfsufficiency in the dispersed networkbased activity it has fostered.continuing evolution of provisions for research and education networkingas discussed in chapter 5, the shift from direct provision of broadbasedbackbone network service through the nsfnet backbone to an expectationthat commodity backbone and interregional networking services will beprocured directly by users or their institutions is another part of a pattern ofemphasis on eventual selfsufficiency. the new nsfnet, circa 1994, willinvolve a fournode (at least initially), very high speed backbone networkservice (vbns), with network access points (naps) for connections amongvarious networks serving the research and education communities and others(see box 1.3 in chapter 1). the naps themselves may eventually be turnedover to participating networks for funding as well as management, much ascommodity backbone transport is being handed off imminently.8 nsf hasindicated that support for connection to the vbns is expected to be linked toproposals for expanding enhanced capabilities provided by regional networks,which will effectively serve as capillaries for an otherwise small vbns.9the national research and education network programš expansionfrom the internet base and earlier arpanet effortsthe nren program emerged during the period from 1987 to 1989 as partof the launch of the high performance computing program (now known as thehigh performance computing and communications (hpcc) initiative). withinthe nren framework, different federal agencies (notably, nsf, nasa, doe,and arpa) launched or expanded separate but interconnected networkingefforts; these became components of the internet.10 these networks resultedfrom the early understanding by the four dominant nren agencies of thepotential value of such services to the researchers that they fund.11appendix a240about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.each agency backbone network utilizes packet switching technologydeveloped by the arpanet as well as the results of early internet projects atuniversities and national laboratories plus complementary research in industry;many of these projects fueled commercial spinoffs and business development.the arpa packet radio program, for example, supported development of theprotocols that are the basis of the internet; early protocol developers used thearpanet to support their collaboration. the earliest tcp protocol work wasundertaken in the mid1970s at stanford university, bolt, beranek, andnewman (bbn), and university college in london; the internet work was thusinternational from the outset. the arpanet also inspired a number ofcommercial data networks (such as telenet) in the mid1970s.mission agency networks serve specific communities: space and earthscientists in the case of the nasa science internet; scientists doing energyrelated research in the case of esnet; defenserelated researchers and others inthe case of the various networks of arpa, including dartnet and especiallythe terrestrial wideband network twbnet; and the broadest assortment ofscientists and disciplines in the case of nsfnet. some agencies, such as thenational institutes of health and within it the national library of medicine(nlm), have launched networkbased information services that depend onadditional commercial networks for access.12the four principal hpcc agencies also support the development of newand enhanced networking and related technologies under the nren umbrella.arpa, for example, has emphasized scalable architectures as well as highspeed computing and networking, exploring concepts and implementationissues with nsf through the gigabit testbed activities and now also through theoptical network program.13 doe and nasa support development of "enablingtechnologies" as well as applications in support of their mission needs. forexample, doe has contributed to the casa gigabit testbed through losalamos national laboratory efforts. this work supported doe's missioninterest in highspeed networking and progress in global climate modeling,quantum chemical reaction dynamics, and threedimensional seismic profiling.growth of internet use and development beyond the research communityconnectivity for the research community has driven the development ofthe internet, but over the past five years access by the k12 education andlibrary communities has grown more rapidly, aided in part by outreachprograms from the research community and the hpcc funding agencies. doe,nasa, and the national oceanic and atmospheric adappendix a241about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ministration (noaa), for example, have begun to package and provide accessto scientific data and tools in programs intended for k12 educationalapplications. nsf has also supported the broadening of internet access throughpilot projects for k12 networking support through the education and humanresources directorate and through pilot projects for library networkingsupported by the department of education's title iid program. finally, hpccagencies have also reached out to other, specialized communities throughspecific applications and services. the nlm's programs aimed at health careresearchers and parties within the health care delivery system are an obviousand important example.internet product development has also grown significantly since 1980,building on federally funded research. in addition to the commercial spread ofthe tcp/ip protocols, a related development was the incorporation of the unixoperating system into local area network (lan) and highperformanceworkstation products, building on efforts supported by arpa at bbn and at theuniversity of california at berkeley. in the 1990s, growth in commercialactivity has been most evident for communications and information services,growth for which nsfnet has been a catalyst. for example, psi was spun offfrom nsyernet; ans was an outgrowth of the merit regional networkingactivities; cerfnet was launched by general atomics, which also runs thensffunded san diego supercomputer center.14 around 1990 a consciouseffort was made to link commercial and nonprofit information service providerssuch as dow jones, dialog, nlm, and carl to the internet.transition to a new era in networkingthe latest federal initiative relating to networking is the expansion of thehpcc to include the new information infrastructure technology andapplications (iita) program. this direction was made possible by the highperformance computing act of 1991 (pl 102194), although specific fundingauthorization did not come until 1994. agency program activity under iitacommenced in 1993, building on the generation of ideas relating to socallednational challenge areas (manufacturing, education, health, and libraries).according to an official description of iita activities, the gigabit testbedprogram will continue to foster advanced technologies and their integration insupport of prototyping for national challenge efforts. activities will fall intofour broad areas: information infrastructure services; systems development andsupport environments; intelligent interfaces; and national challenges(apparently, specific applications).15 at this time it is not known howšin termsof both complementarity and substitutionšthe growth of iita will affectactivities under the nren umbrella.appendix a242about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the internet todayšwhat it is and how itworksthe internet, a global interconnection of computer networks spanning 61countries, over 2 million host computers, and an estimated 15 million users,provides paths for communication among these computers. this interconnectionpermits a range of activities to be accomplishedšamong them exchange ofelectronic mail (email), exchange of files, and remote login to computersšandprovides access to a growing array of online information. used today by manydifferent communities in support of collaboration, cooperation, anddissemination of information, the internet is viewed by its creators as a publicresource.the internet is an open network. any individual or organization iswelcome to attach and become a part of the internet. all that is required is aterminal or a computer with the correct software and the ability to pay the costs.the necessary software is now available to attach nearly all kinds of computers,including personal computers, and the options for attaching are expanding. forthe most part, there are no limitations on the purposes for which the networkmay be used.16features and use of the internetthe internet's servicesthe most popular service of the internet has been email. it exists inseveral forms, including mail between individual users and mail to"newsgroups," which are ongoing group discussions on many different topics.although mail and newsgroups may dominate internet usage today, this patternis changing with the rapid rise in applications that provide access to information(figure a.1). tools such as worldwide web (and its most popular userinterface, mosaic) are transforming the use of the internet. chapter 2 includesinformation on these and other new internet services.another new service now in experimental use but not yet in production ismultimedia teleconferencing. in addition, audio, video, and shared workspacetools are now emerging from the research community, and content is comingfrom a variety of multimedia information providers. the coming availability ofsuch services and the expected wide deployment of the next generation of verypowerful workstations will have considerable impact on the required capacityand resultant costs of the internet. (chapter 5 discusses in some detail the issuesof costs and pricing for use of the internet.)appendix a243about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure a.1 internet services: global information space. courtesy of the internet society, reston, va.appendix a244about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how can one attach to the internet?most users of the internet today are affiliated with institutions. thecomputer they use is attached to a lan, to which other end users are alsoattached; this lan, in turn, is connected by a router to a regional or wide areanetwork. for users located in homes or at isolated business sites, there are twoways to attach. one is to use a terminal to connect to a computer (host) that isalready attached to the internetša very common approach to attachment today.the other is to equip the local computer with internet software and connect notto a remote host, but to an internet router. this mode of connection, althoughsomewhat more complex (and more expensive), permits the local computerdirect access to a fuller range of services, for example file transfer.it is also possible to use a dialup connection to pass packets into theinternet; two of the common protocols for this purpose are slip and ppp,which are often mentioned in software packages offered for personalcomputers. the limited bandwidth of dialup lines may constrain the use ofsome internet services such as teleconferencing, but there are today few costeffective alternatives at higher speeds. this issue is discussed further in chapter 5.what does it mean to be a part of the internet?to connect to the internet, an end node must run software that implementswhat are called protocols. the various protocols of the internet define thepacket formats, the rules for packet exchange, the higherlevel servicesavailable, such as forwarding of email, and so on. the internet protocols areoften known by the names of the most important two, tcp and ip. manycomputers now come with the software for internet connection built in, andsuch software is commercially available for essentially any other computertoday. computers in the ibm pc class, the macintosh, and a range of unixmachines are all very common end nodes on the internet.because the internet is a somewhat amorphous collection of networks andend nodes, the question of what it means to attach to or be a part of the internetcan cause confusion. at the technical level, an end node is a part of the internetif (1) it implements the required protocols (the internet protocols, including ipand tcp), (2) it has an internet address that includes a network number knownin the routing tables in the internet routers, and (3) it has some sort ofcommunications connection that permits it to exchange network informationelements (ip packets) with the other 2 million machines on the internet.an alternative to connecting to the internet at the low (packet) levelappendix a245about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is to connect at a higher (application) level. even without packetlevelconnectivity, higherlevel services can be interconnected through some sort ofgateway. thus, for example, interconnected mail systems permit the exchangeof email among a pool of users that is much larger than the group of users whohave ipconnected hosts for mail exchange. although users interconnectedthrough a relatively highlevel (application) gateway may feel that they are "onthe internet," their perspective is limited; as new services become available overthe internet, mailonly users will discover that such services are not accessibleto them.of the large private corporate networks, some have been implementedusing the internet protocols, and some using other, vendorspecific protocols.because of concerns about possible breaches of security, these networks are notusually connected directly to the internet by a packet router. instead, a higherlevel service gateway is more commonly used, which does permit mailinteroperation but may limit other services. chapter 2 discusses the importanceof designing a network architecture so as to provide users a range of choices inlevel of connectivity to the network, and it addresses issues of network securityand its relation to packet routers and higherlevel service gateways.internal components of the internetthe typical user may be satisfied to know that the internet is a systemcapable of moving data from one place to another as requested by the attachedcomputers. but within the internet is the wide range of technologies from whichit is built.the core technical concept of the internet is packet switching, which wasproposed about 30 years ago as a very efficient way of sharing very expensivelongdistance telecommunications circuits. a packet (a small amount of datawith a destination address on the front) can be put in line with packets fromother hosts and sent in turn down a link. this very fine grained sharing allowsthe cost of the link to be divided among many users.internally, the internet is composed of networks, almost 20,000 of them. anetwork is a logical entity that may in turn be composed of a number ofphysical network elements called subnetworks. some of these networks arecollections of lans at campus locations, for example, ethernets and tokenrings; some are longdistance networks, such as the nsfnet backbonenetwork; and some are regional or statelevel networks. each network has aunique network number that is part of the address of the end nodes, orcomputers, attached to each net. addresses are organized in a nested mannerand are represented by four elements,appendix a246about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.which are written as four numbers separated by dots. sometimes more than oneelement is used to name a network or a subnetšif we used just one field toname networks, we could name only 256 nets, because each field holds only256 values. the address of a particular machine at the massachusetts instituteof technology, the one on which much of this appendix was written, is18.23.0.108. this means that the machine is host 108 on subnetwork 23.0 onnetwork 18, with network 18 covering all of mit and subnet 23.0 covering thebuilding in which the end node (this author's computer) is located.the device that connects networks together and passes packets amongthem is called a router. internet routers are now commercial products, and manythousands of routers currently exist within the internet. as the name indicates,routers deal with routing, addressing, management of telecommunications links,and other issues of operation. in particular, routers maintain routing tables,which indicate for each of the known network numbers how to reach that net.at the end of march 1994 there were 19,373 networks active in the internet.17with the growth of the internet, routing tables have become larger, andmaintaining them in a consistent state is now becoming more challenging.routing tables are maintained through a combination of online automaticmessage exchange and manual control. in early 1994 nsf announced an awardfor an internet routing arbiter project intended to facilitate the logicalinterconnection of the networks attached to the internet.18the design of the telecommunications technology out of which the internetis built has matured over the last decade. when the internet was first conceived,the only wide area technology available consisted of simple pointtopointtelecommunications links operating at various speeds. now, a range of verysophisticated technologies exists for passing packets between routers, includingframe relay, smds, asynchronous transfer mode, and so on. however, thisincrease in sophistication in the internal components of the internet has notchanged its basic nature as perceived by the end user, except that the newtechnologies are now facilitating provision of a broader range of services, suchas realtime video, and are permitting broader and less expensive deployment ofservices.national and global interconnection of internet usersno single organization owns or operates the internet. instead, severalthousand organizations separately operate and administer their individual parts,which combine to form the total internet (figure a.2).19most countries have some sort of backbone or longdistance networkappendix a247about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure a.2 growth of registered ip networks, 1989 to 1993. graph courtesy of the internet society, reston, va.appendix a248about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spanning the country. the united states has a number of such "nets," someprovided by the government and some built for commercial use. attached tothese backbone networks are more localized networks that serve regions, states,or cities. finally, there are the networks that cover an institutionša university,corporation, or similar facilityšand there are networks that permit individualsto connect from homes and businesses.federal agencies have addressed the problem of interaction andinterconnection within the united states through the concept of exchangepoints, first implemented as the federal internet exchanges (fixes; includingfixwest at nasa ames research center and fixeast at the university ofmaryland, college park). the multiple paths between the fixes areindividually subject to each agency's policybased constraints on usage. thecommercial internet exchange (cix) added a third, similar exchange point forcommercial internet access providers, and the network access points outlined inthe new nsf network program solicitation (see box 1.3 in chapter 1) willfurther generalize the implementation of exchange points. experience with andexpectations for these network exchanges are motivating further work in thearea of routing funded by nsf as part of its networking program.20access to and interconnection among the pieces of the internet is offeredthrough common carriers, leasedline access providers, and dialup accessproviders, many of which are interconnected. for example, metropolitan fibersystems operates fiber links between falls church, virginia, and college park,maryland, that are known as metropolitan area ethernet or maeeast and thatdirectly link sprint, psi, uunet, nsfnet, and the main data line to europe.sprint leases circuits to uunet, america online, digital express, and otherproviders of internet access; mci has an equity interest in ans and leases linesto prodigy. dialup access is available from providers that range from residencebased small businesses with a single computer, modem, and telephone line tocorporate communications concerns (e.g., ge information services or americaonline).21 provision of access to the internet can be and has been launched as avery small business as well as a big business; one entrepreneur reported that histotal hardware cost for starting a 16telephoneline service was under $15,000.22the internet's very decentralized administration succeeds because it isgoverned by a set of defining conventions (the internet protocols and the agreedto operating rules) that specify what each operator must do to be an effectivepart of the internet. these rules define the formats of messages, how routing isdone, conventions for managing the network elements, and so on.appendix a249about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.oversight of the internetinternet societythe internet's very decentralized organization is, of necessity, balanced bymechanisms for coordination and oversight of key issues and concerns. of theseveral organizations that play a coordinating role, perhaps the most importantis the internet society.23 the international internet society provides a means forglobal cooperation and coordination for the internet and its internetworkingtechnologies and applications. its members reflect the breadth of the entireinternet community and include individuals, corporations, nonprofitorganizations, and government agencies.the internet society's principal purpose is to maintain and extend thedevelopment and availability of the internet and its associated technologies andapplicationsšboth as an end in itself and as a means of enabling organizations,professions, and individuals worldwide to more effectively collaborate,cooperate, and innovate in their respective fields and interests. its specific goalsand purposes include the following: development, maintenance, evolution, and dissemination of standardsfor the internet and its internetworking technologies and applications.internet standards are formulated by the internet engineering taskforce, an openmembership body that currently operates under theauspices of the internet society; growth and evolution of the internet architecture. the internetarchitecture board (iab), which offers architectural guidance for theinternet, sits under the internet society; maintenance and evolution of effective administrative processesneeded for operation of the global internet and for internetworking. forexample, the internet assigned number authority, which isresponsible for the allocation of network numbers for the internet, is afunction of the iab; education and research related to the internet and internetworking, andthe collection and dissemination of relevant information; and harmonization of actions and activities at international levels tofacilitate the development and availability of the internet. the internetsociety is currently establishing liaison relationships with suchorganizations as the international organization for standardization andthe international telecommunications union.u.s. federal governmentas outlined above, the u.s. government historically has played a veryappendix a250about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.important role in the overall coordination of the internet, but this role isdiminishing with the internet's increasing commercialization andinternationalization. however, the government continues to provide someguidance in key areas, as in the recent award by nsf to provide coordination ofinternet routing. in addition coordination among federal agency networkingactivities is provided through the federal networking council (fnc; which wasestablished in 1990 with links to the office of science and technology policy(ostp) overall, the high performance computing and communicationsinformation technology effort under ostp, and the office of management andbudget) and the fnc advisory committee, which consists of representativesfrom the nongovernmental constituencies served by federal networks. the fncoversees various working groups (e.g., the engineering and operationsworking group concerned with network technology design andimplementation, and the federal engineering and planning group that conductstechnical analysis and operational coordination of the federal agency networks).24paying for use of the internetin the early days of the internet, most of the funding for the facilities andalso for network use came from the u.s. government, as discussed in chapter 5.briefly, most of the costs today are covered by payment from the various users,both institutional and individual, that attach to and are a part of the internet. atypical payment scheme is a monthly access fee, although other patterns ofpayment can be found. for an institution, the costs of installing, operating, andsupporting the local networks and related infrastructure at the campus areusually much greater than the access fees paid to the regional or longdistanceinternet provider.notes1. kleinrock, leonard. 1976. "the arpanet." pp. 304314 in queueing systems, volume 2:computer applications. section 5.4. wiley interscience, new york.2. cerf, vinton. 1993. "how the internet came to be." in the online user's encyclopedia bybernard aboba. addisonwesley, new york, november.3. cerf, vinton. n.d. "a brief history of the internet and related networks," distributedelectronically.4. to facilitate communication and coordination among regional networks and coordinationbetween those networks and nsf, the federation of academic research networks (farnet) wasfounded independently in 1987.5. mandelbaum, richard, and paulette a. mandelbaum. 1992. "the strategic future of the midlevel networks." pp. 59118 in building information infrastructure. harvard university press,cambridge, mass.6. aiken, robert, hanswerner braun, and peter ford. 1992. "nsf implementationappendix a251about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.plan for the interim nren," gaa21174, ga project 3900, san diego supercomputer center,draft, may.7. aiken et al., 1992, "nsf implementation plan for the interim nren," p. 8.8. aiken et al., 1992, "nsf implementation plan for the interim nren."9. stephen wolff, national science foundation, remarks at national net '94 conference,washington, d.c., april 7.10. "a key activity of the nren program is to enhance the interconnection technologies andstrategies for both federal and nonfederal networks, without interfering with the autonomousmanagement of each component network." aiken et al., 1992, "nsf implementation plan for theinterim nren," p. 3.11. computer science and technology board (ctsb), national research council. 1988. toward anational research network. national academy press, washington, d.c. (the computer scienceand technology board became the computer science and telecommunications board in 1990.)12. see agency matrix in committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federalcoordinating council for science, engineering, and technology, office of science and technologypolicy. 1994. high performance computing and communications: toward a national informationinfrastructure. office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c., pp. 2627.13. the gigabit testbed program is funded by nsf and arpa and involves industry contributionsand participation as well as participation by universities and government laboratories. seecommittee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, federal coordinating council forscience, engineering, and technology, office of science and technology policy, 1994, highperformance computing and communications: toward a national information infrastructure.14. cerf, 1993, "how the internet came to be."15. national coordination office for hpcc. 1994. information infrastructure technology andapplications. office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c., february.16. for those parts of the internet installed by the nsf in support of scholarly and academicactivities, there are policy restrictions on the uses of the network, but these restrictions are expectedto vanish from the core of the network with the transition to commercial provision of internet service.17. personal communication, elise gerich, merit inc., april 1994.18. "[the routing arbiter's] role will be to promote internet routing and stability, estabiish networktopology and policy databases, develop procedures to resolve problems between network entities,develop advanced routing technologies, provide simplified routing strategies, and promotedistributed operation and management of the internet." part of the challenge is to develop newtechnologies, including highperformance, workstationbased route servers. see university ofsouthern california. 1994. "nsf announces major network awards: california, new york, andmichigan groups win." press release, february 15, distributed electronically.19. no firm number exists for the number of organizations involved; the range is perhaps from alower bound of 2,000 to 3,000 to an upper bound of 10,000 to 12,000. individuals contacted by thecommittee remarked on how interesting the question wasšit is a measure of the internet's truedecentralization that we cannot count or even identity all the internet players.20. aiken et al., 1992, "nsf implementation plan for the interim nken"; and huston, geoff. 1993."connectivity within the internetša commentary." australian academic and research network,canberra, australia.21. stewart, thomas a. 1994. "the netplex: it's a new silicon valley," fortune, march 7, pp.98104.appendix a252about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22. lewis, peter h. 1994. "a traffic jam on the data highway," new york times, february 2, pp.di and ds.23. material on the internet society was adapted from an electronic frequently asked questionsdocument, "what is the internet society?" dated march 5, 1994.24. aiken et al., 1992, "nsf implementation plan for the interim nren."appendix a253about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bsample principle setsnii principles and objectives promote privatesector investment through appropriate tax andregulatory policies. extend the ''universal service" concept to ensure that informationresources are available to all at affordable prices. act as catalyst to promote technological innovation and newapplications. promote seamless, interactive, userdriven operation of the nii. ensure information security and network reliability. improve management of the radio frequency spectrum, an increasinglycritical source. protect intellectual property rights. coordinate with other levels of government and with other nations. provide access to government information and improve governmentprocurement.source: information infrastructure task force (ntia). 1993. thenational information infrastructure: agenda for action. ntia, u.s.department of commerce, september 15.appendix b254about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.seven principles from the telecommunicationspolicy roundtable universal access š in our information age, everyone has a right toaffordable news, education and government information. informationthat is essential to the functioning of citizens in a democracy should befree. freedom to communicate š information is a twoway street. thedesign of the new networks should aid twoway audio and videocommunication from anyone to any individual, group or network. vital civic sector š the new networks should allow all groups andindividuals to freely express their ideas and opinions. the newnetworks should include a way for us to build communities. diverse and competitive marketplace š no one should ever controlboth the wire or wires into our home and the content of the programsthat go over those wires. equitable workplace š workers must be valued and protected in thenew electronic workplace. nondiscriminatory practices must form thecore of the new information marketplace. privacy protection š privacy should be carefully protected andextended. democratic policy making š every american deserves to be heard onthis complex set of issues.source: telecommunications policy roundtable. 1993. newcoalition unveils public interest blueprint for america's 21st centurytelecommunications highway. center for media education, washington,d.c., via electronic mail news release october 26.appendix b255about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic frontier foundation on principles diversity of information sources: promote a fully interactiveinfrastructure in which the first amendment flourishes, allowing thegreatest possible diversity of view points; universal service: ensure a minimum level of affordable informationand communication service for all americans; free speech and common carriage: guarantee infrastructure accessregardless of the content of the message that the user is sending; privacy: protect the security and privacy of all communications carriedover the infrastructure, and safeguard the fourth and fifth amendmentrights of all who use the information infrastructure; development of public interest applications and services: ensure thatpublic interest applications and services which are not produced by thecommercial market are widely available and affordable.source: electronic frontier foundation. 1993. new effinfrastructure policy statement: the open platform campaign. electronicfrontier foundation, cambridge, mass., november 3, via electronic mailfrom daniel j. weitzner, senior staff counsel.appendix b256about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fundamental principles from the computerprofessionals for social responsibility universal access. all people should have affordable access to theinformation infrastructure. freedom to communicate. the information infrastructure should enableall people to effectively exercise their fundamental right to communicate. vital civic sector. the information infrastructure must have a vital civicsector at its core. diverse and competitive marketplace. the information infrastructureshould ensure competition among ideas and information providers. equitable workplace. new technologies should be used to enhance thequality of work and to promote equity in the workplace. privacy. privacy should be carefully protected and extended. democratic policymaking. the public should be fully involved in policymaking for the information infrastructure. functional integrity. the functions provided by the nii must bepowerful, versatile, welldocumented, stable, reliable, and extensible.source: computer professionals for social responsibility (cpsr).1993. serving the community: a public interest vision of the national information infrastructure. cpsr, palo alto, calif.appendix b257about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.draft: april 21, 1994principles for providing and using personal informationpreamblethe united states is committed to building a national informationinfrastructure (nii) to meet the information needs of its citizens. thisinfrastructure, essentially created by advances in technology, isexpanding the level of interactivity, enhancing communication, andallowing easier access to services. as a result, many more users arediscovering new, previously unimagined uses for personal information. inthis environment, we are challenged to develop new principles to guideparticipants in the nii in the fair use of personal information.traditional fair information practices, developed in the age of paperrecords, must be adapted to this new environment where information andcommunications are sent and received over networks on which usershave very different capabilities, objectives and perspectives. specifically,new principles must acknowledge that all members of our society(government, industry, and individual citizens) share responsibility forensuring the fair treatment of individuals in the use of personalinformation, whether in paper or electronic form. moreover, the principlesshould recognize that the interactive nature of the nii will empowerindividuals to participate in protecting information about themselves. thenew principles should also make it clear that this is an active responsibilityrequiring openness about the process, a commitment to fairness andaccountability, and continued attention to security. finally, principles mustrecognize the need to educate all participants about the new informationinfrastructure and how it will affect their lives.these "principles for providing and using personal information"recognize the changing roles of government and industry in informationcollection and use. thus they are intended to be equally applicable topublic and private entities that collect and use personal information.however, these principles are not intended to address all informationuses and protection concerns for each segment of the economy orfunction of government. rather, they should provide the framework fromwhich specialized principles can be developed.i. general principles for the national information infrastructurea. information privacy principle1. individuals are entitled to a reasonable expectation of informationprivacy.appendix b258about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.b. information integrity principlesparticipants in the nii rely upon the integrity of the information itcontains. it is therefore the responsibility of all participants to ensure thatintegrity. in particular, participants in the nii should, to the extentreasonable:1. ensure that information is secure, using whatever means areappropriate;2. ensure that information is accurate, timely, complete, and relevantfor the purpose for which it is given.ii. principle for information collectors (i.e. entities that collect personal information directly from the individual)a. collection principlebefore individuals make a decision to provide personal information,they need to know how it is intended to be used, how it will be protected,and what will happen if they provide or withhold the information.therefore, collectors of this information should:1. tell the individual why they are collecting the information, whatthey expect it will be used for, what steps they will take to protectits confidentiality and integrity, the consequences of providing orwithholding information, and any rights of redress.iii. principles for information users (i.e. information collectors and entities that obtain, process, send or store personal information)a. acquisition and use principlesusers of personal information must recognize and respect the stakeindividuals have in the use of personal information. therefore, users ofpersonal information should:1. assess the impact on personal privacy of current or plannedactivities before obtaining or using personal information;2. obtain and keep only information that could reasonably beexpected to support current or planned activities and use theinformation only for those or compatible purposes;3. assure that personal information is as accurate, timely, completeand relevant as necessary for the intended use.appendix b259about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.b. protection principleusers of personal information must take reasonable steps to preventthe information they have from being disclosed or altered improperly.such users should:1. use appropriate managerial and technical controls to protect theconfidentiality and integrity of personal information.c. education principlethe full effect of the nii on both data use and personal privacy is notreadily apparent, and individuals may not recognize how their lives can beaffected by networked information. therefore, information users should:1. educate themselves, their employees, and the public about howpersonal information is obtained, sent, stored, and protected, andhow these activities affect others.d. fairness principlesbecause information is used to make decisions that affect individuals,those decisions should be fair. information users should, as appropriate:1. provide individuals a reasonable means to obtain, review, andcorrect their own information;2. inform individuals about any final actions taken against them andprovide individuals with means to redress harm resulting fromimproper use of personal information;3. allow individuals to limit the use of their personal information ifthe intended use is incompatible with the original purpose forwhich it was collected, unless that use is authorized by law.iv. principles for individuals who provide personal information a. awareness principleswhile information collectors have a responsibility to tell individualswhy they want information about them, individuals also have aresponsibility to understand the consequences of providing personalinformation to others. therefore, individuals should obtain adequate,relevant information about:1. planned primary and secondary uses of the information;appendix b260about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2. any efforts that will be made to protect the confidentiality andintegrity of the information;3. consequences for the individual of providing or withholdinginformation;4. any rights of redress the individual has if harmed by improper useof the information.b. redress principlesindividuals should be protected from harm resulting from inaccurateor improperly used personal information. therefore, individuals should, asappropriate:1. be given means to obtain their information and be provided theopportunity to correct inaccurate information that could harm them;2. be informed of any final actions taken against them and whatinformation was used as a basis for the decision;3. have a means of redress if harmed by an improper use of theirpersonal information.source: national information infrastructure task force, informationpolicy committee, working group on privacy in the nii. 1994. "requestfor comments on the draft principles for providing and using personal information and their commentary." washington, d.c., may 4. the draftprinciples for providing and using personal information and theassociated commentary are the first work product of the informationinfrastructure task force's work group on privacy. they are intended toupdate the code of fair information practices that was developed in theearly 1970s. while many of the code's principles are still valid, the codeitself was developed in an era when paper records were the norm.appendix b261about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cuser support servicesthe increasing dependence of multiple communities of users on networksrequires that the internet have the following characteristics: it must beaccessible at a low cost, be user friendly, and have a capacity and features thatenable effective and meaningful access to needed resources. also needed (at aminimum) is the following support service infrastructure:1 education and training, as well as programs and services, to assistusers in utilizing the network; outreach services to identify new communities of users and theirdistinct information needs; and coordination between network providers and service organizations foran integrated approach to supplying user support services and access.the most basic of the needed services is a "white pages" capability thatwill permit users to find each other on the network. the governmentfundednetwork information center has traditionally operated a user naming service.however, a centralized approach of the kind practiced in the past is no longerappropriate, because the network has grown, and a centralized approach doesnot scale well.at this time, the government should support the planning and deploymentof a distributed user naming service. it could support the internet engineeringtask force (ietf), in conjunction with other standardsoriented groups, in theselection of a set of protocols for this purpose. in addition, the government(perhaps through the advanced research projects agency) should fund thedevelopment of a softwareappendix c262about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.package that implements these protocols and is made freely available, as tcpitself was distributed initially. prior attempts to accomplish this goal havefailed, due to a lack of focus and priority. the need for a distributed usernaming service is even more pressing now.once such a framework is in place, companies, educational institutions,professional organizations, and other such groups should begin to assembledirectories of their members, which can then be incorporated into the eventualdistributed naming service.2 although the overall framework must be centrallydeveloped (for example, by the ietf with the support of the federalgovernment), the data themselves should be collected and managed in adecentralized manner "close to the source," to ensure their accuracy and toallow for local access controls.the need for user support has expanded as the offerings of the internethave become more diverse and complex and as the user population has grown.the internet society through the ietf has been improving user support throughthe development of a series of documents that help new users to join theinternet. for this kind of effort a centralized approach works well, and it shouldcontinue.private enterprise and privatesector institutions have major roles to play inproviding direct support to users. answering questions, resolving serviceproblems, and facilitating attachment are necessary services that will requiresubstantial effort. the data network is not like a telephone. it is a complex andevolving technology, and it sometimes displays inexplicable and undesirablebehavior. assistance for users is thus critical.sellers of individual products today provide good user support, but theycannot be expected to solve problems related to overall system integration.today, institutional network users are supported through a growing body of forprofit system integrators and resellers, who provide support as their majorproduct. the major problem in this area today is the lack of a mechanism forlocating and evaluating these providers. in other words, we need a marketplace.this, of course, is what the information network is intended to provide.individual users cannot hire a system integrator to solve their specificproblems. since most users attach to the network because of some specificprofessional or personal interest, such as workrelated activities or a hobby, oneapproach to providing networking support for (some) individuals would be forspecialinterest groups, for example, professional societies, to contract toprovide network support to their members.existing network providers today offer support as an important part oftheir overall network service. as forprofit providers move to take over theactual operation of trunks and switches, these existing network providers cancontinue to provide service to their clients. such an apappendix c263about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proach would separate the business of network operations, which is becomingmore clearcut in its nature, from the still rather evolving task of effectivelyhelping users.customer service is a significant source of revenue for providers ofcomputer products. the problems of supporting users of largescale networksare more complex, and resolving these problems should present a significantbusiness opportunity. what is important is that users clearly understand the costand value of this service. today, for example, cost competition for personalcomputers has eliminated any cost margin for support, and many users are firstpleased at the very low cost of computers, and then frustrated when they cannotget parts to work. from the very beginning, network providers should beencouraged to price service and basic network access so that the cost of each isapparent, and so that a realistic level of support can be made available.notes1. in the interest of assigning responsibility for such services, one suggestion made elsewhere was toinvolve the iitf in service delivery. "draft report of the federal internetworking requirementspanel," prepared for the national institute of standards and technology, january 14, 1994.2. the harvesting of names and electronic mail addresses is becoming easier through technology,although there are drawbacks associated with these practices.appendix c264about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix dstate and regional networksstate networks provide local connectivity and access to widerarea servicesfor schools, higher education, and research institutions. state networks havebeen wholly oriented to operations; states have procured networks in much theway that large corporations have, rather than to demonstrate or advancetechnology, as the federal government has often sought. given their strong linksto and interests in many segments of the public interest domainšincluding avariety of groups relatively new to networkbased services, such as hospitalsand other components of health care delivery, public libraries, and state andlocal government entitiesšstates have important roles to play in the current andfuture development of information infrastructure.although virtually all states are at least planning networking strategies,implementation has been uneven, with some states manifesting morecoordination and integration than others. states vary considerably in terms ofsize, resources to support networks, geography, and the economics ofnetworking (e.g., networking is much more costly in montana than inmassachusetts). states also differ in their approaches to adopting networkarchitecture and technology, raising questions about prospects forinterconnection. a major factor in developments and prospects at the state levelis each state's public utilities commission, which regulates intrastatetelecommunications offerings and pricing.one state that has taken a lead in networking is north carolina, whichrecently announced a new state networking program to which it plans to shiftthe $35 million per year it spends on networking services.1 already, it haslinked community colleges to an x.25 service and universities to the t3concert network.appendix d265about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in california the development of networking for the research, education,and library communities has evolved in a loosely coordinated fashion. fivemajor networks form the nucleus of a statewide education network. the twostate university systems, the university of california (uc) and the californiastate university (csu), each have networks. ucnet interconnects the nineuc campuses and csunet the 20 csu campuses. in addition, there are threeregional networks, barrnet serving northern california, cerfnet servingsouthern california, and losnettos serving the los angeles basin. these threeregional networks were initially designed to serve the research community buthave branched out. all five networks are connected to the internet and also toeach other. a majority of the 107 community colleges have connected to theinternet via one of these five networks. only a fraction of the several thousandk12 schools have been connected to the internet, most through csunet. thestate library system has called for a statewide network to support multitypelibrary cooperation and coordinated planning studies. efforts are now underway to bring that planning endeavor into an overall strategy to develop thegolden state education network as a "network of networks." in mid1993,pacific bell announced plans for advanced communications networks linkingup to 80 educational, medical, and hightechnology industrial organizationseach in the san francisco and los angeles areas. known as calren, theprogram involves development and pilottesting of innovative applications overat least a twoyear period.2regional (or midlevel) networks are one response to variations in supportfor networking among states, although they are not necessarily a substitute forstate networking. they provide economies of scale for users across a relativelywide area. most of these organizations purchase basic connectivity fromexisting telecommunications providers and provide the packet switched overlayas well as user support.regional networks, especially those catalyzed by national sciencefoundation investments, service the research and library communities andincreasingly the education community (k12 and higher education); some havea considerable base of commercial clients as well. anecdotal evidence compiledinformally by farnet and nsf suggest that about 80 percent of networktraffic is intraregional and about 20 percent is between regions. each regionalnetwork serves about 100 to 200 client sites (i.e., research and educationinstitutions).3 as a group, their financial health and viability vary.4with the shift toward commercial packetswitched networks plusdiminishing federal support, these regional providers will have to evolve to fillnew rolesšit remains to be seen whether regional providers as they arecurrently known are a temporary phenomenon. in some instances, they maybecome competitive providers of network service. toappendix d266about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ward that end, eight regional networks, organized as the corporation forregional and enterprise networking (coren), to provide voice, data, andvideo services, including tcp/ip networking, between regions and nationwide.5alternatively, regional networks may evolve into or effectively reappear ascollective purchasing groups, which attempt to control cost and unify servicethrough coordinated procurement of service. this could be a means for indirectsubsidy of deployment, although some hardtoserve research and educationentities might still be unable to afford to participate. a third potential role is as auser service support organization. training is a key issue, especially for lesssophisticated potential users. finally, another possibility is that commercialproviders might buy up today's regionals if they continue to grow.regional networks, as currently cast (i.e., as dominant providers ofregional data networking serving the research and educational communitieswithin their regions and providing access to federal backbones), raise questionsabout the ease with which other networks can interconnect and thereby gainaccess to the regional network clientele, notably the university community. thecombination of the current sheltered status of the regional networks and theformation of coren raises the prospect of the regionals achieving a threetofouryear head start over other, commercial providers on developingrelationships with universities for which they could provide both intraand interregional connectivity. such a head start could result in substantial barriers to theentry of new commercial providers after federal support has been phased out,unless some form of broader interconnection is required now. this observationassumes that institutions have high costs for switching among network andservice providers, that they lack motivation for seeking diversity in providers,and that the telecommunications companies that provide the underlyingfacilities for regionals do not themselves become major players, exploiting theirexisting relationships with universities. the rapid growth of commercialinternet access providers suggests that these problems will not be significant.to promote regional networking infrastructure that is of value to academicand other users and that supports competition, there is a choice: (1) establishregional regulated monopolies that crosssubsidize within the region (charginghigher prices to commercial users, and lower prices to academic users), or (2)encourage competition, such as that provided by sprint and mci for at&t inlonghaul telephony, with only the government providing subsidies to research,education, and other public interest communities (e.g., hospitals). competitionwill lead to reductions in commercial rates; noncommercial rates will fall ifthere is an injection (subsidy) of government money. which approach is best deappendix d267about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pends on an assessment of the extent to which the market may fail to meet theneeds of noncommercial users and thus compromise societal interestsšacentral concern with respect to the future of research and education networking.given the overall movement toward less regulation in communications, it maybe desirable to try the competitive approach for a specified period, say, fiveyears, and to carefully monitor impacts on the research and educationcommunities.notes1. mcfadden, kay. 1993. "hightech communications 'highway' in works," the news & observer,may 4, p. 1a, 6a. the article notes that, "under the proposal, north carolina's information highwaywill be built, maintained and owned by the three participating phone companies. although thegovernment will set priorities on the uses of the highway, it is clear that the companies will reap twobenefits. they would get the state as a client, and they would be able to link up to each otherwithout undergoing as many arduous regulatoryclearing procedures .... as for the state's costs,those will come at the "user end"šthat is, the classrooms, hospitals, jails and other facilities thathave to buy television, computer, and telephone equipment. in all likelihood, such spending will fallunder individual departmental budgets" (p. 6a).2. pacific bell press release, april 2, 1993, excerpts distributed electronically.3. information presented to the committee by stephen wolff, nsf, and laura breeden, thenexecutive director, farnet.4. mandelbaum, richard, and paulette a. mandelbaum. 1992. "the strategic future of the midlevel networks." pp. 59118 in building information infrastructure. harvard university press,cambridge, mass.5. cicnet. 1993. "coren selects mci to join forces on national information infrastructureinitiatives," press release from cicnet distributed via electronic mail.appendix d268about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix einternational issuesbecause the terms "nren" and "nii" contain the word "national," it iseasy to assume that problems of developing, implementing, and usinginformation infrastructure are largely domestic. but this is misleading, becauseboth the markets served by u.sowned companies and the endeavors of theresearch and education communities are increasingly international. thus,nren and nii services will operate in a context of international connectivity;u.s. entities do and will use u.s. infrastructure to communicate with partiesoverseas, and foreign entities will use their local infrastructure to communicatewith parties in the united states.research networks have been international since the mid1970s, when sitesin the united kingdom and norway connected to satnet, and thereby to thearpanet. in the early 1980s, csnet, bitnet, and uucp all developedgateways to networks in other countries. for example, by 1984, csnet wasoperating electronic mail gateways between the united states and korea, israel,japan, france, germany, australia, and scandinavia. in the same time frame,bitnet became international as it spread to europe, via the europeanacademic research network (earn). similarly, the uucp network developeda gateway to the european unix networks via amsterdam, and the u.s.agency networks, span and hepnet, were linked to communities of interest inother parts of the world. by the mid1980s, when the first nsfnet backbonewas being discussed, electronic mail gateways already connected the variousu.s. networks to a robust and growing global networking infrastructure.an early national network project outside the united states was janet(joint academic network) in the united kingdom. later, national networkprojects were initiated in large numbers of countries on everyappendix e269about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continent. examples include dfn (deutsche forschungsnetz) in germany,uninet in norway, sdn in korea, and junet in japan. internationalcollaborations included nordunet in the nordic countries, earn andeunet in europe, and pacom in the pacific rim. the various nationalnetwork projects have differed with respect to technology, financing,implementation details, and the extent of government participation and control.however, all are intended to support enhanced communication within theirlocal academic and research communities as well as communication withcolleagues in other countries.with the advent of the nsfnet backbone, connections between theunited states and other parts of the world were expanded and an attempt wasmade to better coordinate routing and addressing. this led to formation of thecoordinating committee for intercontinental research networks (ccirn) andthe internet engineering planning group (iepg). the internet engineeringtask force (ietf), the organization that sets standards for the internet, has alsodeveloped an international character in recent years. this emphasis is reinforcedby its recent location under the aegis of the internet society, an expresslyinternational organization.u.s. government agencies have played an active role in helping tointernationalize the global internet. for a number of years, the national sciencefoundation (nsf) has provided shared funding for network connectionsbetween the united states and other parts of the world, and nsf personnel havetaken a leadership role in representing the united states in international forums.the u.s. department of energy (doe) and the national aeronautics and spaceadministration (nasa) have also been active in internationalizing theirresearch networks for some time, largely to enable "remote science" andinternational research collaborations. much of this effort has involvedsubsidizing international connections to laboratories and research facilities ofinterest to u.s. scientists.for example, doe is working with european scientists in programs usingtelecommunications to conduct sophisticated experiments using u.s.basedscience facilities. telecommunications experts within that agency want highertransmission speeds to improve realtime response interactions involvingscientists in japan, germany, and russia, participants in the internationalthermonuclear experimental reactor program. nasa seeks infrastructureimprovements to collect and display in video format the enormous quantities ofdata being acquired by the earthobserving satellites of other nations. thecreation of a "giant worldwide nasa" as part of the international earthobserving system will provide scientists with greater insight into globalweather trends and facilitate identification of earth resources. both agencies areconvinced that the degree and frequency of collaboration among the participantsin theirappendix e270about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international programs will increase dramatically with increased bandwidth andconnectivity.1in parallel with the development of national networks, a number of"volunteer" networks have developed, the most prominent of which is fidonet.fidonet reaches 84 countries, including many developing countries for whichthis is the only affordable network alternative. in this regard, fidonettechnology is used extensively by nongovernmental organizations working oneconomic development in africa and asia. electronic mail gateways allowpeople in such countries as kenya, namibia, and ethiopia to correspond withcolleagues in other parts of the world.the global network environment now reaches over 140 countries. avariety of technologies are used, but the common denominator shared by all isthe ability to exchange electronic mail. as new countries, such as those ineastern and central europe and latin america, have connected, the firstinternational service has been electronic mail. a universal goal has been tomove to the next level, interactive services and connection to the internet. theprincipal barrier to such enriched communications is the high cost ofinternational communications.there are several reasons for the high cost of internationalcommunications. historically, an important factor has been the high cost ofinstalling and maintaining the physical infrastructure coupled with the limitedcapacity of such facilities. but with the advent of optical transmission and theintroduction of new technical innovations such as optical amplification andwave division multiplexing, capacity is increasing dramatically, and hence costscan be amortized over an enlarged user and application base.a second reason for the high cost of international communications hasbeen the lack of competition. until recently, most governments exercised eitherdirect or indirect control over national telecommunications as well asinternational links. while this is still the case in some parts of the world, therehas been a significant increase in competition resulting from deregulation andthe opening of domestic and international markets to foreign companies.despite the growing availability of bandwidth capacity, the costdifferential between u.s. and overseas service is not something that is going tobe resolved in the immediate future, although there are visible signs that changeis on the way. in almost every nation of the world telecommunications servicesoperate in a "contrived" economic system, that is, a system of crosssubsidization in which monies are collected to support a wide range ofgovernment goals. in the united states one of the goals is "universal service" orthe provision of affordable telephone service for the greatest number of people.the swiss, and many other countries throughout western europe, use moniescollected from telecommunicaappendix e271about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tions services to subsidize postal and transportation services. introducingcompetition into these countries, such as we are now attempting to do in theunited states, does not appear at this time to be in the best interests of many ofthese countries and, in fact, the telephone companies are discouraging anyonefrom building their own networks employing leased lines. rather, the telephonecompanies are promoting integrated services digital network and expensivenarrowband 8.25kbps services on the basis that raising the price for leasedlines high enough will encourage everyone to move toward these services.considerable evidence exists to question that this strategy is working.in the case of satellite communications the lack of competition is equallydiscouraging, resulting in fewer choices and increased costs for major users.satellite communication was initially introduced into europe so that the postaltelephony and telegraphy organizations (ptts) could communicate amongthemselves and serve as gatekeepers to the flow of information in and out oftheir countries. revenues from these services have been rather substantial. twofactors, possible loss of control and income, have made the ptts reluctant toenter into a market economy for telecommunications in which competition isencouraged.it is important to keep in mind that while networks have developed atdifferent paces in different countries, the phenomenon has been global innature. while the technologies most commonly used today, the internet,bitnet, fidonet and uucp protocols, were developed largely in the unitedstates, each national network activity reflects the unique characteristics(economic, legal, regulatory) of its local environment. these national effortsshould be considered as peers to the u.s. networks, and it should be understoodthat the "global nii" will likely not be a reflection of the u.s. nii.implementation of internationalconnectivityachieving international connections has three components: transmissionbetween countries (in particular, transoceanic connections), distribution (localinfrastructure and access points) within countries, and bilateral or multilateralagreements on technical (e.g., addressing, routing) and policy issues (e.g.,acceptable use, financing).intercontinental transmissionseveral important considerations can affect the international connectivityof the nii. some are technical in nature, and the others involve costofservicefactors that must be the result of competitive forces andappendix e272about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cooperative efforts among nations. the availability of adequate bandwidthšthat is, whether or not the united states has in place, or in the planning stages,sufficient digital connections to europe and the pacific rim to meet the highspeed bandwidth requirements of the niišis an important technicalconsideration. a quick review of this issue suggests that bandwidth capacitywill not be a problem.the two major technologies underpinning highspeed transmission mediaare satellites and fiberoptic cables. in the case of satellite technology, intelsatremains the primary service provider for most of the nations of the world.2 inaddition, a large number of regional satellites provide a range of broadcast andpointtopoint services.3a recent development in the satellite arena is the expected growth indeployment of very small aperture terminal dishes (vsats), which canfacilitate the supply of connectivity to remote areas and significantly enhancelocal infrastructure (see "local infrastructure" below). panamsat is alreadybeing used for this purpose in latin america, and both carriers and satellitesystems vendors are expected to roll out vsat services at very low cost.vsats should dramatically expand internet access worldwide. this will beaccomplished as federal government regulations, policies, and attitudesregarding satellite and other communications technologies, devised andimplemented in the 1950s and 1960s, are changed to reflect the vast capabilitiesof the technologies of the 1990s. these government changes will not end at theshores of the united states, nor will they be limited to technologyconsiderations alone. the nii planners are committed to working with theirinternational counterparts to promote a seamless, open structure that will bemost effective when it becomes integrated into a global informationinfrastructure. this means addressing transborder data flow policy problemssuch as privacy, monitoring requirements of other governments, censorship, andthe exchange of certain types of data between countries.international connectivity is also available via cable (coaxial or fiber), andas in the national context, experience suggests that the importance of fiberopticcable for international transmission is likely to grow. one reason for this is thatcable provides for betterquality service for interactive applications.the current largescale capacity of fiberoptic connections between theunited states and europe (tats8, 9, 10, and 11) will be further enhanced inaugust 1996 with the availability of tats12 and 13. the two latter fiberopticcables will operate at gigabit rates. looking toward the pacific rim, there are inplace several largecapacity fiberoptic cables (transpac 3 and 4). these havethe same capacity as the tat8 series of cables. transpac 5, scheduled to be inoperation by 1996, will offer gigabit rates. submarine cables provide anattractive economic advantage forappendix e273about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.selected routes where there is a high rate of growth in demand forcommunications capacity.local infrastructurealthough intercontinental transmission technology is rapidly advancing,there is a distinct absence of a generic infrastructure that is capable of takingadvantage of this capacity in most developing nations and in some developedcountries.the disparity between u.s. and foreign data communicationsenvironments (including networks and associated hardware and software) is asource of operational frustration to businesses and, in particular, members of theresearch community when they seek to effect or use international connections.within a country, distributionšlocal infrastructurešis largely a matter oflocal policy and investment; it is the area of greatest unevenness acrosscountries. for example, in countries such as china and russia the infrastructurefor very high speed links is almost nonexistent. a major finding of the 1990report of the task force on telecommunications and broadcasting in easterneurope, commissioned by the u.s. state department, stated: "the years ofpolitical bias against private access and dissemination of information have leftall eastern european countries, regardless of gnp, with telecommunicationsand broadcast infrastructures which are among the very poorest and mostantiquated in the world. massive investment will be required to bring thetelecommunications and broadcasting infrastructures up to developed countrylevels."4 and, of course, whatever the situation in this part of the world,conditions are far worse in most of africa and parts of asia and latin america.since that report was written a number of major changes have beeninitiated by the governments of most of these countries to improve theirtelecommunications infrastructures, such as the move from analog to digitalcircuits, the introduction of cellular radio, the passage of legislation toencourage investments by western companies marketing products and servicesin telecommunications, and so on. but despite the gains being made, the findingof the state department report remains valid; significant investments arerequired to bring these nations to "telco equality" with developed nations. theseinvestments depend to a large degree on the ability of these countries topromote market economies and to demonstrate a business environment that willprovide investors a reasonable risk and return on their investments. further, thefinancially poor condition of the universities, a widespread situation, rules outany purchase of expensive services in the near future.as suggested above, vsats hold the promise of upgrading local inappendix e274about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.frastructure, sometimes providing a capability that overlays an existing wirelineinfrastructure, at a relatively low cost. such overlay connectivity is the goal ofsome new universitylocal business consortia being formed in eastern europe,encouraged in some cases by the world bank.in more advanced countries, such as japan and some in western europe,the problems are mostly political, not based on a lack of underlyingtelecommunications infrastructure. in such countries, state owned or charteredptts control both domestic and international communications. it can be nearlyimpossible to acquire a direct link into a specific site, and often use of anexpensive x.25based and pttoperated network is mandated.when available, obtaining leased line service may involve substantialdelays and/or costs that are very high compared to u.s. costs. a paper writtenby two information technology specialists, part of a research team in cernworking at the world's largest particle accelerator facility, lamented the fact thatreasonably priced leased circuits were not available and the situation wasadversely affecting their research activities. one example of a political issue isthe approach in some countries toward standards. for reasons ofcompetitiveness or, in some cases, to avoid adopting what has been perceived asa u.s. standard (the internet protocols), some governments and intergovernmentgroups have decreed that national networks must use the iso/ccitt osicompliant protocol suite. however, software has not been readily available andsome of the standards have been slow in coming, leading to delays inimplementation.one possibility for overcoming shortcomings in local distribution iswireless communication technology, including microwave cellular telephony.in addition, cable telephone technology might also enhance local infrastructurein some countries.it is important to keep in mind that local infrastructure is a national issuefor each of the countries involved. it is not appropriate for u.s. private orgovernment groups to try to dictate national network approaches to othercountries despite the fact that many u.s. companies are competing in foreigncountries for intra and international telecommunications business. moreover,while policies such as those cited above have limited communication betweenacademics and researchers, they have also had the effect of stifling thedevelopment of national industries to compete with u.s. companies in this area.foreign research networkingu.s.based research networks have provided a vehicle for overcomingsome of the foreign interconnection hurdles. some government agenappendix e275about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cies are applying their resources and traffic to specific generic networksoperated by organizations within a country, supporting a major researchinstitute in an effort to increase internet usage. for example, in japan nasa isleveraging its resources to enhance the tokyo international science networkoperated by the university of tokyo. in russia nasa works closely with thespace research institute to achieve the connectivity it requires in this country.while technology may help to lower the costs of connectivity, the essentialbarriers to foreign access and enhanced foreign distribution are pricing,standards, and trade barriers. these issues are discussed below.cost and pricing of transmission capacityany effort to create a highspeed network to europe and to the pacific rimnations must first consider who pays and how payment is to be made.network users in europe spend, on the average, ten times more for circuitsthan similar users in the united states; and in some regions of europe t1service is unobtainable at any price. the disparity between the costs ofinternational circuits initiated in the united states and those of other countriesseriously constrains the costsharing efforts of government agencies using thesecircuits.today some government agencies pick up the costs of the longhaultransmission channels and their international partners pay for the localdistribution circuits within their own countries. for example, when doe ornasa arrange international connections, they have typically provided theinternational circuit in exchange for provision of distribution by the foreignpartner. there is an important policy question involved here: to what extentshould u.s. agencies, and therefore u.s. taxpayers, support nonu.s.networking facilities even though this support might help u.s. scientists? it islikely that there will be different answers for different countries. a related issueis the degree to which the u.s.supported facilities carry traffic other than thatdedicated to the particular application that justified the link.standards for global interconnectivitythe international connectivity issue is made even more complex becauseof the different standards in place and being planned.achieving consensus on standards in the current international environmenthas been difficult at best. historically, many countries have emphasized andpromoted conformance with the open systems interconnection (osi) protocolsuite, in contrast to the internet choice of theappendix e276about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tcp/ip protocol suite. one u.s. marketing specialist, who works for a majorinterexchange carrier, refers to this environment as ''religious political wars"wherein government bureaucrats decide which protocols are "politicallycorrect." his description of the standards adoption process is shared by manygovernment network users and u.s. telecommunications manufacturers andservice providers doing business overseas. they see the standards developed byslowmoving international committees over many years as not serving the needsof the user community; yet, these governments, commissions, and largeresearch funding organizations representing one or more countries oftenmandate the acceptance of these standards.however, the market for osi products has been weak and, in the opinionof some experts, both u.s. and foreign, the whole osi development process hasbeen flawed because of its cumbersome design process (designbycommitteeand consensus) as opposed to a reliance on experience and market forces. incontrast, commercially successful protocols (e.g., ethernet, token ring, tcp/ip, x.25) have been those that have been defined, implemented, and revisedbased on experience prior to being standardized.in recognition of such problems, osi appears to have been dealt adeathblow by the fall 1993 announcement of the european union throughewos that its efforts will now focus on the open systems environment (ose)rather than osi; ose is meant to encompass all open system standards. to agreat extent this decision only validates what has actually been happening inmany countries where network builders have already begun to base theirnetworks on tcp/ip, currently the standard of choice for multivendor datanetworks. where this decision was made a number of years ago, e.g.,scandinavia, the growth of research and education networks as well as thecommercial availability of network services has paralleled that in the unitedstates. similar rates of growth are now under way in many countries throughoutthe world.export controls and internationalnetworkingachievement of full international connectivity hinges on reducinginequities in local distribution infrastructures. one dimension is broadeningaccess to essential technologiesšfirst those related to physical facilities, andthen those related to information services. the access issue is one wheredifferent u.s. policy perspectives appear to have collided.the export of certain kinds of communications equipment and systems isrestricted under a program of controls intended to protect national security.some of these controls are specific to the united states, and some have beenbroadly shared among industrialized nations under theappendix e277about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.coordinating committee for multilateral export controls (cocom) umbrella,which is expected to be replaced by a new multilateral structure.5 experience inthe international networking arena has raised questions about the designation ofproducts that fall under controls, the tightness of the controls, and the degree towhich u.s. vendors may be or have been disadvantaged relative to vendors ofcomparable products in other countries. the march 30, 1994, announcementthat the united states would relax many of its controls on the export ofcomputing and communications technology gives rise to a more positiveoutlook than has been evident to date.6in the recent past the export of many items ranging from 9,600kbpsmodems to electrooptical equipment and digital subscriber interface equipmenthaving transmission rates in excess of 156 mbps and 144 kbps, respectively, hasbeen restricted. technologies for encrypting communications in the interests ofprivacy or security fall under even tighter controls than transmission andswitching technologies. those tight controls continue to be in effect, althoughthey are coming under increased scrutiny.inasmuch as export controls succeed in limiting the capabilities in foreigninfrastructure, there is a possibility that traffic originating in the united stateswould have to be throttled for distribution in other countries, slowing thedelivery of communications, and that certain applications (e.g., video, realtimecommunications) would be less feasible in other countries, militating againstcertain forms of research collaboration, for example. such impacts on researchcollaboration have already posed problems for u.s. government agencies whosemissions require increased technology transfer to other countries to ensurestrong international connectivity. an example is the inability of nasa to getcisco and proteon routers into russia. but perhaps even more critical today arerestrictions on export of equipment employing dynamic adaptive routing, i.e.,network routers. this technology, developed in the 1970s with support from theadvanced research projects agency (arpa), is essential to the operation ofthe global internet. and today, u.s. companies are the major suppliers of suchequipment in all parts of the world. since the algorithms used are well known,continued restrictions on the export of u.s. manufactured equipment would leadto loss of market share by u.s. companies.the scope of this problem is such that the federal networking council, anorganization of 15 government agencies, put in place a special advisory groupto study the problem and to make recommendations. the fncac indicated inoctober 1993 that it "endorses full connectivity of federal (and commercial)networks to nonallied countries." it argued that security mechanisms are betterplaced in host systems than in the network. it noted that key packet switchingand cryptographic technoloappendix e278about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gies are available from nonu.s. sources. it urged reevaluation and somerelaxation of controls.demands from research and industry for highbandwidth communicationsbetween countries suggest that there is a need to periodically assess existingexport controls and to explicitly weigh and balance policy goals for protectionof national security, promoting international research collaboration, andfostering foreign market development for u.s.based producers ofcommunications technologies. at a minimum, the performance ceiling (e.g., thebandwidth level permitted for exports) should be frequently reevaluated toprevent perpetuation of outdated rules.to date, u.s. superiority in networking technologies and applications hasbeen a source of competitive advantage to u.s. businesses operatinginternationally; not only physical facilities but also higherlevel services andapplications are areas in which the united states has exhibited leadership. thatleadership is threatened to the extent that u.s. vendors are hindered from selling(e.g., by long delays in the export approval process) products available fromvendors elsewhere. until the recent relaxation of controls, many u.s.companies were prohibited from selling products being marketed by japan,germany, and other industrialized nations competing with u.s. vendors inglobal markets.controls on exports are not the only trade problem constraining thedevelopment of worldwide information infrastructure. there are businesspractices and export control devices being employed by other nations that maybe regarded as "unfair" by u.s. standards. these practices and procedures tendto build economic walls that favor specific technical standards, products, andarchitectures, oftentimes initiated to limit the sales u.s. technology abroad. theresult of this is to seriously impede the growth of u.s. export markets ininformation technology. in addition, there are information walls involving theunequal sharing of information and informationrelated material on the part ofour trading partners. since the enhancement of information infrastructure in theunited states will provide new opportunities for foreign parties, benefitingother nations, questions arise as to whether better access by u.s. parties toforeign information infrastructure and resources should be arranged as a quidpro quo.conclusionsinternational connectivity must be maintained and expanded as foreign networks develop and proliferate. beyond physical access, one or more bodies(organizations) may be needed to develop and monitor bilateral and multilateralagreements on standards, transborder problems, and transborder legalities.7 forexample, as the growth of commercial networkingappendix e279about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proceeds to expand, international agreement on address space management, useof encryption technology and methods, authentication of signatures and senders,management of rights and funds transfers, and so on is needed both to maximizeconnectivity and communication and to enable international electroniccommerce. agreements and mechanisms also need to be negotiated to handlesecurity problems in the international network environment, includingmechanisms for communicating and resolving problems and for dealing withperpetrators. in addition, both to assure the maximum usefulness ofinternational connections and to support u.s. vendors, export controlrestrictions on the sale and deployment of u.s. infrastructure technology shouldbe reviewed and, as appropriate, relaxed.many players are already addressing some of these issues (e.g., the internetsociety is addressing protocols; the state department participates ininternational standards and coordinating conferences; the department ofcommerce addresses export controls through its bureau of exportadministration and comparative national infrastructure development through itsnational telecommunications and information administration; the nationalinstitute of standards and technology (u.s. department of commerce) and thenational security agency have begun to address some international securityissues; and so on), but a consistent framework, coordination, and mechanismsfor gaining input from the research, education, and other communities areneeded, and there should be a clear demarcation of authority in these areas, sothat affected communities in the united states and counterparts overseas knowwhom to contact for what.notes1. personal communications: robert aiken, u.s. department of energy, and anthony villasenor,national aeronautics and space administration.2. intelsat is an international consortium of countries that owns and operates 18 satellites in theatlantic, pacific, and indian oceans, with which it provides voice, data, and television services.approximately 65 percent of all revenues are derived from voice circuits. inmarsat is a 44memberorganization of nations that purchase services from it for such applications as telex, voice, fax, anddata transfer up to the t1 level. inmarsat does not own its own satellites but leases circuits onsatellites operated by intelsat and other carriers. growing demand for increased competition in theinternational satellite communications industry has resulted in recent loosening of the regulation ofthe u.s. satellite services market, raising questions about prospects for reductions in costs andincreases in innovation, both benefits typically associated with deregulation. the fcc recentlydecided to provide a more open environment for the entry of new systems. five companies havebeen granted authority to compete with comsat, the u.s. authorized agent to intelsat, in marketingand delivering international communications. this authority was granted subject to a number oflimitations such as not having the right to interconnect to the public network. panamsat, columbia,and orion are some of the better known companies that are in operappendix e280about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ation or in development and that are working vigorously to eliminate the limitations currentlyimposed on them. recent developments indicate that the easing of these restrictions may soon beforthcoming.3. for example, arabsat is a multiapplication satellite that provides communications services to aconsortium of arab countries. eastern europe and the russian territories are served by satellitesowned by a consortium of 14 countries similar to intelsat called interspumik. recently intelsatentered into an agreement with russia's informkosmos granting intelsat the option to lease threesatellites in 1994. in the pacific rim the palapa satellites provide services for indonesia, malaysia,singapore, thailand, and the philippines. eutelsat, a cooperative of 39 european nation stateshaving the legal status of an intergovernmental organization, has seven satellites in orbit providingleased transponders principally for television and news gathering.4. advisory committee on international communications and information policy. 1990. easterneurope: please stand by. u.s. department of state, washington, d.c., spring.5. the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls disbanded on march 31, 1994.6. friedman, thomas l. 1994. "u.s. ending curbs on hightech gear to cold war foes," newyork times, march 31, pp. a1 and ds.7. a new nrc study titled "bits of power" will examine these issues in more detail.appendix e281about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix fkey termsans,advanced networks and services inc.ansi,american national standards institute.arpa,advanced research projects agency part of the department of defense.formed as arpa, changed to darpa, renamed as arpa in 1993. it isundertaking an increasing volume and range of infrastructurerelatedprojects.atm,asynchronous transfer mode.aup,acceptable use policy statement defining what kinds of traffic areacceptable over a given network (e.g., nsfnet is intended for trafficrelating to research and education functions).backbone,largecapacity circuits at the heart of a network, carrying aggregated trafficover relatively long distances.bandwidth,a measure of informationcarrying capability; the difference between thelowest and highest signal frequency, expressed in hertz (cycles per second).bisdn,broadband integrated services digital network.broadbandnetwork,a flexible, allpurpose, twoway medium that will offer the high bandwidthnecessary for both conventional video and highdefinition television, andfor stillframe displays for information retrieval, catalog shopping, and soon.ccitt,consultative committee on international telephony and telegraphy.cic,committee on information and communication. part of the nationalscience and technology council.cicnet,committee on institutional cooperation network.appendix f282about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cise directorate,computer and information science and engineering directorate one of themajor units of nsf, and the one out of which nsf networking activities arerun.cix,commercial internet exchange a trade association of businesses engagedin providing network services that interconnect with the internet and/orprovide similar services (alternet, psi, sprint, other).cooperative agreement,form of arrangement between nsf and the providers of nsfnet services.not a standard government procurement; more flexible than a conventionalcontract for services.esnet,wide area network operated by the department of energy in support of itsresearch activities.etc,entertainment, telephone, and cable television industry complex.fddi,fiber distributed data interface.fix,federal internet exchange a point of interconnection and data exchangeamong federal agency backbone networks. there are two fixes, one oneach coast.ftp,file transfer protocol supports file exchange over the internet.fullduplexservice,simultaneous twoway communication, as over the telephone.gigabittestbedprogram,a governmentindustryacademic program for developing anddemonstrating highspeed network technologies.hpca,highperformance computing act 1991 legislation introduced by thensenator albert gore to expand and extend on the hpcc (and within it thenren) vision developed within the executive branch.hpcc,high performance computing and communications initiative.hpccit,high performance computing and communications information technology subcommittee, under the office of science and technologypolicy.ietf,internet engineering task force.iita,information infrastructure technology and applications the new fifthcomponent of the high performance computing and communicationsinitiative.iitf,information infrastructure task force.isdn,integrated services digital network.iso,international organization for standardization.itu,international telecommunications union.lans,local area networks.last mile,popular term for the ultimate segment of the connection between acommunication provider and the customer (usuallyappendix f283about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. residential but could also be commercial), originating with consideration ofthe connection between a telephone company central office and thecustomer premises. telephone companies typically call that connection the"subscriber loop"; cable television or radio/wireless connections may beardifferent labels, given their origins as something other than the twistedcopper wire pair loop historically typical in telephony. "access circuit" isanother label for the generic concept of connection between a customer oruser and the main part of a service provider's network.lata, local accessand transport areaa geographic region ranging from a metropolitan area to a state, createdwith divestiture of at&t and used to define service areas for regulatedversus unregulated services (e.g., intralata local services versus interlata longhaul services).mans,metropolitan area networks.mpeg,motion picture experts group.naps,network access points elements within the new nsf network architecturefor interconnection between the very high speed backbone network service(vbns) and other network service providers (regional and other midlevelnetworks, commercial services, and so on).nii,national information infrastructure.nren,national research and education network a component of the highperformance computing and communications initiative.nsfnet,national science foundation network.nsi,nasa science internet operated by the national aeronautics and spaceadministration in support of its research activities.nstc,national science and technology council.ntsc standard,national television systems committee standard for analog transmission oftelevision.oclc,online computer library center.odn,open data network.osi,open systems interconnection protocol suite with seven layers promulgatedby the international organization for standardization.ostp,office of science and technology policy.qos,quality of service.sonet,synchronous optical network an international standard for transmittinginformation over fiber, specifying standardized opticalsignal formats andinterfaces and integrated into the atm packetswitching system.tcp/ip,transmission control protocol/internet protocol.appendix f284about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.t1 service,1.5 megabits per second.t3 service,45 megabits per second.udp,user datagram protocol.vbns,very high speed backbone network service the small backbone networknsf plans to introduce in 1994 to replace the larger nsfnet backboneservice.wais,wide area information service.wans,wide area networks.www,worldwide web.x.25,a protocol for data transport developed by the international organizationfor standardization as part of the osi suite.appendix f285about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix f286about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indexaacceptable use policy (aup), 15960, 282access circuitsbearer service (odn) and, 88bidirectionality as critical factor, 8687,89cost considerations, 179, 187definition, 284network sharing and, 181recommendation regarding, 91research needed, 9899access costs, 18688, 201naccess links. see access circuits; lastmile connections.accessibility issuesbalancing conflicting needs, 150,15253, 166nbandwidth requirements, 6567, 151basic services, 151censorship, 15860controlling access, 15658, 169ncost reductions, 37costs as key factor, 123, 132, 142costs of infrastructure, 17683education (k12), 132equity of access, 14953governmentgenerated information,15456, 168ninternational concerns, 27277internet as access model, 3031libraries, 13740navigation and filtering tools, 99100network access points (naps), 28 payment and pricing, 15253, 167n,18398privacy concerns, 15658research community concerns, 118residential service, 152, 18081, 200nsatellite dishes, 273telephone service as pricing model, 37telephone service example, 14950types of access, 40ubiquity of access, 152, 167nuser charges, 810accounting. see financial issues.acronyms identified, 28285addresses for internet sites, 75, 24647,250addressing and naming issues, 7476,9495administration support, 206goals articulating, 32, 33limited technical scope of, 13applications level (odn), 5, 49access circuit bidirectionality and, 87index287about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic services, 5963diagram, 53information access services, 6163interconnection via, 246research and development needs, 1035archie (file access service), 61architecture of networks. see open datanetwork (odn) architecture.archives as information providers, 143narpa (advanced research projectsagency), 103, 104, 109n, 111n, 216,23739arpanet development, 23739arts and humanities research, 114,11819, 144nasynchronous transfer mode (atm) systems, 12, 221bisdn vs, 58bearer service (odn) and, 5658, 108nn definition, 282federal policy and, 221, 223, 232nstandardssetting groups, 73atm systems, see asynchronous transfermode systems.audio servers, 60aup (acceptable use policy), 15960, 282bbisdn (broadband integrated servicesdigital network), 5658, 108nn, 282backbone network services. seensfnet; t3 network service; vbns.bandwidthaccessibility requirements and, 151allocation of, 6567, 108data path symmetry, 87, 110ndefinition, 282education (k12) requirements, 126limitation as network measure, 52modem limitations, 37reserved bandwidth service, 6667, 108nresearch requirements, 11718barrnet regional network, 266map, 24bearer service level (odn), 5, 4748atm and, 5658, 108nnaccess circuits bidirectionality, 8687,89, 110nncentrality of, 5152, 9394characteristics of, 5255diagram, 53integration options, 8889quality of service, 6567, 93, 95research needs, 9395besteffort service, 6566, 179, 181, 18991bestnet (educational consortium), 120bidirectional communications paths,8687, 89, 110nnbilateral issues. see international issues.bitnet, 238, 269branscomb report (network access concerns), 119, 144nbrowsing network resources, 6063,99100business issues. see commercializationissues.ccable television (catv) issuesaccess circuits bidirectionality, 8687, 89cable links, 19highdefinition tv (hdtv), 4142n, 85interactive possibilities, 31pricing of services, 182, 200nstandards, 8586, 110ntechnology upgrades, 37video services delivery, 8889california as networking leader, 121, 266index288about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.calren educational network (proposed),266catv. see cable television issues.ccirn (coordinating committee forintercontinental research networks),270censorship issues, 15660centralization issuesinternet administration, 24749user support services, 26264cerfnet regional network, 266map, 24cicnet regional networklibraries and, 135map, 24cise (computer and information scienceand engineering) directorate, 283cix (commercial internet exchange),222, 249clintongore administration's role, 32, 33,2056closed networksinternational concerns, 27779open networks and, 4, 44, 47security of, 45cocom (coordinating committee for multilateral export controls), 278code of fair information practices(updates), 254, 25861collaborative computing, 115collaborative work via networkseducation, 12526sciences, 11516, 118collaboratory, 11516commerce department and networks,210, 280commercial internet exchange (cix),222, 249commercialization issues.see also financial issues;payment and pricing issues;publishing industry issues.access circuits bidirectionality, 8687access restrictions, 119administration views, 33censorship, 15860costs and scalability, 18081, 200ncustomer support services, 26364funding partnerships, 17475governmentgenerated information,15456, 168nintellectual property protection, 16065,170nninterconnection services, 176internet oversight, 22123lastmile considerations, 3638, 45,18081needs of markets vs communities, 150,15253, 166nnsfnet, 242open system support, 9091payment for services and access,15253, 167nprivacy concerns, 15658, 169npublic vs private interests, 9091,21113, 232nresidential connections, 3638, 45,18081royalties protection, 163, 164service availability, 150standards setting, 6, 21820, 7172communications infrastructure. seeinformation infrastructure; networks; nii.compliance issues, 6, 6770computer networks. see internet; networks; nii.computer professionals for socialresponsibility (cpsr) principles, 257confidentiality issues. see privacy issues;security issues.congestion problems, 9697, 18990, 201nconnectivity issuesaccess circuits, 8689administration's goals, 32, 33circuits (links) in networks, 19connectivity levels, 245costs as key factor, 123, 132, 142costs of infrastructure, 17683entertainment industry influences, 3132index289about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international concerns, 27277internet access, 24549internet connectivity, 30lastmile connections, 3638, 18081,28485links (circuits) in networks, 19payment and pricing, 18398proposals, 2830residential service, 18081, 200nsatellite links, 273, 28081nstandards setting, 7172telephone link limitations, 3637coordinating committee for multilateralexport controls (cocom), 278coordinating committee for intercontinental research networks (ccirn), 270copyright protection, 161, 16263copyright management (academic), 164open issues, 100technological means, 1045coren (corporation for regional andenterprise networking), 267cost recovery issues. see financial issues;payment and pricing issues; usercharges.csnet, 238, 269csunet, 266customer support services, 26364ddarpa. see arpa.dartnet (arpa), 241data integrity, 80, 8183, 161data path symmetry, 87, 110ndatabase browsing services, 60, 6163database sharing in education, 121decentralization issues, 45internet experience, 24751network control functions, 96routing, 94security concerns, 1012user support services, 26264decnet networks, 238defense department (dod) and networks, 72, 238, 109n.see also arpa;arpanet.department of – see commerce –;defense –; education –; energydepartment and networks.digital communications infrastructure.see information infrastructure; networks; nii.digital libraries, 132, 13640, 14546nresearch on, 104, 111ndigital object storage services, 60distribution issues (international concerns), 27476dod. see defense department and networks.doe networks. see energy departmentand networks.eeconomic issues. see federal fundingissues; financial issues.education department (ed) and networksinternet support, 242leadership role in k12 issues, 15, 20910title iid program, 242education issues (higher education),11922copyright management, 164california networking examples, 121,266database sharing, 119, 144nfinancial considerations, 710instructional concerns, 119, 144nlibrary projects, 141network usage examples, 12021privacy requirements, 157education issues (k12), 12232censorship, 15860commercial support, 173costs and scalability, 18081, 200ncosts as key factor, 123, 14243, 173equity in financing, 19697index290about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.equity of access, 14953federal leadership required, 1112, 15federal policy role, 13132, 20910financial considerations, 710hpcc assistance, 242infrastructure deficiencies, 12224internet access improvements, 242learning resources, 126network usage examples, 125, 12730personnel training deficiencies, 124privacy requirements, 157teachers' concerns. 12425, 12730education issues (lifelong education),133, 258electronic archiving, 114, 141electronic frontier foundation (eff)principles, 256electronic mail. see email.electronic money, 55, 58electronic publishing. see publishingissues.emailas applicationslevel service, 59educational (k12) uses, 12730internet and, 243research uses, 114, 118encryption issues, 8283, 101energy department (doe) and networks,116, 23132n, 238entertainment industry issuesfinancing of nii by, 31size of customer base, 31equity of access, 14953esnet (doe network), 283ethical issues, 16566.see also accessibility issues; legal issues.balancing conflicting needs, 150,15253, 166nintellectual property protection, 16065,170nnpolicy guidelines, 166principles of information usage, 25461privacy concerns, 15658, 169nexchange points on internet (fixes,cix), 249export controls and international networks, 27779ffair information practices, 25861fairness issues, 258.see also accessibility issues;connectivity issues;social issues.fax services, 59federal communications commission(fcc), 231nfederal funding issues, 17276basis for federal support, 9internet support as model, 23limitations inherent in, 1011, 227recommendation for, 1415federal internet exchanges (fixes), 249federal internetworking requirementspanel (firp), 215federal networking council (fnc), 230n,251, 278federal policy issues, 20433acceptable use policy, 15960access circuit bidirectionality, 8990access circuits reengineering, 8691administration goals and roles, 33, 2056agencies involved in, 280coordination and management role,21316education (k12) concerns, 13132,20910export controls, 27779governmentgenerated information,15456, 168ninfrastructure deployment, 14, 22326infrastructure development, 91102,2078, 21728international concerns, 27779internet coordination, 25051internet oversight, 22123internet support as model, 23leadership roles, 1011, 18, 20510,21617index291about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.libraries, 135lobbying concerns, 212, 230nodn as technical framework, 13,21415, 217osi support, 219procurement role, 22021public vs private interests, 9091,21113, 233nrecommendations, 1316, 210, 216research and development, 91105, 207,21721, 22328roles defined, 205standards, 7074, 21820technical scope, limitations, 13, 21415,217technology role, 207, 21728fiberoptic linkscompliance issues, 69federal support of, 12international connectivity, 27374internet and, 249networks changed by, 1920synchronous optical network (sonet),284fidonet and international networking, 271file transfer protocol (ftp) upgrades, 61financial issues, 172202access links, 181access circuits, 87, 181connectivity, 17683, 199ncost reduction and new technology, 37costs as key factor, 14243costs of access, 152, 167ncosts of infrastructure, 17683, 199ndatabase sharing, 121education (k12) concerns, 132entertainment industry role, 3132export controls, 27779federal funding, 911, 1415, 23,17276, 227fixed costs, 17778funding partnerships, 17475geographical cost differences, 18081interconnect charges, 183international concerns, 27172, 276lastmile connections, 3638, 181link technology and pricing, 37payment and pricing, 18399.see also payment and pricing issues.public financing needed, 9resource sharing, 17879, 181scalability, 18081, 200nsubsidies, 186, 19395transitional financing, 186ubiquity of access, 152, 167nuser charges, 810financial transaction services, 60firp (federal internetworking requirements panel), 215first amendment protections, 15660fixed costs of networks, 17778fixes (federal internet exchanges), 249flatfee pricing, 183, 19193, 200nfnc (federal networking council), 230n,251, 278ftp (file transfer protocol), 283upgrades, 61funding issues. see financial issues.ggatewaysapplicationslevel connections via, 246in networks (figure), 22gigabit network testbeds, 21, 27, 283global issues, 26982.see also international issues.gopher (information browsing service),61, 64gore, albert (vice president), 33, 206government issues. see federal policyissues; federal funding issueshhdtv (highdefinition tv), 4142n, 8586hepnet, 238index292about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.highperformance computing act of1991 (pl102194), 135, 189high performance computing and communications (hpcc) initiativeeducation (k12) and, 122expansion of, 206, 242, 242humanities research, 122iita as component, 29, 29, 242nren program and, 24041subcommittee (hpccit) for, 14technical roots of nii, 13higherlevel network services. see applications level (odn)hospitals and health care issuescommercial support, 173online services potential, 145nprivacy requirements, 157hpcc. see high performance computingand communications initiativehumanities and arts research, 114,11819, 144nhypertext, 30document definition by, 16465information access using, 6162iiepg (internet engineering planninggroup), 270ietf (internet engineering task force),219, 270iita (information infrastructure technology and applications) program, 29,122, 206, 242iitf (information infrastructure taskforce), 206, 21315, 217information infrastructure. see also nii;odncosts, 17783description, 21federal role, 21728networks compared to, 2122information retrieval services, 60, 64, 65information retrieval tools, 99100information superhighway. see nationalinformation infrastructure (nii)intellectual property protection, 1665,170nnacademic publishing, 16263, 164commercial publishing, 16364copyrights, 161, 16365open issues, 100principles ensuring, 5, 25461research needed, 100, 104testbeds for, 104intelsat (satellite transmission provider),273, 28081nninteractive video as instructional tool,12021interconnection costs, 18283international issues, 26981connectivity concerns, 27279cost issues, 27172distribution concerns, 27476export controls, 27779federal agency roles, 270fiberoptics connections, 273networks development, 26970odn characteristics and, 45, 46research networks, 27576satellite connections, 273, 27475,28081nntransmission concerns, 27274, 276volunteer networks, 271international organization for standardization. see osi protocolsinternetaccessing, 24549addresses for, 75, 24647, 250administration characteristics, 25051censorship issues, 159commercialization trends, 103current status, 243decentralization issues, 24751description, 21, 24349development of, 2223, 23739diversification of (figure), 26educational (k12) uses, 11, 12730index293about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.entertainment user base compared, 31federal policy issues, 21822financial considerations, 89funding partnerships, 17475growth (figure), 248higher education usage, 121interconnections, 249international aspects of, 24748, 270journal distribution via, 163library access, 13740networks constituting, 24647nii compared to, 18nsf expansion of, 23, 23840nsfnet as backbone, 21, 27, 23940oversight of, 22123, 25052privacy issues, 254protocols, 27677.see also ip;tcpresearch activities via, 11319routers, 247services (figure), 244technologies comprised by, 24647upgrades to backbone service, 21, 27user charges, 251value of, 112internet architecture board (iab), 250internet assigned number authority, 250internet engineering planning group(iepg), 270internet engineering task force (ietf),219, 270internet protocolsinternational issues, 27677osi protocols vs, 27677internet society, 25051international role of, 27080standards setting, 219user support via, 263ip (internet protocol).see also tcp;tcp/ipatm and, 57bearer service of odn and, 5154,9394, 1078nnchanges to, 5051connectivity and, 245networks using (figure), 248service features, 54isdn (integrated services digitalnetwork). see bisdniso (international organization for standardization). see osi protocolsjjvncnet regional network (map), 24llans. see local area networkslastmile connections.see also access circuitsdefinition, 285economics, 3638residential services and, 45, 18081, 200ntechnology and, 3637legal issuescensorship, 15860intellectual property protection, 16065,170nnliability concerns, 170nlibraries, 138personal information usage, 261privacy concerns, 15658, 169nliability concerns, 170nlibrary issues, 13341accessibility concerns, 13740commercial support, 173costs and scalability, 18081, 200ncosts as key factor, 14243, 146ndigital libraries, 104, 111n, 132, 13640,14546nequity in financing, 19697equity of access, 14953governmentgenerated information,15456interlibrary loan system, 146nprivacy requirements, 157public library characteristics, 13437,146nlocal area networks (lans)description, 19internet access via, 245index294about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as internetwork element, 22odn protocol stack and, 5losnettos regional network, 266mmbone (multicast backbone), 103, 110nmeasuring and monitoring of networks,7778, 98metropolitan area networks (mans), 22michnet, 122microwave links, 19middleware level (odn) services, 5, 49,55, 58diagram, 53research and development needs,99102, 1034midnet regional network, map, 24mobile access technology, federal supportof, 12mobility of computing, 7677, 97modem bandwidth limitations, 37monitoring and measuring networks,7778, 98mosaic hypertext interface, 30, 62, 120,165mpeg ii (motion picture experts group)standard, 85multicast backbone (virtual network),103, 110nmulticast capabilities, 95, 97multilateral issues. see international issues.multimediamoney spent on, 32products, 32teleconferencing, 243nnaming and addressing issues, 7476,9495naps. see network access points.nasa (national aeronautics and spaceadministration)international research networks, 27071,276, 278networking support, 23132n, 241national aeronautics and space administration (nasa). see nasanational information infrastructure (nii),113.see also separate issues entries: accessibility, cable television, connectivity, commercialization, education,entertainment, ethical, federal,international, library, publishing,research, telephone industry.architecture. see open data network(odn) architecture.benefits, 368commercial aspects of, 3compliance issues, 6, 6770development, recommendations for,1216, 209, 210, 214, 215, 21617,222, 225, 227development scenarios, 3233educational (k12) policy, 20910educational (k12) possibilities, 1112entertainment industry vision of, 3132federal roles in, 1016, 2048integrated vision of, 3438international issues, 7internet as basis for, 23internet compared to, 18internet vision of, 3031lastmile economies and, 3638odn central to, 216, 21820openness required for, 34principles for using, 24561research requirements, 1516, 22628scalability issues, 7478standards issues, 6, 7074, 21820unified nii, need for, 9091national institute of standards and technology (nist), 219, 280national oceanic and atmosphericadministration. see noaanational research and educationindex295about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network program. see nren program.national science foundation (nsf).see also nsfnet.cise directorate, 283commercial developments from, 247digital library research, 104, 111neducational (k12) support, 118, 122international network support, 270internet expansion by, 23, 23840nii, expansion of role in, 216regional networks study, 266supercomputer interconnections, 28national security agency (nsa), networking role, 280navigation and filtering tools, 99100nearnet regional network (map), 24network access points (naps), 222, 285diagram showing, 29nsfnet expansions and, 28network architecture, 4.see also open data network (odn)architecture.network communication protocol (tcpprecursor), 237network information center (nic), 262network services.see also vbns.flexibility required of, 4546illustration, 34networks, 1819.see also internet;nii;nsfnet.broadband, 20costs of infrastructure, 17683elements of (figure), 20federal expansion of, 23information infrastructure compared to,2122integrated (figure), 34nii compliance, 6principles guiding usage, 25461research requirements, 15as shared resources, 17879, 181speeds for end users, 21technology changes in, 2627, 22328transitions under way in, 27u.s. lead in, 12user support services, 26264newsgroups on internet, 30nic (network information center), 262nii, 142.see also national information infrastructure.nist (national institute of standards andtechnology), 219noaa (national oceanic and atmospheric administration)international research networks, 27071network use and support, 117, 24142north carolina, networking in, 265, 268nnorthwestnet regional network (map), 24nren (national research and educationnetwork) programagencies involved in, 230n, 24142,24142development of, 29, 24041education (k12) focus of, 119federal funding, 17475federal policy and, 20411, 228ngigabit technology, 27hpcc initiative and, 240iita and, 242internet support, 23, 23942nii and, 2nrenaissance committee, viiviiimembers, iiirecommendations, 1216nsf. see national science foundation;nsfnet.nsf connections program, 119, 122nsfnet backbone servicearpanet and, 21, 23940cooperative agreement, 283costs of expansion, 199developments proposed for, 2830federal policy and, 221internationalization via, 270internet and, 21, 23940map, 24index296about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nextgeneration, 2830regional networks and, 239status 1993 (figure), 24traffic (19911994), 25usage patterns and charges, 23132nvbns and, 240ntsc (national television systemscommittee) standard, 35, 284nysernet regional network, 239map, 24oodn. see open data networkoffice of science and technology policy(ostp), 23, 251omb (office of management and budget), 215251open data network (odn), 24, 4347access circuits, 8690, 9697addressing and naming, 7476benefits, 4647compliance issues, 6770criteria for, 44, 44deployment issues, 710, 14federal roles in, 1016mobility of computing, 7677, 97monitoring and measuring, 7778, 98network control functions, 9697objectives for, 4446openness defined, 34organizational objectives, 4446quality of service, 6567, 93, 95recommendation for, 14research and development, 91104scalability, 45, 7478security issues, 45, 7884, 1012software development needs, 1025standards, 45, 7074, 8586open data network (odn) architecture,4765applications level, 5, 49, 5963, 1035bearer service level, 5, 4748, 5155,6567, 8889, 9394closed architecture vs, 4diagram of, 53information vs network service, 5levels described, 4751, 53middleware level, 5, 48, 55, 58, 99102privacy protection, 5routing issues, 9495security issues, 5, 7884summary, 45transport level, 5, 4849, 106nopen networks, 4347.see also internet; open data network (odn).architecture, 4, 4765closed networks and, 44, 47commercial support, 9091description, 43export controls and, 27779international concerns, 27779internet example, 4, 4344openness defined, 34security and, 45open systems environment (ose), 277open systems interconnection protocol.see osi protocols.ose (open systems environment), 277osi (open systems interconnection) protocolsdefinition, 284federal support, 219ose as alternative to, 277ostp (office of science and technologypolicy), 23, 251ppacketlevel connectivity, 24546payment and pricing issues, 18398,2012nnaccess costs, 18688, 201neducation concerns, 19697equity concerns, 19697flatfee pricing, 183, 19193, 202ngovernmentgenerated information,15456, 168ninterconnect charges, 183index297about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.link technology and pricing, 37local infrastructure costs, 18688, 201nopen issues, 100prices of network expansion, 199nresource and cost matching, 18990royalties protection, 163, 164subsidies, 19395times of usage, 18990traffic congestion, 183, 18990transitional financing, 186usagebased pricing, 18991personal information, protection of,25861.see also privacy issues.phonenet, 238prepnet regional network (map), 24pricing issues. see financial issues; payment and pricing issues.privacy issues, 5, 15658.see also security issues.individuals' responsibilities, 169nprinciples for information usage, 25461specific privacy needs, 157property rights. see intellectual propertyprotection.proprietary network architecture, 4protocols, 19.see also osi; ip; tcp; tcp/ip.ptts (postal telephony and telegraphyorganizations), 272public interest networking. see educationissues;hospital and health care issues;library issues;research issues.public library issues. see library issues.publishing issues archiving electronically, 114censorship, 15860challenges of networks, 5354, 6162,15354, 16768ncopyright management, 164copyright protection, 100, 104, 161,16263copyright protection technology, 1045digital libraries, 13640document definition control, 16465educational publishing concerns, 126electronic distribution, 141, 153, 168nelectronic text experiments, 141filtering and navigating online information, 99100hypertext, 30, 6162, 16465information overload management,99100information retrieval services, 6163intellectual property protection, 100,104, 16065, 170nnlibraries, 13839, 146nmultimedia formatting needs, 105navigating and filtering online information, 99100needs of markets vs communities, 150,15253, 166nonline projects, 141open marketplace of ideas of www,6166royalties protection, 100, 163, 164technological changes, 15354, 16768nuser interface requirements, 99100qquality of service issues, 6567, 93, 95rradio links, 19red sage project (online journals), 163regional networks, 26668map, 24nsf connections program and, 238usage types, 266remote access services, 5960research and development for nii andodn needs, 91104, 110n, 223228research community issues, 11319.index298about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.see also science and technologyresearch issues.access concerns, 119arts and humanities, 11819collaborative computing, 11516costs and scalability, 18081, 200ncosts as key factor, 14243equity in financing, 19697equity of access, 14953financial considerations, 7humanities and arts, 11819international concerns, 27576internet influenced by, 23841networking applications, 114networks' influence on research, 9privacy requirements, 157scientific research, 11318research issues. see research communityissues; science and technologyresearch issues.reserved bandwidth service, 6567, 108nresidential services connections, 18081,200n.see also lastmile connections.routers, 19, 247routing network traffic, 9495, 110nssatellite linksinternational connectivity, 273, 28081nscalability of odn, 457478scholarship issues. see education issues(higher education); publishingissues; research community issues.schools and nii. see education issues.science and technology research issues,11319accessibility, 119biomedical, 11415earth sciences, 11314, 117, 24142,27071interdisciplinary possibilities, 115internet development role, 23841networks' influence on research, 9physical sciences, 116, 11718space sciences, 241, 27071, 276, 278visualization applications, 117security issues, 7884closed systems, 45data integrity, 80, 8183encryption, 8283, 101information security, 80, 8183, 25861international concerns, 27779open systems, 45principles guiding, 5, 25461research needs, 1012technological limits, 84user controls, 83user security, 25461wireless transmission, 109nsesquinet regional network, 239map, 24social issues.see also accessibility issues;education issues;ethical issues;legal issues.administration goals, 32, 33balancing conflicting needs, 150,15253, 166neducational concerns, 11933federal policy and social needs, 214lifelong education, 133newsgroups, 30public vs private interests, 9091,21113, 232nsoftware development research needs,1025sonet (synchronous optical network)standard, 223, 232n, 284span (nasa network), 238standards issues, 7074connectivity and, 7172consumeroriented standards, 220, 231nfederal policy regarding, 21820international concerns, 27677nii compliance, 67, 6770osi protocols, 70, 109n, 219, 27677risks to, 7172tcp/ip, 109nindex299about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.state networks, 26668subscriber loop (lastmile connection,telephones), 285subsidies for user charges, 19395suranet regional network, 239map, 24switching technology, analog vs digital, 35symmetry of data paths, 87, 110nsynchronous optical network (sonet)standard, 284tt1 network service (1.5 mbps), 21, 27, 286.t3 network service (45 mbps)definition, 286map, 24upgrade costs, 199upgrade from t1, 21, 27, 239tcp (transport control protocol)early development, 241multicast limitations, 96odn transport level and, 5, 51tcp/ip protocols, 109n.see also ip;tcp.teachers (k12) and networks, 12430telecommunications infrastructure. seeinformation infrastructure; nationalinformation infrastructure (nii);networks.telecommunications policy roundtableprinciples, 255teleconferencinghome education possibilities, 133multimedia, 243telephone industry issuesaccess circuits bidirectionality, 8687, 89community access support, 173, 198nequity of access, 14950, 166nlobbying efforts, 230nphonenet, 238technology upgrades, 37video possibilities, 31television (cable). see cable televisionissues.television issues (broadcast)highdefinition tv (hdtv), 4142nntsc, 35, 284transmission standard's limitations, 35testbeds for network technology, 21, 27convergence of tv with data, 8586toward a national research network(1988), vii, 27traffic congestion problems, 18990, 201ntransmission issuesinternational concerns, 27274, 276internet vs tv broadcasting, 3536satellites, 273tv broadcasting standards (ntsc), 35wireless, 108n, 109ntransport level (odn), 5, 4849, 106nn,diagram, 53limitations to, 96protocol requirements, 96, 1078nn,twbnet (arpa), 241uucnet, 266universal service expectation, 14950,166nunix systems, 242, 245usagebased pricing, 183, 18991user addressing issues, 7476, 9495user authentication, 83user charges, 810.see also payment and pricing issues.free information providers and, 143internet model, 251libraries and, 136sources of, 251subsidies for, 19395user interface requirements, 99100user naming issues, 7476, 26263index300about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.realizing the information future: the internet and beyondcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.user privacy protection. see privacy issues.user support services, 26264uucp, 271vvbns (very high speed backbone networkservice)access possibilities, 28definition, 286federal policy and, 221upgrades, 21, 27, 240video (interactive), 63, 12021video services delivery, 63, 8889videoconferencing, 145nvirtual network (multicast backbone),103, 110nvolunteer networks (fidonet), 271vsats (small satellite dishes), 273wwais (wide area information servers),6263westnet regional network, 239map, 24whitepages user search services, 262wide area information servers (wais),6263wide area networks (wans)description, 19as internetwork element, 22odn protocol stack and, 5wireless technologycompliance issues, 69federal support of, 12limits of, 108nsecurity problems (radio), 109nwww (worldwide web), 6163, 64xx.25 protocol, 265, 275, 285index301about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.