detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4812research recommendations to facilitate distributed work84 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309051859 | doi 10.17226/4812technology and telecommunications: issues and impacts committee, nationalresearch councilresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.researchrecommendationsto facilitate distributed worktechnology and telecommuting: issues and impacts committeecomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1994iresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the department of energy (grant no. defg0293er25161), and that support does not constitute an endorsement by the department ofenergy of the views expressed in the report.library of congress catalog card number 9468990international standard book number 0309051851additional copies of this report are available from: national academy press 2101 constitutionavenue, nw box 285 washington, dc 20055 8006246242 2023343313 (in the washingtonmetropolitan area)b498copyright 1994 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and telecommuting: issues andimpacts committeerobert kraut, carnegie mellon university, chairkathleen christensen, city university of new yorkclement cole, locus computing corporationfred goldstein, digital equipment corporationgil gordon, gil gordon associatesg. anthony gorry, rice universityirene greif, lotus development corporationpatricia mokhtarian, university of california at davislisa neal, eds center for advanced researchlawrence rowe, university of california at berkeleychristopher schmandt, massachusetts institute of technologymischa schwartz, columbia universityjames mallory, computer science and telecommunications boardstephen godwin, transportation research boardgloria bemah, project assistantiiiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunicationsboardwilliam a. wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems inc.james gray, san francisco, californiabarbara grosz, harvard universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorolarobert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.edward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise a. arnheim, senior staff officerherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames mallory, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria bemah, administrative assistantkimberly striker, project assistantleslie wade, project assistantivresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofscience, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studyjohn a. armstrong, ibm corporation (retired)sylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyavner friedman, university of minnesotasusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationhans mark, university of texas at austinclaire e. max, lawrence livermore national laboratorychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyjames w. mitchell, at&t bell laboratoriesjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratorynorman metzger, executive directorvresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific andengineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technologyand to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it toadvise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. brucealberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, underthe charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization ofoutstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selectionof its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences theresponsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy ofengineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nationalneeds, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. robert m. white is president of the nationalacademy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the nationalacademy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriateprofessions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the nationalacademy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federalgovernment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute ofmedicine.the national research council was organized by the national academyof sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science andtechnology with the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advisingthe federal government. functioning in accordance with general policiesdetermined by the academy, the council has become the principal operatingagency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy ofengineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly byboth academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robertm. white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the nationalresearch council.viwww.nationalacademies.orgresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein 1993, the department of energy (doe) asked the computer scienceand telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council toorganize a study of the technological issues and impacts related totelecommuting. in response, cstb, in collaboration with the nrc'stransportation research board (trb), convened a committee of researchersand practitioners with both technical and sociological expertise. thecommittee's task was to recommend research into relevant computing andcommunications technologies that could enable increased telecommuting. indeveloping these recommendations the committee relied on existing literature,briefings, and its own expertise and deliberations. with the agreement of doe,the study committee chose to broaden its approach to its task in two specificways. first, it chose to examine both telecommuting and the broader topic ofdistributed work, because it believed that focusing solely on telecommutingwould overlook more farreaching impacts of computing andtelecommunications technology on the way work is done. second, thecommittee chose to examine technological issues within a broad social contextin order to ensure the relevance of its recommendations.this study is the result of the study committee's deliberations. it isindependent of and complementary to the april 1993 department oftransportation study, transportation implications of telecommutingprefaceviiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.), on the future impacts oftelecommuting on transportation, and to the doe study energy, emissions, andsocial consequences of telecommuting (u.s. government printing office,washington, d.c.), which was released in early 1994. the publication ofresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed work during 1994 willallow its conclusions and recommendations to be considered during thedevelopment of the national information infrastructure (nii) in the samemanner as those regarding other nationally important applications such aseducation and health care.at another level, the committee is convinced that computing,telecommunications, and related technologies are profoundly changing the waysin which society acquires, manages, and distributes information. in the privatesector, the development of new tools for distributed work could enable newforms of collaboration, allowing employees to work effectively at any locationthat is mutually agreeable to them and their employers. one result could benew, more productive configurations of people, processes, and technology. inthe public sector, new tools for distributed work could be used to address highpriority needs, such as rural and innercity health care, and to remedy longstanding inequities among the nation's classrooms.a nationwide information and network infrastructure could open newavenues for mutual cooperation and support among our workplaces, schools,neighborhood centers, community groups, and government. this new digitalenvironment has the potential to enable a richness in information access andsharing that could help us restore a sense of community within and between thepublic and private sectors. achieving such goals will depend on having both thespecific knowledge and broad understanding needed to implement appropriatetechnology wisely. in accordance with that concept, this report complementstwo other recent cstb reports, information technology in the service societyand realizing the information future (both published by national academypress, washington, d.c., 1994), and the forthcoming rights andresponsibilities of participants in networked communities.the technology and telecommuting: issues and impacts committee isgrateful to the numerous individuals who contributed to its deliberations and tothose who commented on early drafts of this report. the anonymous reviewersin particular helped to sharpen and focus the material. the staff of the computerscience and telecommunications board and the transportation research boardwere indispensable in creating the report. gloria bemah attended to theprefaceviiiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.multitude of details required for committee meetings and report production,leslie wade helped check references, and jim mallory transformed thecommittee's submissions into the final text. the committee, however, retainsresponsibility for the final content of the report.robert kraut, chairtechnology and telecommuting: issues and impacts committeeprefaceixresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 technology and the changing workplace 5 new opportunities for flexible work 5 this report 7 approach and emphasis 7 scope and definitionsštelecommuting versus distributedwork 8 technology and society 8 the rise of distributed workšrepresentative concerns 10 other impacts and public policy considerations 13 summary comments 142 distributed work: current reality and promise 16 aspects of distributed work enabled by computing and communications technology 16 information processing 17 audio and video communications 19 computermediated communications 22 information sharing and use of remote facilities 24 the reality of today's distributed work 25 the mobile workerša composite 25 distributed education 29contentsxiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. collaborative workšthe need for new products linked tounderlying databases or objects 31 the potential for increased distributed work 323 distributed work and group processes 35 distributed work in the context of business organizations 36 strategies for accommodating distributed work 37 basic group processes to be supported for effective distributedwork 39 selecting goals 39 recruiting group members 40 managing distributed groups 42 obtaining information 424 facilitating distributed work 46 identifying barriers to expansion of distributed work 46 complexityofuse barriers 46 costoftechnology barriers 48 designing communications infrastructure to support a range ofcapabilities for distributed work 49 supporting typical work routines 49 envisioning the applications enabled by unlimited bandwidth 51 enabling integration of lowand highbandwidth applications 52 meeting requirements for multimedia communication 52 user requirements 53 technology requirements 545 research recommendations 56 infrastructure research 56 mobile work 57 multipoint, multimedia distributed work 59 applications research 60 domainspecific research 60 generic research 62 conclusion 64 bibliography 66contentsxiiresearch recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summarythe term ''distributed work" describes the practice of working withoutregard to location by using a combination of modern communications andcomputing technologies. it includes: working while truly mobilešin activities ranging from sales and onsite customer support or equipment repair to composing and submittinga product design while traveling; working as part of a geographically dispersed project teamšinactivities such as research and report writing done largely withouttraveling to a common site; and traditional telecommutingšcarrying out activities such as respondingto customers' telephone calls by utilizing a personal computer linked toa remote database while working at home or at a satellite work center.distributed workers can engage in these activities on a fulltime basis, asmight be the case for a distributed customer service operation. perhaps morecommonly, however, they may engage in the practice of distributed work on aparttime basis, such as spending a day per week contributing to a companywide product evaluation.to the extent that a job involves or is enhanced by the creation,manipulation, storage, or communication of information, it is increasinglypossible to do that job anywhere that the appropriate informationexecutive summary1research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.processing equipment and communications links are found. there are numerouseconomic and social benefits to be gained by enhancing and extendingdistributed work practices. these include increased locational independence foremployees, greater flexibility in convening project teams for employers, andbetter use of transportation resources for society. there are also some potentialdisadvantages, such as loss of contact and identification with an organization, aswell as a possible increase in demands on employees' time and energy.although many individuals already engage in distributed work, currenttechnologies have several important limitations, especially for groups whosemembers are geographically dispersed and for individuals who need to workwhile truly mobile. however, technology itself is only an enabler of orconstraint on change rather than a direct motivator of change. thus, along withbetter technologies, distributed work practices will also be enhanced by a betterunderstanding of the human factors and sociology of the changing workplaceand labor force.recent improvements in the capabilities and availability ofcommunications and computing tools have meant that distributed work,including telecommuting, can be done more easily now than in the past.likewise, future improvements in these interrelated fields will benefit thoseengaged in distributed work. however, to optimize the opportunities for andeffectiveness of distributed work, the study committee recommends thatresearch also be conducted with distributed work as a specific focus.research recommendationscomputing power, in terms of processing speed and mass storage capacity,and communication capabilities, in terms of available bandwidth and quality ofservices, can be viewed as a spectrum of varying capacities. currently, withrespect to distributed work, the "high end" of the spectrum may be thought of asbeing represented by a fully configured desktop workstation attached to a highbandwidth network. the "low end" of the spectrum may be considered to becharacterized by a small handheld device such as a personal digital assistantwith only lowbandwidth wireless communications capabilities.through the middle part of the capability spectrum, the nation's computingand communications infrastructure is reasonably well established and utilized.highspeed modems and communications services are decreasing in price andbecoming more widely used. both individuals and organizations have abundantcomputing powerexecutive summary2research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.readily available, and the most pressing need is for applications research.conversely, the communications and computing communities should conductresearch aimed at stretching the capabilities of the network and computinginfrastructure at both the low and high end of the spectrum. the committee'srecommendations for technical research are detailed in chapter 5 of the reportand summarized below.infrastructure researchworking while mobile presents many challenges, because communicationsbandwidth and computing power are limited compared to what is typicallyavailable in a stationary environment with a wire or optical fiber networkconnection. the committee's research recommendations center on increasingthe bandwidth available to mobile workers and better using whatever bandwidthis available at any point in time, as well as facilitating periods of disconnectedwork when there is no bandwidth at all. the fact that communicationsbandwidth and computing power can often be substituted for each other bothcomplicates and adds promise to research at the low end of the capabilityspectrum.research at the high end of the infrastructure capability spectrum shouldcenter on exploring distributed work practices that can be facilitated bymultipoint, multimedia communication at generally abundant bandwidths.currently, little is known about transmitting large volumes of interactive,multimedia traffic among multiple parties. the committee recommendsresearch centered on understanding and specifying qualityofservice factors,controlling the various types of traffic, enabling new billing methods, andminimizing the human efforts currently involved in establishing andmaintaining multipoint, multimedia conference sessions.applications researchvarious types of distributed work are reasonably common in the u.s.workplace. however, the implementation and effectiveness of distributed workare often constrained by the computing and communications applicationsavailable to support it. the committee recommends researchorienteddistributed work field trials in areas of national or commercial interest to helpsolve the difficult problems of information retrieval, sharing, and browsing;group socialization; remote supervision; and related problems in the context ofrealworld employeremployee distributed work relationships. while these fieldexecutive summary3research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trials would be conducted within specific domains, the lessons learned and toolsdeveloped could be applied in many other fields as well. an interdisciplinaryapproach is needed to gain the full benefit of such trials.the committee also recommends more general research related toapplications to benefit telecommuting. if distributed work is to expand beyondthose individuals with considerable technical skill, researchers must payattention to simplifying complex user interfaces and commonly requiredoperations. research should concentrate on developing tools, interfaces, andsystems that encourage information sharing; bridging synchronous andasynchronous communications to facilitate input to and followup from groupwork sessions; improving and extending the user interface to the telephonenetwork and services; improving capabilities to use audio as a data type; andreducing the costs of input/output devices and network support.conclusionduring a period when the nation's economy seems to be in transition to apostindustrial model, the nation and its work force would be well served byhaving efficient and effective tools for engaging in distributed work. theresearch topics addressed by the committee in chapter 5 will provide importantnew technological capabilities to enhance and extend the practice of distributedwork to provide greater locational flexibility, expanded employmentopportunities, and better use of our transportation resources.executive summary4research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1technology and the changing workplacenew opportunities for flexible workto the extent that a job involves or is enhanced by the creation,manipulation, storage, or communication of information, it is increasinglypossible to do that job anywhere that the appropriate information processingequipment and telecommunications links are found. this is true not only forjobs performed by a single isolated individual, but also for group tasks, such asdecision making, that involve multiple individuals in dispersed locations.there are many potential benefits of the flexibility that locationalindependence provides. for an employer, those benefits may include the abilityto recruit the best workers anywhere without requiring them to move to acentral location, the ability to assemble and disassemble teams on an asneededbasis, the ability to offer improved customer service through coverage overlonger hours and a greater geographical area, and savings in overhead coststhrough more efficient use of space. for a worker, the benefits of locationalindependence may include a more desirable lifestyle: greater choice inresidential location, type of job, and allocation of time between work andpersonal interests. for society, benefits may include greater economicefficiency, opportunities for economic development in underdeveloped areas,expanded employment opportunities for individuals with limited mobility, andmore efficient use of the transportation infrastructure.technology and the changing workplace5research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, the potential benefits of greater flexibility in where and whenwork can be done must be balanced against the potential costs or disadvantages.for an employer, disadvantages may include the direct costs of investing in therequisite technology, the intangible costs of learning how to use new tools anddevelop new styles of management suited to distributed work, less opportunityfor certain kinds of serendipitous productivity (e.g., clearing up of amisunderstanding during a chance meeting at the coffee pot), and some loss ofdistributed workers' identification with an organization. for a worker,disadvantages may include loss of privacy, the blurring of boundaries betweenwork and personal activities, fewer chances to interact socially with colleagues,and the increasing domination of work over other aspects of life if the worker isexpected to be constantly on call for the employer. employees may bear part ofthe costs of a new distributed work style if, for example, the employer allowstelecommuting only by those who are willing to provide their own computers.loss of job security and fringe benefits can result from any shift toward agreater use of temporary and contract workers and the flattening oforganizational hierarchies. increased social isolation may be a negative outcomefor some distributed workers.for society, a negative consequence of greater flexibility may be afragmented populace that is increasingly able to segregate itself intohomogeneous strata. the ability to enjoy a distributed work style may beinequitably distributed, and the socioeconomic gap between the information"haves" and "have nots" may continue to widen. the offshore relocation ofsome locationindependent work, increased automation of jobs, and associatedorganizational restructuring may contribute to increased domesticunemployment (cstb, 1994a). finally, greater flexibility for workers inchoosing where to live may further exacerbate urban sprawl and result in toorapid growth in rural areas. (see the report energy, emissions, and socialconsequences of telecommuting (u.s. department of energy, 1994) fordetailed discussion of many of the societal impacts of telecommuting.)until recently, the information technology that was commonly available,the communications infrastructure, and prevailing work practices have inhibitedindividuals and organizations from taking full advantage of the potentialbenefits of flexibility in the place and time of work. for example, when 300baud modems were the norm, each full computer screen of text tookapproximately 50 seconds to transfer, and most file transfers had to be manuallyinitiated at both the origin and destination. increasingly, however, theproliferation of more affordable, more portable, more powerful, and somewhateasier to use computing systems and telecommunications equipmenttechnology and the changing workplace6research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has broadened the opportunities for effective, efficient locationindependentwork. developments on the horizon, such as greater integration of information,communications, and multimedia systems, suggest that these opportunities willcontinue to expand. simultaneously, on the demand side, changes in theeconomy, increased time pressures, a desire to reduce energy consumption,corporate layoffs, and the growing use of work teams have resulted in increasedinterest in implementing telecommuting and distributed work programs andprojects.together, the new enabling technologies and an increase in demand arelikely to result in an increase in locationindependent work. how such work canbest be facilitated and integrated to meet individual, group, and national needsand expectations is a topic that merits careful study.this reportapproach and emphasisdespite the growing interest in and potential benefits of distributed work,there are many technological, economic, and social barriers to its wideradoption. although in its deliberations the committee focused initially ondeveloping a technical research agenda, it quickly realized the importance ofacknowledging context. distributed work is an area for which consideration ofpurely technical issues is potentially misleading and counterproductive. thus, inaddition to outlining goals for technological research that could facilitate wideradoption of distributed work among individuals and organizations, this reportalso emphasizes the need to understand the broader social, economic, andpublic policy impacts of wider use of computing and communicationstechnology, including possible negative impacts and how to ameliorate them.although detailed treatment of such issues is outside the direct charge to thecommittee, social and economic considerationsše.g., the capability forubiquity of connection, or the willingness and ability of people to workindependently and often in relative isolationšprovide the larger frameworkwithin which specific technical decisions are made and directions taken. thecommittee concluded that understanding that framework is an essentialprecondition to making the most effective technical decisions. the results ofsuch decisions will be seen in the longterm ability of comparatively newactivities like distributed work to contribute positively to u.s. national life.technology and the changing workplace7research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scope and definitionsštelecommuting versus distributedworkone difficulty in discussing new work styles is the widespread lack ofconsensus on the use of terms such as "telecommuting" and "teleworking" (seekraut, 1988, for one discussion of the difficulties associated with defining andmeasuring the amount of telecommuting). it has been suggested (mokhtarian,1991a) that two factors that distinguish telecommuting from other forms ofremote work are remote supervision and a reduction in commuting. under thesecriteria, overtime work done at home in the evening by an insurance companyexecutive, for example, would generally not be considered telecommutingbecause it does not involve a reduction in travel. in contrast, an employee of asoftware publisher who answers telephone requests for technical assistancefrom his or her home, instead of answering the questions while present at acentrally located helpline location, is certainly engaged in telecommuting.likewise, a person doing transcription for a medical clinic and submitting thecompleted work via a modem and telephone line is a telecommuter.however, to focus exclusively on telecommuting, as narrowly defined, isto overlook the sweeping nature of technologysupported changes that areaffecting virtually every employer and every worker. these changes are leadingto a work style that may be broadly referred to as distributed work: work that isdone in a location different from that of the supervisor, subordinate, or fellowteam member. distributed work includes mobile work (work done whiletraveling), computersupported cooperative work, field work, offshoreinformation processing, teleconferencing, and numerous other arrangements aswell as homeand centerbased telecommuting. to encompass the diversity ofcurrent approaches to locationindependent work and to develop acorrespondingly broad research agenda, this report examines distributed workof various kinds in an effort to delineate the strengths and limitations of currentcomputing and communications technologies for enabling effective work.technology and societyit is important to view technology in its proper role as an enabler of, orconstraint on, change, rather than as the direct motivator of social or individualchange. an individual may be motivated to telecommute not becausetechnology permits it, but rather, for example, to avoid an onerous commute, toget more work done, or to have more time to spend with family. an employermay be motivatedtechnology and the changing workplace8research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to adopt telecommuting for its staff not because technology makes it possible,but rather to improve recruitment and retention, save money, increaseproductivity, or help comply with mandated tripreduction goals. confusing anenabler of change with a motivation for change is likely to lead to overstatingthe potential impacts of the enabler, which does not alone guarantee that changewill occur. change will occur when there are no binding constraints and whenone or more motivations are present (mokhtarian and salomon, 1994).new technologies sometimes emerge because they are needed; that is,researchers are motivated to develop a technology because they are aware of aneed that the technology can satisfy. often, there is a cyclical interrelationshipbetween technological and social issues related to the work environment: thesocial context gives rise to the need for a given technology, and over time, thattechnology may have social impacts that are significant enough to alter thesocial context, giving rise to the need for another round of technologicalinnovation. for example, yates (1989) has shown that as corporations grew andorganized into divisions, the internal office memorandum was developed toincrease communications and document organizational procedures.typewriters, filing systems, various copying technologies, and word processorswere all developed to meet the demand for more memoranda and other writtenmaterials. more recently, electronic mail was developed to meet a variety ofimmediate communication needs in an increasingly distributed environment.each of these technologies affected society by creating new classes of jobs,which in turn often led to further organizational division and the resultant needfor even newer, better forms of communication.in other instances, technological research is driven by the desire to expandknowledge and capabilities for their own sake, without consideration for theirlikely application. research and development conducted without specific needsin mind may produce important scientific understanding, new technologies, andsolutions to problems that are not yet widely recognized. however, researchthat is exclusively technologydriven also may produce solutions that no onewants and for which there is no market, or solutions that some may even viewas potentially damaging.the social context of research efforts helps ensure that some of each typeof research is conducted. generally, exploration of technology for its own sakeis balanced by economic and social realities, and pragmatism is balanced byopportunities for unexpected discoveries. regardless of the motivation, newtechnologies may permit us not only to do the old things better, but also to donew things thattechnology and the changing workplace9research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are not imagined until the enabling technology is available. the practice ofdistributed work and the technologies developed to support it are best examinedin relation to society and with an understanding that they will have importantimpacts on all of us.the rise of distributed workšrepresentative concernsimpacts on transportation and land usetelecommuting per se is frequently proposed as a strategy for reducingpeakperiod vehicle trips, fuel consumption, and air pollution by substitutingcommunications for travel. it has been included as such in a variety of federal,state, and regional or local policy statements (see, e.g., mokhtarian, 1991b). agreat deal of research has been conducted on the transportationrelated impactsof telecommuting. some of the early studies hypothesized about the ultimateextent of telecommuting and its effects on transportation (for a review, see, e.g.,salomon, 1986). it was suggested, for example, that the travel mileage saved bytelecommuting might be partially or completely offset by an increase innoncommuting trips motivated by some inherent desire for mobility or travel.empirically, this effect of generating more travel has not been found to date.the measured net impact of telecommuting on transportation has been arelatively uniform reduction in miles traveled: an average of 36.1 personmilessaved per telecommuting occurrence (mokhtarian et al., 1994). however, thesefindings are based on shortterm studies involving small samples of earlyadopters of telecommuting who may be unrepresentative of the population thateventually engages in it. for example, studies published to date have found thattelecommuters live about twice as far from work as the average commuter intheir region. as telecommuting moves into the mainstream, the per capita travelsavings of telecommuting is likely to decline but will probably remain positiveon balance.a broader critical issue concerns the transportationrelated impacts ofenhanced computing and telecommunications capabilities generally, not justthose of telecommuting. what will be the impacts on transportation ofdistributed work activities such as the remote acquisition of goods and services,tele and videoconferencing, product or project coordination with businesspartners, and consumer activities such as teleshopping? there are a few isolatedempirical and anecdotal examples of complementary effects (mokhtarian, 1988,1990), such as electronic access to information and people prompting traveltechnology and the changing workplace10research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to obtain further information or to develop a relationship, or a regionalvideoconference stimulating travel because it is accessible to more people thanwould be a single national conference without video. however, suchcomplementary impacts of distributed work activities on transportation have notbeen studied as extensively as substitution and generation impacts. thus thepossibility of distributed work leading to more employmentrelated travelremains a fertile area for research.another important social impact of using computing andtelecommunications technology for distributed work involves changes in landuse patterns. a commonly held hypothesis is that distributed work will make itpossible for people to move even farther from central sites than they currentlylive, possibly leading to a net increase in travel. again, the empirical evidenceto date (nilles, 1991; mokhtarian, 1994) has not borne out the hypothesis thatdistributed work will lead to fewer but longer commuting trips in the aggregate,although no longterm evaluation has been made. a simple theoretical modelbased on economic location theory (lund and mokhtarian, 1994) suggests thateven after optimal residential relocation occurs, total commutemiles traveledwill generally be lower because of more widespread telecommuting, but moreresearch is needed to refine such a model and to test it empirically.in the literature on the general impacts of computing andtelecommunications on land use and urban form, the most commonly expressedexpectation is that their use will lead to greater decentralization. however, it isalso pointed out that telecommunications is usually a facilitator, not a driver, ofdecisions about residential and industrial location and that it can supportcentralization as well as decentralization. for example, although the elevator isconsidered to have made modern skyscrapers possible, the telephone played anequally important role in making them practical (de sola pool, 1980). althoughcomputing and telecommunications may support a relative decline in theadvantage of central locations, these locations will retain a competitiveadvantage due to the economics of agglomeration and the existence of theirmassive, alreadybuilt environments (nijkamp and salomon, 1989).social isolationone reason for early skepticism about the widespread adoption oftelecommuting was the idea that people would not want to be isolated fromothers. the assumption seemed to be that telecommuting was to be fulltimework from home. current experience indicatestechnology and the changing workplace11research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that telecommuting is most often parttime: one or two days per week onaverage. at this level, isolation and related issues such as visibility tomanagement are not often cited as concerns by telecommuters. however, thereis obviously some selfselection bias in considering the responses only oftelecommuters, while not obtaining and considering the responses of those whomay have chosen not to telecommute because of the possibility of isolation.even when telecommuting is virtually fulltime, telecommuters and, for thatmatter, millions of homebased business owners have found numerousstrategies for circumventing isolation (christensen, 1988; race, 1993;shellenbarger, 1993). these strategies include participating in local chapters ofprofessional organizations, having lunch with colleagues, and using electronicmail extensively. thus, the same technology that permits increased isolation canalso be used to decrease it. finally, experimentation with telecommuting atsatellite work centers like the federal telecommuting center in waldorf,maryland, is increasing (bagley et al., 1993). one hypothesized advantage ofsuch centers is that they offer an opportunity for some social and perhapsprofessional interaction.the effects of isolation may reach beyond the individual actively engagedin telecommuting. for example, individuals who become isolated as the resultof corporate downsizing (a department of specialists may be reduced to a singleindividual) may require contacts with other human beings (i.e., networks) inother organizations to survive in their jobs. in such cases, too, distributed worktechnologies can decrease isolation as well as cause it: electronic mail,computeraided conferencing, and the online availability of conferenceproceedings can help individuals to keep current within their occupations.a broader question concerns the impact of computing andtelecommunications in general on social isolation. arguably, thesetechnologies, much like television, have contributed to social isolation, althoughjust as arguably, they have also given rise to new forms and norms ofsocialization. technology is a tool that can be used to break down socialbarriers by enabling egalitarian access through such mechanisms as electronicmail communications, as much as it can be used to facilitate separation throughmechanisms such as the increased opportunity to choose isolated residentiallocations.management and personnel considerationsthe process of selecting personnel for telecommuting can be usefullyrepresented as a triangle: the right employees, jobs, and managers must beselected to ensure the success of telecommuting. moretechnology and the changing workplace12research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.than 10 years of practical experience have helped define the selection criteriafor each. most important is the selection of remote workers, which should bebased on a combination of wellinformed volunteerism from the employees andfinal selection by management, based on the employees' work habits, skills, andknowledge of the organization.supervision of remote workers has been the primary stumbling block formany organizations considering telecommuting. the perennial question is, howcan i tell they're working when they're not here in the office? the best answer isbrought out by another question, how can you tell they're working when theyare here in the office? this exchange highlights the fact that many managerspractice ''eyeball management," often erroneously assuming that if work andworkers can be seen, workers are working and being supervised. effectivemanagers of telecommuters learn that it is the product, not the presence of aperson or a visible process, that counts; they should be selected and trained sothat they are comfortable managing workers according to the end productproduced. likewise, jobs that have, or can be modified to have, ascertainableend products and quantifiable standards for quality should be considered as theprime candidates for distributed work.managing or working successfully to produce expected deliverables meansthat telecommuters are relatively free to work how and when they want as longas the end product meets expectations. conversely, managers and workers whoprefer commandandcontrol organizational styles may find it uncomfortable, ifnot impossible, to manage and work at a distance. thus, in the short term, theperceived loss of control of remote workers is a concern that could inhibit morewidespread implementation of distributed work practices.other impacts and public policy considerationsbeyond concerns about effectiveness, efficiency, social consequences,management, and personnel issues that will be resolved largely on a casebycase basis are a number of broad public policy issues associated with theexpansion of distributed work. they will need to be discussed, understood, andaddressed in order for distributed work to expand to the fullest extent possible.perhaps foremost is the question of the amount of private and public support forthe infrastructure that is likely to be needed to provide the enhancedcommunications services required for distributed work. in the past, the nationhas supported infrastructure development by providing general or limitedmonopolies, loans, grants, construction subsidies, and tax incentives. in mostrecent developments involving technology,technology and the changing workplace13research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, the private sector has been the main investor in new facilities. giventhe broad range of technological capabilities that may be needed for distributedwork, it seems likely that private funding will play the major role, withgovernment supplementing efforts only in areas that will not be addressedwithout such assistance. user fees and access to new services are also a concernto many, particularly to those who believe that access to information andcommunications over the national information infrastructure will be necessaryto fully participate in tomorrow's society and economy.financial considerations will also affect our ability as a nation to furtherdevelop and expand our capabilities for distributed work. although since worldwar ii the federal government has played a crucial role in financing both basicand applied research in numerous fields, that role is now in transition, and thereis great uncertainty regarding the philosophy for support and levels of federalfunding for various fields.the increased practice of distributed work also raises concerns aboutintellectual property rights, privacy, and the security of information as it isstored, accessed, and processed electronically. several reports of the nationalresearch council have detailed these issues. computers at risk (cstb, 1990),realizing the information future (cstb, 1994b), and rights andresponsibilities of participants in networked communities (cstb, 1994c) arehelpful for their discussion and recommendations on these and related issues.summary commentsthe overall societal consequences of distributed work practices are not yetcompletely clear, and their treatment is not within the scope of this study. manyresearchers in academia, industry, and government are currently examiningdistributed work, including telecommuting, in order to gain a betterunderstanding of its advantages and disadvantages. a recent department ofenergy report, energy, emissions, and social consequences of telecommuting(u.s. department of energy, 1994), summarizes much of this research, and thedepartment of transportation's transportation implications of telecommuting(u.s. department of transportation, 1993) focuses more detailed scrutiny ontransportation. intellectual teamwork: social and technological foundationsof cooperative work (kraut et al., 1990) is also useful for its linking of socialand work issues and technology. the committee underscores the need for openand detailed discussion of the public policies that may be implemented withrespect totechnology and the changing workplace14research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the practice of distributed work. technology and society have a complexrelationship that is constantly changing (see, e.g., cstb, 1994a). it will beimportant for researchers to address not only the technical agendarecommended in this report, but also interrelated social and economic issues.technology and the changing workplace15research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2distributed work: current reality andpromisethis chapter describes today's distributed work landscape, exploringcurrent uses, benefits, limitations, potential enhancements, and opportunities forexpansion. its purpose is not to describe an exhaustive set of applications andscenarios, but rather to aid in exploring the need for further technologicalresearch aimed at enhancing distributed work. although the initial discussionfocuses on the representative activities of information processing andcommunicating at various levels, it is clear that jobs vary in the extent to whichthey require complex handling of data, people, and things (see u.s. departmentof labor, 1991). dealing with people and objects requires tools that aredifferent from those for dealing with information. u.s. industry has developed arich palette of mail and telecommunications applications to enablecommunication among people at a distance. however, even in regular telephonecommunications, improvement is needed for some typical distributed worktasks. in comparison, there are even fewer techniques for dealing with objects ata distance.aspects of distributed work enabled bycomputing and communications technologythe last 15 years have seen a proliferation of information technologies andcommunications applications that let people do theirdistributed work: current reality and promise16research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.work while overcoming some of the limitations of space and time. corporatedatabases, electronic libraries, and information servers help people retrieve,process, and store the information they need to do their jobs, regardless oflocation. facsimile, electronic mail, and audioand videoconferencing nowroutinely supplement longstanding communications media such as facetofacemeetings, postal mail, and the telephone, keeping people in touch with theirfellow employees and with their clients and customers. the traditional mediaalso have changed: many telephone systems now include voice mail, the u.s.postal service offers overnight delivery, and formerly widespread telex servicehas been largely replaced by other communications technologies. homebasedresources, too, have been augmented: national surveys have shown that doingpaid employment from the home is the best predictor of having a computer athome (dudley et al., 1993).information processingdeclines in the cost of computing hardware and the concomitant growth inthe use of computers for both routine and strategic purposes in organizationsmean that much of the information that people need to do their jobs is incomputerized form at some point during its life cycle. and once information isin computerized form, it becomes possible for people to access it withcomparatively few logistical constraints on where they are and when they do so.much of the information available to remote personnel is generated as a byproduct of an organization's routine transaction processing, rather than createdspecifically for the purpose of supporting distributed work. for example,computerized reservation systems for the airline industry were developed toallow a highly distributed work force of travel agents to gain uptodateinformation about flight schedules and prices. a variant of this reservationsystem combined with nationwide data networks such as compuserve nowallows average citizens to access the same information on their personalcomputers at home. similarly, by using database technology combined with calldistributors and other telecommunications services, some customer servicerepresentatives are able to do their work independent of location. servicerepresentatives working for a telephone company, for example, can accessrecent bills, customer credit history, and databases of help information so thatthey can resolve billing conflicts, collect pastdue accounts, take new serviceorders, and answer customer questions.many workers can also have at their disposal information beyond thatcreated by a single organization. for a fee, individuals anddistributed work: current reality and promise17research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.firms can access any of the thousands of commercial databases containing avast array of information, including the full text of legal cases; financialinformation about firms from various sources, including securities andexchange commission filings; consumer and business credit information;patent filings; stock quotations; the full text of national and regionalnewspapers; and research articles in virtually every scientific and technicalfield. an increasing number of databases (especially for governmentgeneratedor governmentowned information) are also becoming available on a nofeebasis via the internet.moreover, recent developments in information publishing and retrievalhave made increasing amounts of information available on public networkssuch as the internet and america online. for example, a tool developed byresearchers at cern in geneva, the worldwide web, links documents andfiles connected by the internet. the information in the web is based on a hypertext markup language protocol that makes it possible for individuals andorganizations to publish information on the internet that is crosslinked bothinternally and to external documents. for example, selecting, or clicking on, ahighlighted word within a document can initiate retrieval of its definition, orrelated information, from within that same document, or even from a documentat another location on the network. this capability allows the user to browseeasily through related pieces of information, or groups of related documents,without regard to the physical location of the information. this and other newtechniques for information retrieval on computer networks (including the easytouse mosaic interface to the worldwide web) have stimulated the supply ofavailable information by improving access to it, but they have also led toincreased network traffic.taken together, the availability of company and other databases,commercial database services, and the networks that connect them mean thatmany people can be much less reliant on centralized, physically colocatedcorporate resources to do their jobs. lawyers do not need the corporate lawlibrary if an electronic library is available, and service representatives need notbe tied to file cabinets of paper invoices. it is clear that people use electronicarchives of information when they work away from a conventional work site.yet there are practical limits on the extent to which people can work awayfrom a conventional work site, remote from peers and supervisors, merely byrelying on electronic archives. the major consideration is the availability inelectronic form of the information people need to perform informationintensivetasks. sales representatives for mailorder companies have in electronic formmost of thedistributed work: current reality and promise18research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information they need to take an orderšproduct and inventory information, forexample. yet other information that they might need to aid a customer, such asthe exact color of a product and whether it clashes with the color of anotheritem, might require accurate pictures that are not easily stored or searched for incurrently available conventional databases. while searching for textualinformation (e.g., skirts in size 7) is easily done, searching for nontextinformation (e.g., blouses compatible in style with a skirt) is still a problem.even much textoriented information that employees need to handletransactions may originate from outside their company and therefore not bereadily available in electronic form; thus letters of complaint or explanation thataccompany a mailorder return may not be available when the customer nextcalls up to discuss the status of an order.even if the informationintensive tasks that people perform wereadequately supported by networked electronic archives, retrieving andprocessing of information account for only a portion of most people's duties.audio and video communicationsaudiospeech plays an essential role in our work lives due to its power,expressiveness, and richness in interactive conversation. numerous studies(e.g., kraut et al., 1990; ochsman and chapanis, 1974) comparing voice andother communications media have repeatedly identified speech as the primarychannel for cooperative problem solving. except in specialized cases, speechplus any medium is better than any other combination of media without speech.thus, one traditional way for remote workers to keep in touch is to use thetelephone. the voice telephone enables realtime communication, supportinginteractivity between people that allows them to rapidly get feedback from eachother during the course of a conversation. this feedback improves their abilityto communicate clearly (kraut et al., 1982; clark and brennen, 1991).although the telephone is an old technology (the first call was completedin 1876), several recent developments have contributed to its importance insupporting distributed work. the first is simply the reduction in costs and therelated change in cultural attitudes that have made longdistance telephone callsa much more frequently used business tool now than in the past. the secondtrend is the growing availability of mobile communications that make it mucheasier to contact workers while they are traveling. historically, drawbacksdistributed work: current reality and promise19research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to the radio services used by police dispatchers and others who communicatewith mobile workers have been their limited geographic range, their high cost,and their very limited availability. in traditional telephony a constraint has beenthe fact that a telephone number represented a fixed location, not a person. thusone person attempting to contact another placed calls to the locations where therecipient was most likely to be, and hoped for the best.recently, however, both switched and storeandforward services formobile workers have become available nationwide. national switched servicesinclude paging and the mobile telephone, which signals its presence to localrelay cells so that any calls to that mobile telephone number can be routed to thecell then in contact with the mobile telephone. storeandforward servicesinclude electronic mail and voice mail, which allow a sender to leave in arepository a message that can subsequently be picked up and attended to by therecipient over local or wide area data networks, including the nationwidetelecommunications network.a third trend in telecommunications that enhances telephony's support fordistributed work is the introduction of what had been business services orequipment, repackaged for the residential market by communicationscompanies and equipment manufacturers. for example, telephone companiesnow offer call waiting, call forwarding, threeway calling, calling numberidentification, and voice mail for the residential market. relatively inexpensivetelecommunications hardware for the home both supplements and competeswith the services now embedded in the communications network. multilinetelephones, answering machines, and fax machines are now easily affordable.both optional communications services and standalone devices aredisproportionately purchased by people who work from their homes (dudley etal., 1993).video and audiovideovideo telephony is another communications development that hasimplications for distributed work. video telephones were first demonstrated in1927 (ives, 1930). since then, the telecommunications industry has attempted tosolve the technical problems that prevented video telephony from enjoyingwidespread use. recent improvements in algorithms for video compression andpowerful new microprocessing chips will increase quality and reduce the cost ofvideophones and conferencing equipment to levels that small businesses andconsumers can afford. these developments, along with industry agreement onstandards for the interoperability of compressiondistributed work: current reality and promise20research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and decompression devices for digital video (codec devices) and the availabilityof communications services at data rates that support reasonablequality videotransmission, promise to make video telephony and videoconferencing morewidely used services in the future.it seems reasonable to think that a video connection should be especiallygood at enabling distributed groups to work as if they were in a facetofacemeeting. yet a substantial body of research literature suggests that the visualmedium does little to improve conversation when the main goal is the exchangeof information. however, video connections do seem to have greater value forhandling complex, ambiguous, or conflictual tasks and for tasks in which thesocial component is important (see williams, 1977, for an early review and fishet al., 1992, and tang and isaacs, 1992, for more recent discussions). comparedto audioonly conversations, audiovideo conversations are more personalized,less argumentative, and broader in focus. groups engaging in audiovideoconversations tend to like each other more and are more likely to reachconsensus easily; in negotiation or persuasion sessions, the negotiation isgentler and agreements tend to be influenced by the personalities of thebargainers, rather than resting exclusively on the merits of the argument(williams, 1977).in addition, in field trials, new applications of video connections haveemerged that go beyond conventional interpersonal communication, includingthe use of videophones to access multimedia information services and tomaintain organizational awareness. the use of videoconferencing for accessingbroadcast materials is common in both business and education settings (larose,1983, cited in svenning and ruchinskas, 1984). users of experimental videotelephony systems can place calls to television channels to see the news andother entertainment, and to video cassette recorders to access storedinformation. by placing calls to corporate lectures and presentations and thusattending these events remotely, users reduce their risk of wasting time, sincethey can politely turn off an unproductive session or attend to the broadcast andtheir desk work simultaneously. people have also used video for benignsurveillancešto maintain awareness of what their colleagues are doing evenwhen they are not immediately communicating with them. in video telephonyfield experiments, users have maintained longlived calls to "public" placesšlobbies or lunch rooms, for examplešjust to know what was going on atremote sites. in addition, they have maintained longlived calls to work partnersšfor example, people with whom they were coauthoring a documentšin orderto have easy access to them, butdistributed work: current reality and promise21research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.without engaging in sustained conversation. in effect, when they anticipatedfrequent but unscheduled conversations, they used video to create a sharedoffice for a time. these novel uses were enabled by video; they rarely happenon the voice telephone.computermediated communicationstypically, in conventional organizations members acquire much of theirtechnical knowledge and a substantial amount of incidental information bybumping into interesting people or situations (allen, 1977; kusterer, 1978;lave and wenger, 1991). members who are at the periphery of an organizationhave fewer opportunities to converse spontaneously with colleagues and toobserve others working or in interaction with each other. isolated members canthus be at a disadvantage in knowing about their work environment (e.g.,hesses et al., 1993).current uses of electronic mailelectronic mail seems to be an especially useful medium for supportingdistributed work because it is able to overcome many disadvantages of workingat a distance, especially for isolated members of an organization. like otherasynchronous media, such as facsimile and voice mail, electronic mail allowspeople to leave messages that are available almost instantaneously regardless ofdistance but that do not require the sender and recipient of the message to besimultaneously available. in addition, communications sent by electronic mailtend to be processed and archived more easily than communication exchangedusing more ephemeral media (e.g., facetomeetings and telephone calls) ormedia that are harder to search (e.g., voice mail). electronic mail as a writtendocument supports a form of memory for distributed work groups, allowingpersonnel to keep up with communications that have gone on in their absence.third, because of the ease of sending messages to multiple recipients throughonline bulletin boards and distribution lists, communications sent by electronicmail tend to have more recipients than communication through other media(kraut and attewell, 1993; finholt, 1994), thus facilitating the spread oforganizational information.several studies have shown that individuals working at an organization'speriphery use electronic mail more than those at the core of the organization(kraut and attewell, 1993; finholt, 1994). compared to those who do not useelectronic mail, members of distributed groups who use it regularly tend toknow each other betterdistributed work: current reality and promise22research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and to be more uniformly involved in the group's projects (eveland and bikson,1988). when isolated members use electronic mail more, they tend to be moreinformed about their organizations (kraut and attewell, 1993; finholt, 1994)and tend to be more successful. for example, hesses et al. (1993) have shownthat oceanographers who used an electronic mail network for projectcommunication published more articles and had greater professional recognitionthan did nonusers and that the benefits of network use accrued most to thescientists who were geographically isolated (i.e., away from the coasts) or whowere less senior.potential uses of electronic mail for distributed workcommunications technologies are more valuable the more ubiquitous theyare. much of electronic mail's potential for distributed work has not yet beenrealized, because its use is still significantly concentrated within hightechnology organizations and the academic community. the use of electronicmail by unaffiliated individuals and small businesses, and the ability tocommunicate with people who are not on large networks, is still limited.however, it is growing with the expansion of commercial network providers.what truly distinguishes electronic mail from other communications mediais that electronic mail messages are computational objects. that is, messagesare sent and received in a form that can be directly processed by computer. intheory, it is possible to use information retrieval techniques to search through anorganization's archives of electronic mail, or use filtering mechanisms to allowintelligent agents to separate important messages from the routine or irrelevant.in practice, however, most commercial electronic mail software packages haveonly rudimentary searching and filtering capabilities.it is also possible to anticipate forms of computeraugmentedcommunication that will improve traditional humantohuman communication,rather than merely allowing it to take place at a distance. for example, withsome addition of database capabilities, products like lotus notes use electronicmail to form the basis for work flow processing. once designed, certain types ofmessages can automatically route themselves through the various steps in anorganizational process, collecting comments and approvals along the way. thistype of application can also be used to consolidate and record organizationalknowledge and may be particularly important for distributed organizations andwork teams.currently, however, few people apply computation to electronic messages,even when these capabilities are available (see lai et al.,distributed work: current reality and promise23research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1988; flores et al., 1988; and borenstein, 1992, for examples of systems forcomputeraugmented human communication). despite the recent developmentof ''intelligent" electronic mail systems with some searching, filtering, and workflowprocessing capabilities, most electronic mail is apparently still readdirectly by humans, without the aid of these informationhandling tools (bullenand bennett, 1991). additional multidisciplinary research in this general areamight improve the ability of software to mimic the filtering, sorting, andprocessing functions of individuals who have learned to use electronic mail as acentral part of their work.information sharing and use of remote facilitiesalthough the capability to enable remote sharing of expensiveinstrumentation and facilities has been limited to date, its potential benefits areconsiderable. some of the possibilities for using computing andcommunications technology to facilitate remote field work in oceanography,control of remote instruments in space physics, or realtime sharing of researchresults in molecular biology have been suggested in national collaboratories(cstb, 1993). other distributed and mobile workers will also find itadvantageous to be able to control physical devices remotely. for example, theuniversity of california at san diego recently made an electron microscopeavailable to scientists over the internet. users can control many of the functionsof the microscope while receiving highquality images in real time.applications of this nature need not, however, be limited to the scientificresearch realm; specialized industrial or medical imaging and testing equipmentmight also be controlled, and the output viewed, remotely. in general, the valueof this capability is highest when either the physical assets or the individualswith the needed knowledge are in short supply, or when the equipment must beoperated in a hazardous environment.remote control and utilization of data require reliable networking withsufficient bandwidth to support interactive responses between the equipmentbeing controlled and the user receiving the images or other data stream.expansion of this type of application will require changes to the devices to becontrolled, sophisticated distributed control software systems, and creative userinterfaces. a particularly challenging application might be to develop a remotecontrol application that would allow scientists to control experimental devicesover a wireless personal communication system device or over cellular networks.distributed work: current reality and promise24research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the reality of today's distributed workalthough distributed work includes telecommuting, it also encompassesactivities such as working while mobile, field work, and computerandtelecommunicationsassisted education and collaboration. what could once bedone only in an office or lecture hall, for example, can now often beaccomplished from other sites. mobility has significant advantages, such asincreased temporal and locational flexibility in working and learning, but alsodisadvantages, for instance, that the time and effort spent to utilizetechnological capabilities may sometimes seem to outweigh the benefits. attimes, what can be envisioned as a productive approach to doing work well isnot supported by currently available communications technology andinfrastructure.the mobile workerša compositethe work experience of "richard," a prototypical modern mobileexecutive in a large, multinational organization, simultaneously illustrates thecapabilities that today's technology enables and underscores many of thelimitations that people undertaking distributed work or telecommuting mustface today.what richard does can be divided loosely into two categories: (1)"manifest" work activities, performed primarily alone, such as informationretrieval and perusal, reading, editing, and document preparation; and (2)communication and related activities involving other individuals. as with manymanagers and executives, at least half of richard's time is devoted tocommunications. there is, of course, an enormous overlap between the twocategories, and both tend to be interrupted frequently by external demands.richard works in a number of locations, including his office, additionalcompany sites, his home, customer sites, his car, hotel rooms, airplanes, andairports. to support his work and communication needs, richard relies on anoffice computer, a home computer, a portable computer, modems, printers,facsimile machines, electronic mail, telephones, and voice mail, and from timeto time he accesses his office computer from computers in other offices. on afew occasions, while negotiating a complex deal, he has used a pager.because his job is so communicationintensive, much of richard'scomputer use is for sending and receiving electronic mail. he estimates that lessthan 20 percent of his computer use is for his manifest work activities. toaccomplish those tasks, he relies heavily on paperdistributed work: current reality and promise25research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.because of its portability and ease of manipulation; paper can be carried fromplace to place, skimmed, studied, and/or marked up with ease.given richard's activity mix, work locations, and the devices on which herelies, what are the main problems he encounters in accomplishing his work?the main problem richard is constantly encountering is the lack ofintegration between his computers and the other devices he uses, and evenamong the software programs used on his computers. the output from one toolor device can not always be easily input to another. for example, richard usesfour separate electronic mail systems to obtain global coverage but cannotcombine them to receive mail in one place. he has a similar problem with hiscalendar and appointment information, which cannot be easily transferredamong systems or made easily accessible to others who are at remote sites. inthe office he still must print complex pages or pages containing graphics andphysically carry them to the facsimile machine for transmission. this lack ofintegration inconveniences and irritates richard and slows his work.richard also encounters difficulties related to the complexity of installing,gaining access to, and using tools and devices. he tends to use a small subset ofthe functionality available in software packages and in complex devices such asfacsimile machines. richard is not fond of interface changes and unexpectedincompatibility among systems, and so he often chooses not to upgradesoftware until his system administrator insists. the other problems heencounters range from relatively minor but annoying circumstancesšsuch asthe difficulty of locating electronic mail addresses, the occasional unreliabilityof electronic mail delivery, and uncertainty about the extent to which a note byelectronic mail should be polished and formal like a letter, rather than informallike a voice mail messagešto broader, less defined concerns about issues likeprivacy and security.richard's use of a laptop computer illustrates many of the above problemsand some additional issues as well. he has yet to discover a simple, foolproofmethod of keeping the programs, information, and files on his laptopsynchronized with those on his office and home computers. technical support isan even greater problem for the laptop than for his home computer: the portablecomputer is generally used both away from the office and during off hourswhen the office is closed. even worse, he often does not know what electronicfiles he will need when he goes to a meeting away from his home office, and hewould prefer to be able to connect to his office and access electronicinformation from the meeting site with equipmentdistributed work: current reality and promise26research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.located there. he thinks that, ideally, he should be able to access his electronicmail and files, exchange electronic information with others physically present atthe meeting, and set up a remote information world without having had to carryanything at all to the meeting. in short, he wishes that the computingenvironment at his various meeting sites would enable him to obtain all thecomputerbased information support he could get at his office if he werephysically present there.richard still feels that the laptop is too obtrusive for taking notes duringreally important meetings. he has considered getting a personal digital assistantjust for use in such circumstances, but he doesn't want yet another device tocarry and he has heard that the handwriting recognition is poor. richardtherefore typically relies on pencilandpaper notes and tries to type up theimportant ones to save on the portable computer for easy referral. he isintrigued by the use of computers during meetings for tasks such asbrainstorming but is concerned that he will not be able to communicate hisideas as effectively as he does when speaking. richard has used his computer afew times to prepare presentations. he found that it required a great deal of timeto get everything colored, spaced, and sized properly for visual appeal, incontrast to the times when he used the company's graphics department.modem use is essential during richard's time away from his office.however he rarely finds that he can just plug the modem in and use it,especially when he is traveling internationally. he often cannot access hiselectronic mail when he wants to, or feels that he wastes time in gettingconnected. his success in sending facsimiles from hotel rooms using his ownportable computer is even lower. and at the moment, his portable computercannot receive and display facsimiles.richard's problems with printers are "simple." his home printer does nothave the quality, speed, or reliability he would like. a printer is rarely availablewhen he is traveling and when one is available, he often has trouble connectingto it and getting his software to print documents properly. on some occasions,he has resorted to sending himself a fax, in essence using a facsimile machineas a printer.people sometimes joke that richard has a telephone attached to the side ofhis head. he still relies heavily on the telephone and voice mail forcommunication. he identifies fewer difficulties with telephone use thancomputer use. the problems he encounters are the quantity of numbers he needsto remember and the expense and occasionally the poor quality of cellulartelephone use. because richard frequently works from home and sometimeswhile on vacation,distributed work: current reality and promise27research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he wants to be accessible without letting people know where he is. instead, hefinds all too often that he leaves three or four telephone numbers with someonewhen he wants to be reachable. he has occasionally used a pager when hewanted to ensure that he could be reached immediately.richard has found that voice mail is a necessary addition to telephonecommunications. he likes the informality and personal nature of voice mail butsometimes must rerecord a message to convey the desired tone. he wishes hecould be notified more easily of waiting messages, especially important ones.he also wishes he could skim, prioritize, filter, and save the text of messages,just as he can with electronic mail. yet the convenience and availability oftelephone use, compared to computer use, mean that richard uses voice mailmuch more heavily than electronic mail. he is occasionally concerned about theprivacy of voice mail, especially given the ease of forwarding it within hissystem. but at the same time, he wishes that his company would integrate all itsvoice mail systems so that he could forward messages to anyone in the company.expense also is an issue, especially to the management in richard'scompany. he would like to explore some new technologies, such as ways ofconnecting his various communication devices or the use of videoconferencingto reduce his travel and allow impromptu meetings, but he is unable to justifythe cost. he is nervous about increasing the number of technological devices heneeds to know how to operate or use, even though he imagines that it would begreat to call a meeting quickly and use videoconferencing to have it, rather thanhaving to plan it far enough in advance that everyone can schedule it and travelto a common site for it. richard is concerned that skills that he has refined overhis career will become less effective with the introduction of other ways ofaccomplishing work; in particular, his ability to dominate conversations is wellrefined and has contributed to his success. he also wonders about his ability tomanage his work time and personal family time. it sometimes seems that hismanager now has unlimited expectations regarding richard's availability sincethere are now fewer technical boundaries no matter what the hour of the day isor where he is locatedševen when he is on vacation. although the discomfortthat many managers feel at supervising people who are connected but not oftenvisible has been cited as a significant problem with mobile work, majorproblems also exist for the mobile worker regarding the management of workand family boundaries.there are thus several general problems richard encounters in his use ofmultiple devices and communication channels. one is that the amount oftechnical expertise needed for effective use far exceedsdistributed work: current reality and promise28research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.his desired level of knowledge. much of what he does is too timeconsuming,and the lack of integration and interoperability is a constant source offrustration. solutions may exist to some of richard's problems, but he is notaware of them or he is hesitant to implement the significant changes to his workhabits that would be required. he also feels that he now must do himself muchof the work that used to be done by his assistant. with importantcommunications being transmitted via so many different media, he particularlymisses the ability his assistant used to have to filter and prioritize calls,messages, and written information.in summary, richard wants significantly better integration of devices,services, and interfaces regardless of whether he is in his office or mobile. heneeds better ways to manage and integrate the ever increasing flows ofinformation arriving on multiple media from multiple sources. in the long term,he wants a ubiquitous computing environment such as that being explored atxerox parc (weiser, 1993) so that he can largely dispense with "hoofingaround" so much technology and so many information sources himself.distributed educationmuch like mobile work, education currently makes use of severaltechnologies to achieve some locational independence, and could use evenbetter tools to increase educational effectiveness. the united states, greatbritain, and many european countries have a long tradition of offering distancelearning using paper, television, and more recently, computeraugmentedinstruction. commercial and public television has been used to broadcastcollegelevel courses for decades, and corporate teleconferencing and closedcircuit networks have been used for broadcasting training materials since theirearliest days (see, e.g., larose, 1983). the national technological universitybroadcasts more than 25,000 hours of educational material and short courses tomore than 130 corporate clients per year (ntu, 1994). in a typical distanceeducation application, a lecture is specially organized for noninteractive, videodelivery and is broadcast to subscribers, who view it as it is transmitted orrecord it for later playback. these broadcast lectures are often supplementedwith a telephone connection, so that members of a remote audience can askquestions or make comments to the lecturer. in a variant of this model, stanforduniversity's school of engineering (gibbons et al., 1977) has videotapedregular college lecture courses and then shown them unedited to students fromindustry in offcampus locations. the tapes are shipped to remote sites withhomework assignments and examinations.distributed work: current reality and promise29research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an onsite tutor guides the students through the lecture, encouraging themto stop frequently for questions and discussion. in the 1980s and 1990s,electronic mail and bulletin boards and other tools have been added to the moretraditional video media to support interaction among students and betweenstudents and instructors (hiltz, 1993).the use of technology to support distance education has obvious benefits.it allows experts to be more productive by distributing their expertise to a wideraudience. it supports students who are physically removed from schools anduniversities or who are isolated from a critical mass of other students who sharetheir educational needs. using asynchronous technology like videotapes alsoallows students to study at times convenient to them. similarly, they can stopand start the instruction at will, which can be an advantage in trying tounderstand material that is especially difficult or that is presented in a languageother than a student's own native language.despite these advantages, the current technology to support distancelearning places substantial constraints on the educational enterprise. it is nosurprise that current distance learning applications typically use a lecture styleof instruction, since the technology is conducive to this model of informationtransmission. whether live or on video, today's lecture setting is characterizedby the isolation of the instructor, a low degree of social interaction, a low levelof attention to individual students, and a declarative model of learning. forexample, while at a lecture, students generally cannot make use of archivedinformation, and interaction typically is limited to a few questions and answers.the pace of information delivery is not under the student's control; it must bemodulated by the teacher in response to his or her assessment of averagestudent readiness or understanding. while the content of most educationalmaterial is declarative, the goal of much educational instruction is to impartprocedural knowledge, the basis for doing rather than describing.educators and others can imagine the value of remote instruction thatincorporates features of the workplace, thereby enabling substantial interactionamong students, access to personal archives, and handson experience withwork objects like models, experiments, or instrumentsšfor example, aremotely taught collaborative design course in which industrial design studentswork with humanfactors specialists and software engineers to build a wearablecomputer (smailagic and siewiorek, 1994). unfortunately, the capability forremote participants in distance learning to have highly interactive discussions toplan and develop a design is not supported well by current communicationstechnologies or applications. neither audionordistributed work: current reality and promise30research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.videoconferences deal well with multiple voice channels, or with the starts,stops, and interruptions that characterize animated group discussions (see, e.g.,o'conaill et al., 1992) similarly, while electronic mail and computerizedbulletin boards are good for involving many participants and for keepingrecords of a conversation, they do not handle well the giveandtake discussionsthat many groups need to have when clarifying ideas.some experiments using more interactive technology such as twowayvideo for distance learning are now under way (e.g., national geographic'skid's net for geography and ocean sciences education). these experimentsemphasize collaborative learning and in the process are developing tools fordistributed work that are specialized for educational settings, especially for thek12 age groups. however, techniques for operating equipment and instrumentsat a distance, for receiving output, and for sharing output among multiplestudents are in their infancy.collaborative workšthe need for new products linked tounderlying databases or objectsone of the reasons for the success of electronic mail is its similarity tocurrent work practices: it resembles other forms of message sending andinformation circulation. however, many of the most successful collaborativeprojects are based on a model that has a closer technological match in physicalobjects or database technology. for example, when people work together theyoften colocate and share writing, drawings, physical space, and mental space.they communicate through gesturing at a shared image or section of text. theysuggest changes that can easily be seen, evaluated, and further changed bycolleagues (whitaker and geelhoed, 1993; fish et al., 1992). unfortunately,most group and distributed work products still depend on easytoacceptelectronic mailbased models of work augmented by some sharedscreencapabilities. products, like lotus notes, based on underlying databases are nowonly beginning to be developed and marketed.facsimile transmission allows remote workers to quickly transmit andshare static documents but not to jointly manipulate them during the course of aconversation. several software packages and technology being developed foraudioand videconferencing over the internet allow people whose computers areon a common data network to jointly view and manipulate computer files andcomputer screens. unfortunately, unlike telephones or fax machines, whichdistributed work: current reality and promise31research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have a level of standardization such that virtually any fax or telephone in theworld can communicate with any other, these fileand screensharing programsare not standardized and do not interoperate. therefore these applications workonly with careful planning and agreement among people who use compatiblecombinations of hardware and software.although current products have facilitated writing and composition formany individuals, much collaborative writing and revision continue to be doneprimarily by people who are either temporarily or permanently colocated. thestill painful nature of collaborating in such tasks via electronic mail isevidenced by the various editing "protocols" that have evolved from the use ofcurrent word processors and electronic mail to coauthor or revise a document:to circumvent the main goal of the design of word processorsšmaking changesvisible as soon as possible and always keeping what is displayed on the screenas close as possible in form and appearance to the final outputšauthorscollaborating via electronic mail often must differentiate new text from old text,or comments on existing text, by changing the appearance of the new text ormarking existing text with a ">" mark at the beginning of each line. by usingthese somewhat contrived conventions, they can better communicate changesand discuss them before agreeing on a final version.emerging products such as prep, developed at carnegie mellonuniversity, and shredit, developed at the university of michigan, hold promisefor facilitating writing and editing by geographically distributed groups. whatdistributed authors needšand what the market is only slowly starting to providešis reengineered programs that can leverage database technology to supportcollaborative building of documents, diagrams, presentations, and otherapplication objects. in other words, the conventional word processor, designedfor individual use and highly evolved for layout and production of paperdocuments, needs to be rethought and recast as a group writing tool. it musthave all the power of a great word processor, but it must also be built withdistributed database technology to support work at a distance in which thedocument is shared in an environment of heterogeneous hardware, software,and network systems.the potential for increased distributed workdistributed work, including telecommuting, is almost certain to increase inthe next decade. even using a comparatively narrow definition oftelecommuting, the u.s. department of transportationdistributed work: current reality and promise32research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(1993) has estimated, for example, that, the current number of telecommuters isabout 2.0 million and will grow to between 7.5 million and 15 million by theyear 2002. although the exact extent of the increase is difficult to predict, thefollowing factors will be important contributors to an expanded potential fordistributed work: if you wire it, they will comešas long as the national informationinfrastructure includes twoway connections, the expected growth intelecommunications capacity for the home and for potential satelliteoffice sites will make the services needed for effective telecommutingand distributed work more widely available and probably lessexpensive on a unit basis. as higherbandwidth networks and highcapacity telecommunication links become more widely available, forexample, opportunities will increase for the appropriate use of highquality audio and video links to enable the work of distributed projectteams. the real estate imperativešcorporate america is starting to realizethat the term "fixed overhead" need not apply to office space. as staffsizes are reduced, employees are relocated to customer sites, and someemployees choose to engage in distributed work for their own reasons,an increasing number of companies will consider reducing costs byreducing the size of their facilities, including highoverhead meetingrooms. moving beyond working at home to remote workšthe united statesis catching up to worldwide interest in satellite offices, rural teleworkcenters, and other hybrid work sites intermediate between the homeand the central office. to the extent that these options overcome real orperceived problems of telecommuting from the home, and to the extentthat they offer jobcreation possibilities, they will become moreprevalent. this development will shift the focus of both distributedworkers and policymakers away from a model involving 10 people,each working at home 20 miles from the office 2 days a week, to oneof 100 people working in a rural telecenter 500 miles from the office 5days a week. the scope, the stakes, and the potential economicbenefits are much larger. life beyond bureaucracyšwhether the eventual result is a virtualcorporation, a series of strategic alliances, or massive "outsourcing,"we are moving into an era in which the traditional, fullemploymentcorporation that does its own work with its own employees maybecome the exception instead of the rule. removing the boundaries ofthe traditional organizational chart is likely to alter the assumption thatcentralization of the work force is inherently a good idea.distributed work: current reality and promise33research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it may be that the most agile and competitive organizations in the next fewdecades will be those with the best networksšnetworks in the broad sense ofinterconnected people, telecommunications, information resources, suppliers,production capabilities, and customers. distributed work tools that facilitatecollaboration, reduce travel, and track complex projects across severalorganizations will be in great demand to support such an organizationalstructure. the nation will benefit through improved competitiveness, andindividuals will benefit as locational barriers to employment are reduced.however, researchers and policymakers will need to pay considerable attentionto integrating the new work styles and technologies in a way that yields optimalsocial and economic benefits while minimizing market disruptions.distributed work: current reality and promise34research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3distributed work and group processesdistributed work has implications for many of the activities thatorganizations, groups, and individuals need to accomplish to be effective; itswider adoption will present both organizational and personal challenges.technology is likely to solve only a subset of these challenges, but nonethelessshould be developed and applied when appropriate.the impact of distributed work on group processes and performance isworthy of examination because group performance encompasses individualperformance, because so much of the work in organizations is done by groups,and because organizations themselves have functions that parallel those ofgroups (katz and kahn, 1979). reviewing the voluminous research literature ongroups and organizations is beyond the scope of this report. rather, the intent inthis chapter is to point out group processes most likely to be affected by thedistribution of work across space and time and to discuss basic functions thatmust be supported for distributed work to be conducted effectively.such functions go beyond tasks with a single focus such as writing areport, selling a product, or handling a customer's transaction. individuals inorganizations are typically members of multiple groups, each of which isinvolved in multiple projects. as members of groups, people perform theirassigned work tasks, as well as many ancillary activities that keep themcoordinated, motivated, well trained, anddistributed work and group processes35research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.adapted to their organizational context. moreover, individuals may well playdifferent roles in different groups: leader in some, member in others; expert insome, novice in others; and so on.distributed work in the context of businessorganizationseven though businesses are not identically structured, they sharesimilarities that can be discussed usefully in terms of the effects of distributedwork. every organization has two primary, albeit competing, needs: to dividelabor into the various tasks that need to be performed and to coordinate thesetasks so that the overall goals of the organization can be met. as managementtheorist henry mintzberg (1979) has written, the ''structure of an organizationcan be defined simply as the sum total of the ways in which it divides its laborinto distinct tasks and then achieves coordination among them." according tomintzberg, each relatively large business organization consists of three basicparts: (1) an operating core that has as its primary function the fundamentalwork of producing goods and/or services; (2) an administrative component thatprovides strategic management, middle or line management, and technicalservices and leadership; and (3) a support staff that provides ancillary servicessuch as legal counsel and personnel, finance, communications, and buildingservices.any introduction of technology into an organization must take into accountboth the nature of the technology and where in the organization the technologyis introduced. introducing advanced robotics on the shop floor will yield a verydifferent relationship between technology and organizational culture than willincreasing the availability of laptop computers, cellular telephones, andmodems in the ranks of middle management or at the strategic apex of thecorporation. the introduction of new technologies to facilitate distributed workis simply a particular case of the broad interaction between organizations andtechnology.while distributed work in almost all cases means increased independenceof place for the worker, how it plays out precisely will vary according to thekind of work, the intention of the worker, and the area within the organizationin which it occurs. in some cases, "knowledge" workers can work outside of thecentralized officešat home or in a satellite officešso as to achieve greatermental concentration or a more desirable lifestyle. much of the contemporarydiscussion regarding telecommuting concerns this aspect of distributed work. inother cases, distributed work may mean that employees will traveldistributed work and group processes36research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.less to the centralized officešbecause they now have access to information orservices that once would have required them to make trips into the officešandtravel more freely and frequently to clients or to other operating plants.for example, advanced technology currently allows more time in the fieldfor general electric company service staff. a ge service technician returnshome at the end of each day and uses a laptop computer and modem to obtainassignments for the next day, order parts necessary to replenish inventory, andorder whatever special equipment may be needed for the next day's calls. whilethe technician sleeps, the van, still sitting in his or her driveway, is restocked,saving a trip to a parts depot and allowing for more repair time the followingday. such a work arrangement requires fundamental changes in core workconcepts and practices: inventory is delivered to technicians rather than havingto be picked up at parts depots, and assignments are obtained at home ratherthan at the office. the technician's data become part of a larger performancemanagement system so that management can track trends in the nature ofservice calls, anticipate preventive maintenance needs, and so on.distributed work can enhance productivity and locational independence fora variety of work purposes. the various approaches chosen by individuals andorganizations to fulfill their particular purposes are almost certain to gainincreased attention and importance over the coming years. distributed workalso raises questions regarding the impacts of various work arrangements on theindividual and on the culture and functioning of organizations. in addition to thetechnological research outlined in this report, extensive sociological andorganizational research will be required to ensure that distributed work can becarried out to serve the needs of individuals and organizations effectively.strategies for accommodating distributedworkaccording to estimates by the u.s. department of transportation (1993),more than 2 million people currently telecommute in the united states, andmore than 10 times as many work at home under other arrangements, includingcorporate afterhours work or various forms of selfemployment. in addition,large numbers of people travel as a routine part of their jobs: sales people travelto customer sites, maintenance personnel travel to immobile equipment, andexecutives travel to meetings, for example. yet currently available technologyfor distributed work places substantial constraints on the types of work anddistributed work and group processes37research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.learning that can be done remotely from a central site, on the road, or removedfrom peers and supervisors.when a work group is colocated and physically embedded within a largerorganization, many of the processes necessary for success are tacit or informal.people learn the norms of an organization and many jobrelevant behaviors byobserving the people around them. supervisors manage groups by monitoringemployee effort, recognizing and averting incipient failure, helping resolvepersonality conflicts, appraising performance, and providing advice andinstruction. workers may call over to a colleague at the next desk for help. theyshare budgets, designs, or machinery by simply gathering in a common physicalplace with the appropriate facilities, such as a white board or overheadprojector, or with the item under discussion. substantial research suggests,however, that while these informal and tacit processes are common, they are notinvariably the best ones for ensuring organizational effectiveness. workersmay, for example, learn norms of minimal work effort by being able to ask aconvenient local for advice while ignoring an expert farther away. and, asorganizations become larger and more specialized, these informal processesoften become increasingly impractical.when members of a work group are physically separated from each otheror from a supporting organizational structure, tacit and informal processes nolonger suffice to support group work and organizational effectiveness. groupsneed different strategies for handling group formations, operations, externalrelations, and reorganization. the approaches that can be taken are of threemajor types. organizations can attempt to reduce the interdependence amongdistributed group members. studies of telecommuting and homebasedemployment suggest that reducing interdependence is a common modeof coping with a distributed work force in the face of inadequatecommunications facilities. for example, companies occasionallyreduce the interdependence between supervisor and employee bypaying piece rates or by creating independent contractor arrangements.consultants may tend to recommend only standalone jobs such aswriting manuals as being suitable for telecommuting. scientistsworking remotely from each other may engage in a more formaldivision of labor and may communicate less among themselves. firms can attempt to reproduce at a distance the informality of theprocesses typically supported by physical proximity and, in so doing,may reproduce both the adequacies and the inadequacies of theinformal processes. for example, some organizations have deployedelectronic mail and computer conferencing to support informaldistributed work and group processes38research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication, discussion, and decision making. in severalorganizational experiments, longduration video connections betweenremote work sites have also been used to support informalcommunication (abel et al., 1990; fish et al., 1992; bly et al., 1993). alternatively, organizations can attempt to use managerial andtechnological mechanisms to formalize at a distance the processesnormally supported by proximitybased informal communication. forexample, tools currently exist to facilitate the successful developmentof software programs by geographically distributed teams. typically, ahighly specialized database is used to track the programmers' progressand coordinate the program segments that have been placed within aglobally distributed file system.basic group processes to be supported foreffective distributed workdespite the use of strategies for handling decentralized work, severalgroup and organizational processes are likely to be disrupted by the distributionof work over space and time. among these are the selection of goals,recruitment of group members, management of distributed groups, andinformation retrieval. sketched below for each is the way the process isgenerally performed in a centralized organization, how distributed work mightdisrupt the process, technological solutions that might mitigate such disruption,and, if applicable, application and infrastructure research needed to implementthese solutions.selecting goalsthe process of selecting initial goals depends on the type of group beingformed. for some groups, such as a crisis task force, the group goal is largelypredefined. however, in other groups, like senior management teams, qualityimprovement circles, or teams of collaborating scientists, specific goals oftenemerge from informal communication. this communication can occur indistributed communication environments through the use of electronic bulletinboards or electronic mail distribution lists, or through the use of realtime audioor videoconferences. the technical challenge is to support both casual andformal smallgroup communication to facilitate the formulation, evaluation, andselection of goals in distributed work groups. today, the traditional writtenmedium is generally too slow for the give and take through which new, sharedideas emerge and goals aredistributed work and group processes39research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.selected. computerfacilitated communication is faster but often reduces socialcontext cues, thereby blurring the link between what is being said and theperson saying it and thus reducing the likelihood that consensual goals willemerge.recruiting group membersin addition to determining an initial project goal, the most importantprocesses in forming a project group are identifying, investigating, andrecruiting potential members.substantial research literature suggests that physical proximity plays alarge role in forming teams. as hagstrom (1965) noted over 25 years ago,"since collaboration often begins through informal contacts, anything thatincreases the frequency of such contacts increases the likelihood ofcollaboration. –spatial propinquity often leads to collaboration since it islikely to lead to informal communication." of course, more recent experienceswith electronic networks suggest new options for stimulating informalcommunication, although it may be too early to tell how productive they are.during the initiation phase of a collaboration, potential collaborators mustestablish an intellectual and interpersonal relationship based on shared interests.selecting people and ideas are both important and often intertwined. physicalproximity creates opportunities for potential collaborators to becomeacquainted, to assess and develop interpersonal compatibility, to identifycommon interests, to explore new ideas, and to accomplish rudimentaryplanning before they become committed to working together. in this way,individuals determine whether potential partners are smart enough to help thinkthrough problems, responsible enough to do their share of the work, and humbleenough to accept only their share of the credit, as well as whether they aresympathetic enough with one's perspective and compatible enough in work styleand personality to make working together pleasant. sometimes collaborationscome about simply because the potential collaborators like each other, beforethey have any shared ideas to work on.while research collaborations and other types of ad hoc groups can and doform at a distance, the evidence indicates they are much less likely to do so thanif the potential members are or have been colocated. nevertheless, despite thebarriers, some amount of scientific research has always been carried out byindividuals who share common or complementary interests but happen to belocated at different institutions. notably, scientists have been among the earlyadoptersdistributed work and group processes40research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of network, data communication, and computing technologies, the most basictools and technologies needed for collaboration at a distance. in addition,supervision is generally less of an issue in scientific research teams than inproject teams in other areas.although members of a team are often identified and evaluated informally,database and information retrieval technology could aid in the selection processfor distributed workers on at least some dimensions. for example, it istheoretically possible to apply the statistical techniques used in informationretrieval to a database of research personnel. potential candidates for a workgroup could be represented by the documents they have written or textualdescriptions of the projects they have worked on. queries against such adatabase could return information on the relevance of each candidate to thequery, subject of course to the known inaccuracies of information retrievalsystems. in the case of seeking a partner for scientific collaboration, a query ofthe published literature could return a list of researchers who have, for example,applied factor analysis to the problem of second language learning.such techniques, however, do not currently suffice for identifying peoplewith the personal attributes and skills necessary for a particular work group.the insufficiency is not intrinsic to an information retrieval approach topersonnel recruiting, but occurs because personal attributes are seldomarticulated explicitly by people seeking to form groups and, more importantly,because this information is now rarely recorded in organizational archives aboutprojects or people. for example, effective group work may require individualswith a sense of humor, creative or leadership abilities, and a willingness to dotheir share of the work; knowledge of such attributes as they apply toindividuals is most often uncovered through informal conversations with peoplewho have worked with these individuals before. of course, this phenomenon isalso reflected in conventional hiring procedures, in which substantial screeningis done based on resumes or comparable documentation but final decisions tendto be based on interviews and consultations with references.the ability to assess personal, workrelevant attributes from databases ofpublicrecord materials or, more likely, to interact informally with individualswho could attest to such attributes could promote more effective, efficientformation of distributed work groups (assuming that privacy, liability, and otherancillary social and legal considerations can be accommodated). socialscientists and computer scientists should consider joint research aimed atproviding a database structure that could aid in the formation of distributedgroups.distributed work and group processes41research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.managing distributed groupstypically employees in groups distributed at two or three differentlocations (usually in different time zones and often in different countries) arecharged with completing a development task by working collaboratively withtheir remote colleagues. the development target could be a new piece ofhardware, a new financial product, an advertising campaign, and so on. eachsite contains several people, at least some of whom have worked togetherbefore. and at least some of those people know some of the people at the othersites. typically the project manager is colocated with the employees at one ofthe sites.the first management problem is building one cohesive group out ofdistributed subgroups. how can technology be used to help people create sharedmental models, shared goals, and trust? technology such as videoconferencesmay even inadvertently subvert this process by setting up unintended "we/they"dynamics. project reporting and tracking are more difficult across multiple sitesand are exacerbated as project schedules become more complex. theintegration of the work products of each site may become an issue if the projectinvolves intellectual or creative efforts that are only marginally suited todetailed specification. finally, it may be difficult to evaluate the relativecontributions of the different groups and individuals on a distributed team.obtaining informationto function successfully within modern organizations, individuals andgroups must have increasing amounts of information. given adequate datatransmission links, conventional information systems can currently providemany workers the core information they need. thus, reservation clerks,directory assistance operators, and even reference librarians working from homecan easily obtain needed information from the same information systems theywould use in centralized job settings.textbased electronic sourcesmany library collections and other archives of books, articles, and textoriented documents are becoming increasingly available over generalpurposecomputer networks such as the internet. as more of this information becomesavailable, facilities to browse and search it become increasingly important.more than 30 years of research ondistributed work and group processes42research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information retrieval, coming primarily from a library science perspective, canbe applied to the problem of helping people find information when they have arelatively well defined informational need (salton and mcgill, 1979). however,recent experience shows that current query techniques are much less effectivefor very large databases, or collections of databases, especially if the user isunfamiliar with the underlying detailed structure of the information or database.often, even the best retrieval systems return only a portion of the material thatis relevant to a query, while at the same time returning other material that isirrelevant.paper sourcescurrently, much of the information workers receive and would like to haveavailable in multiple locations or to share with others does not arrive inelectronic form. while newspaper articles, consultants' reports, and companymemos may exist electronically during some stage in their life cycles, theyoften come to one's desk in paper form. to share hard copy with a colleagueelectronically is a cumbersome process. a user needs tools to easily convertpaper sources of information back into electronic form and to ship, store, andretrieve them. the individual parts for these tools are commercially available inthe form of scanners, optical character recognition systems, facsimile machines,multimedia databases, and multimedia electronic mail. however, they are stillseparate and sizable hardware items, some are still largely outside mainstreamuse, and users must be familiar with the details of hardware and softwarecompatibility, file formats, image resolution, and other technical details.individual sourcesempirical studies of how managers, scientists, and other knowledgeworkers search for and use information shows that textoriented documents arenot necessarily the most sought after or the most valuable information in manycircumstances. in science, for example, because of their timeliness andrelevance to problems at hand, personal contacts and the "gray literature" in adiscipline are often as valuable as the published literature (garvey et al., 1970),which often involves long leadtimes for publication. thus, scientists oftenknow about new findings in their field well before they appear in conferenceproceedings or archival journals. when attempting todistributed work and group processes43research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.solve a problem, scientists, engineers, and sales personnel are as likely to gethelp from colleagues as they are to find information in any written source(constant et al., 1994; culnan, 1983; kraut and streeter, 1994; tushman,1977). for example, an individual needing to understand or apply a newstatistical technique is as likely to seek guidance from a local expert as frombooks on statistics or journal articles that have used the technique. (whetherthis underuse of the archival literature is desirable or is more a reflection of thepoor tools for information search is a question worthy of research in its ownright.) in many other circumstances, individuals' personal stores of informationare more valuable than new information gleaned from a library. assuming thatthe widespread use of individuals' knowledge stores and interpersonal queries isdesirable, supporting their use in distributed organizations suggests severaldirections for research.information sharinga special problem in supporting distributed work groups and organizationsis ensuring that people who have useful information will provide it to others.within organizations, colleagues and experts often respond to the requests ofothers for information. the problem with respect to answering such questions isthat selfinterest can discourage actions that promote the public good. thus,while many people benefit from having others in an organization contributetheir expertise on various topics, it can also be in an individual's interest to takeadvantage of these databases without contributing to them (thorn andconnolly, 1987). for example, with properly designed networks and software, aquestion about using a particular statistical technique might be posed on auniversitywide network. using new indexing mechanisms, the posting could bedirected to a small group of campus members with relevant expertise instead ofbeing broadcast to the entire campus or merely posted on a computer bulletinboard. these experts could be encouraged to provide answers by systems thatimplement payment of a royalty for information, that archive particular requestsfor later use by others, or that highlight an expert's similarity to or identificationwith the person asking the questions.in many conventional organizations, information gatekeepers play aspecial role in spreading needed knowledge (tushman, 1977; allen, 1977).these people typically have knowledge of the information needs of other groupmembers, sources of information both within and outside the group, and thecommunication skills and organizationaldistributed work and group processes44research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.motivation to proactively connect the two. research on this type of selectivedissemination of information has been ongoing for almost 25 years (foltz anddumais, 1993; gentile and houseman, 1970), but it has been based onconventional information retrieval techniques. future research should alsoconsider the dissemination of information in electronic form.distributed work and group processes45research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4facilitating distributed workidentifying barriers to expansion ofdistributed workin addition to the organizational and social processes that constrainadoption of distributed work, there are many technical barriers to its wideracceptance. good database technology is not in place yet; applications incurrent use are expressed as massive, monolithic code structures that cannoteasily be rewritten; and new applications operate in ways that are not as familiaras the messagepassing routines of electronic mail and will therefore meetresistance from customers. although many of the technical and design issuescan be addressed in research laboratories, the issue of user acceptance must beconsidered at other levels as well: until software producers see a sufficientmarket for these products, for example, they may be reluctant to make the largeinvestment in research and software development required to overcome thesignificant barriers.complexityofuse barrierstoday, to effectively engage in distributed work or telecommuting, onemust absorb a large amount of technical detail and have access to an array ofequipment. before they can become ubiquitous, the systems and equipmentmust be made easier to understand, and certainlyfacilitating distributed work46research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.easier to use. for example, a sales person who needs to access a customeraccounts database while at home or traveling must have, at a practicalminimum, a v.22bisstandard, 2,400bps modem connected to, or internal to, aportable computer; communications software; and an analog telephone line withan accessible rj11, or similar, standard jack. additionally, mostcommunications software packages require that the user be at least minimallyaware of communications parameters such as baud rate, parity, data bits, stopbits, and local echo. all of these requirements may be fairly easy to manage athome. however, if a hotel or customer site lacks telephone jacks, or has onlydigital telephone lines, accessing the customer database can be impossible. infact, inveterate mobile workers can sometimes be identified by the contents oftheir wellstocked portable computer cases: screwdrivers and pliers todisassemble telephones, various patch cords with alternate telephone plugs oralligator clips, handset adapters, audiocoupled modems, and digital lineadapters. users who need to have full, mobile access to their company'scomputer networks must master additional levels of technical sophisticationranging from integrated services digital network (isdn) telephone linestandards to the technicalities of internet addressing and packet transportprotocols.inconsistent and inadequate user interfaces also increase complexityofusebarriers and interfere with the adoption of new computing and communicationstechnology. this is particularly true for distributed workers, who may findthemselves using a variety of communications devices and services but in waysonly incidental to their primary work tasks or to the primary use of thecommunications device. for example, it is often a matter of trial and error todetermine which of the many services possibly used by a mobile worker, suchas call waiting or cellular telephone services, interfere (and in exactly whatway) with particular computer communications and how this interference canbe eliminated. often, the ability of end users to take full advantage of flexibleand programmable services is limited by cryptic user interfaces based on touchtone telephone keypads.consistency of interfaces and connections across a range of environmentsare equally important to the mobile worker. today, for example, a cellulartelephone user often needs to make several attempts to dial a longdistance callwhile roaming in another cellular provider's system. this will certainly becomeexacerbated when users more routinely wander from areas with highbandwidth, multimedia connections, to localities with lowbandwidthconnections, to remote locations providing high bandwidth from a distant networkfacilitating distributed work47research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.host. ubiquity of capabilitiesšthe common denominator, which may berelatively lowšwill be a key constraint on the speed of distributed workapplications.for the foreseeable future, learning to use networks effectively will requirea great deal of human support. it has even been possible to make a business outof providing that support. for example, omnet, the network company thatprovides electronic mail and bulletin board services to oceanographers, has atollfree telephone number enabling an oceanographer to talk to a real personwho will tell him/her how to set the parity bits or the local access phone numberfor accessing electronic mail from bogota, bulgaria, or burlington. omnet alsomanages electronic mail distribution lists for distributed projects, ensuring thateveryone's electronic mail address is uptodate and providing hardcopy postalor facsimile delivery to people without electronic mail. other valueaddednetwork vendors offer similar services. more generally, the spread ofsophisticated computerbased technologies from the sophisticated pioneeringuser base into the general population has increased the need for supportservices, which are provided by both employers and system vendors.costoftechnology barriersthe most difficult challenge is how to deploy highspeed communicationsnetworks, connections, and equipment at a reasonable price and on a wide scale.as the national information infrastructure is advanced and the nation'seconomy becomes increasingly dependent on information, equitable andinexpensive access will be important to a very large segment of the population.inclusive policies and deployment decisions will best serve both public andprivate interests (cstb, 1994b) and permit wider utilization of distributed workpractices. in fact, many modern information technologies depend on wideutilization for their effectiveness and efficiency.for example, it is instructive to examine the recent, rapid spread offacsimile machines. the basic principles of facsimile transmission weredeveloped in 1842 and thus precede even the telegraph (mcgrawhill encyclopedia of science & technology, 1987). the first significant commercialuse was by large news organizations that began sending ''wirephotos" in the1930s. however, the high cost and low speed of the early equipment severelyrestrained adoption of the technology. office use began to increase with theintroduction of digital facsimile equipment and lowercost longdistancetelephone service in the late 1970s. in the early 1990s inexpensive integratedcircuit chips became available, speeds increased, prices dropped drastically, anda "criticalfacilitating distributed work48research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mass" of installed machines was reached. the market almost literally exploded,and the least expensive of the machines became home consumer items.if telecommuting and other forms of distributed work are to increase,lowercost communication devices and services will be needed. in 1993, highspeed modems generally cost between $100 and $350, and faster isdn terminaladapters were about twice as expensive, still without offering the bandwidthneeded for multimedia and video applications. video codecs, devices necessaryfor serious twoway, realtime video work, cost 10 times the amount of currentisdn adapters. additionally, inexpensive, highquality displays are clearlyneeded. currently a goodquality 17inch computer monitor, which is generallyconsidered necessary for serious desktop publishing efforts, costs $1,200 ormore. this will need to decrease by a factor of at least three before it will beaffordable to most users. while general market forces will probably continue toreduce unit prices, researchers and individuals making decisions aboutdistributed work should remember the importance of reducing prices for bothinfrastructure items and services.designing communications infrastructure tosupport a range of capabilities for distributedworkhighspeed, broadband communications will be needed to handle themultimedia environment envisioned for both distributed work and the nationalinformation infrastructure. the next few years should see increasing amounts ofbandwidth available due to the deployment of new network facilities andservices such as asynchronous transfer mode (atm) and other broadbandnetwork backbones running at speeds ranging from 45 megabits per second to agigabit per second, or more. however, most of the research in this area hasfocused on pointtopoint communications of a single medium; almost nothinghas been done in the area of multiparty, multimedia technologies.supporting typical work routinescurrently, the ability to engage in distributed work depends to a largeextent on the availability of communications services to support typicalactivities of an individual or group working remotely, such as the following:facilitating distributed work49research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. contacting another individual, or a group of individuals, using regulartelephones and circuits; exchanging messages by electronic mail, voice mail, or facsimiletransmission; exchanging documents or images by electronic mail or facsimiletransmission; accessing and using computers or computer networks from a remotelocation, an activity often referred to as a remote logon; sharing computer files locally and remotely by using explicit schemessuch as file transfer protocols, or by using indirect techniques such asdistributed file environments; and engaging in videoconferences with participants at two or morelocations.these activities impose different requirements for data transmission rate,or bandwidth, on the supporting technologies. the data transmission rate is ameasure of the speed with which a given technology can exchange data and isnormally measured in bits per second (bps). the size of data objects (e.g., pagesof text, still images, digitized audio clips, movielike sequences of still images)is measured in bits, and dividing the size of the data object by the transmissionrate yields the minimum time that it takes for an object to be transmitted,disregarding any "overhead" for processes like error checking andretransmission. in practice, about 10 percent of the bandwidth is lost tooverhead in asynchronous communications. for example, one page of simpletext with no fancy formatting or graphics typically comprises at least 24,000bits, or 3,000 bytes, of information. at a nominal 2,400 bps, a slow but stillcommon modem speed, it takes at least 11 seconds to transfer each page of text.text that must be transmitted with specific fonts or formatting, or in wordprocessor or spreadsheet format, requires a somewhat larger number of bitsdepending on the features and formats that are included. a 1megabyte filetakes more than 1 hour to transfer at 2,400 bps but only a few seconds over avery lightly loaded network running at 10 megabits per second (mbps).depending on the resolution and number of shades of gray required, a onepage,blackandwhite graphic image comprises between 1 and 4 megabytes.bandwidth is even more critical for media that must be transmitted in anongoing data stream such as audio or video. one second of telephonequalityaudio requires approximately 64,000 bits. fullcolor, fullmotion videoconforming to regular u.s. television standards (as set forth by the nationaltelevision systems committee) requires a bandwidth of 180 mbps. thesenumbers can be reduced by limitingfacilitating distributed work50research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the resolution of the image, transmitting fewer frames per second, and utilizingvarious compression algorithms. however, bandwidths on the order of 1.5mbps to 8 mbps are still required to achieve reasonable quality. from theseconsiderations, it is easy to see that video applications are far more demandingthan audio applications, which are in turn more demanding than stillimage andtextonly applications.envisioning the applications enabled by unlimitedbandwidththe introduction of microprocessors and their rapid penetration of themarket have resulted in a drastic reduction in the cost of computer processingcycles. the national information infrastructure (nii) will have a similar effecton the cost of communications: it will make longhaul, highbandwidthconnections less expensive and more widely available. however, lowerbandwidth cellular and wireless technologies will also become widely available,and lowbandwidth, analog telephone lines will continue to be used in manyhomes and sparsely populated areas. thus, distributed work applicationsutilizing the nii will need to be integrated well across different networktechnologies and bandwidths. important research areas will include systeminfrastructure, user interfaces, and developing applications that will effectivelyuse the varying bandwidths available.for example, the processor, the internal data communications bus, and theinput/output systems of desktop computers are now very powerful, with furtherincreases coming at a rapid rate. how could high network bandwidth andabundant, inexpensive desktop computing power be combined and integrated toenable, for example, useful and innovative distance learning applications toimprove education? some possibilities, with widely differing bandwidthrequirements, might include the following: dynamically creating a single video data stream with the "audience"incorporated into the image. this would allow, for example, eachparticipant in a distributed industrial or professional training session topan and zoom within the videoconference or presentation just as he orshe might look back and forth between the presenter and the otherparticipants in a small workshop or seminar; dynamically analyzing the facial expressions of the audience to createdifferent measures and displays summarizing audience response (e.g.,30 percent of the audience shows evidence of understanding what isbeing presented);facilitating distributed work51research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. capturing and organizing audio questions from audience membersduring the lecture that can be reviewed and/or responded to by thelecturer later. in other words, members of the audience can createprivate audio messages that are passed to the lecturer; capturing and indexing the lecture so that members of the audiencecan more easily locate and review what the lecturer said; providing audience members access to the source material on whichthe lecture is based so that they can browse through it during thelecture; and broadcasting several video streams and allowing audience members toselect among them or to watch several at the same time.similar possibilities exist for other applications. the key idea is todetermine how bandwidth could be used if it were effectively unconstrained, soas to better understand its usefulness for distributed work.enabling integration of lowand highbandwidthapplicationsat the same time, bandwidth limitations will exist for traditional telephoneservice, wireless connections, and cellular services for a long time. thus,applications and devices that can provide essential functions using limitedbandwidth and yet be integrated well with devices and services provided overhighbandwidth networks also should be developed. one example might be toallow a person to cooperate in a videoconference using a personal digitalassistant (pda) with limited computational power. while the video portionwould likely be a casualty of limited bandwidth, the audio channel could beplayed and a shared drawing browser could be used in a discussion between afield repair person and a technical support desk. the audio channel might besent over a cellular network, and the shared drawing tool commands might besent over the pda wireless network. more generally, communications protocolsthat have little overhead and that can utilize processing power to substitute forbandwidth are fertile areas for further technical research.meeting requirements for multimediacommunicationthe distributed work environments of the future will clearly involve thetransmission and reception of multiple types of communications traffic,including voice, data images, video, and data files. multimedia communicationis particularly demanding because videofacilitating distributed work52research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and audio data must generally arrive in real time, although delays may betolerated in the receipt of data files and images. the objective, in the generalsense, is to enable people to engage in multimedia communications independentof location, distance, computing and communications environment, or thenumber of parties involved in a given collaborative session.user requirementsthe type of distributed work session might range from that involving asingle individual carrying a wirelessnetwork computer interacting with aremote database to a largescale multimedia teleconference or group worksession involving many remotely located parties as well as specialized serversfor video, image, and data. individuals in such a multimedia, multipartyconference or work session must be free to come and go. subconferences mightbe convened and later, the full session reconvened. different types of mediamight be transmitted to all or subsets of the group at any given time.participants in a distributed work environment do not want to be aware ofthe underlying communications infrastructure required to make their sessions orconferences possible. they want to turn on intelligent systems, indicate withwhom they wish to communicate, and start the session within, almost literally,the blink of an eyelid. they want the chance of a session setup being denied dueto lack of network resources to be as small as it is currently for voice telephonecallsšabout 1 percent or less. while users may recognize that video, voice, andimages in a wireless environment may not be received with the same fidelity asin the wired environment, the quality of service clearly has to be acceptable nomatter where users are located and how they move.qualityofservice requirements vary greatly, depending on the type ofdata being transferred. for example, computer data files must be transferredwithout loss or corruption but can generally be delayed during transmission.realtime voice, on the other hand, is recognizable in spite of some loss orcorruption during transmission, but substantial loss or delay results inunacceptable degradation. the delay and loss requirements for realtime videoover communication networks are not completely understood at this time anddepend on the kind of compression techniques used in transmitting the videoand on the quality of image that is required. a multimedia, multipoint networkmust ensure that the different media arrive in reasonable synchronism at anygiven receiver site and appear at nearly the same time at the different sites.facilitating distributed work53research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as an example, consider a threeparty work session with users located innew york city, boston, and honolulu. the new york user sends a multimediamessage involving video with audio, a number of images, and someaccompanying data, with each medium to be displayed on a different windowon the recipients' screens. four different kinds of media are involved. assumethat the transmission to hawaii encounters a network problem resulting in someloss of data. the lost data are repeated a number of times before finally arrivingcorrectly at their destination. the video and its accompanying audioinformation are separated from each other and from the data, following differentpaths because of differing bandwidth requirements. how will the audio andvideo be appropriately resynchronized at the two receiving workstations, andhow will the system and/or users handle latency problems resulting from thefact that the complete, correct multimedia data took longer to reach hawaii thanboston? issues such as these must be addressed in the context of research intomultimedia, multipoint protocols.technology requirementsat least three enabling technologies are required for effective multimediacommunication among users distributed in time and space.1. a highspeed, broadband, wired communications infrastructure tohandle diverse multimedia traffic;2. a wireless networking environment capable of handlingmultimedia traffic; and3. multimedia communication protocols appropriate over wide areasand involving multiple parties in heterogeneous computingenvironments, i.e., multimedia, multiparty protocols.multimedia, multiparty communications capability is already available to alimited extent over local area networks and is clearly a topic of great interestamong computer, workstation, and communications vendors. multimediacommunication over wide areas is still in its infancy, with many research issuesyet to be addressed. a limited amount of multimedia protocol design for theinternet has been carried out. some work on pointtopoint multimediacommunication protocols, as contrasted to multiparty communications (groupwork sessions and teleconferences), has appeared in the technical literature.however, the bulk of the work carried out thus far on multimediacommunications has focused on workstation design and issues such as thesynchronization of different traffic types. in the terminologyfacilitating distributed work54research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of network communications architecture, research attention has been focusedprincipally on the "higherlayer" protocols. relatively little work has beencarried out on the communications infrastructure, including the transport layer,required for longdistance multimedia communications over wide areanetworks. the recently published realizing the information future (cstb,1994b) has called for an expanded program of research to support an open datanetwork architecture that would facilitate multimedia traffic.facilitating distributed work55research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5research recommendationsdistributed work, including telecommuting, relies heavily on computingand communications technologies. recent improvements in the capabilities andavailability of tools in these interrelated fields have meant that distributed workcan be undertaken more easily now than in the past. likewise, futureimprovements will benefit those engaging in distributed work and provide botheconomic and social benefits to the nation. thus the committee supports thecontinuation of broad national computing and communications researchprograms in academia, industry, and government.however, in order to optimize the opportunities for and effectiveness ofdistributed work, the committee recommends that research also be conductedwith distributed work as a specific focus. the research needed can beconceptualized as indicated in figure 5.1: infrastructure research is most neededat the extremes of the range of computing and communications capabilities, andapplications research is most needed in the middle of the spectrum.infrastructure researchthe national initiative to develop the technologies for and establish thenational information infrastructure (nii) will benefit distributed work. forexample, the nii will require both richer and more robust security features thanare now available on the internet. theseresearch recommendations56research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.same features will of course be useful to distributed workers to help ensureproper access, control, authentication, and tracking of both individual and groupwork. the committee recommends that specific technical infrastructure researchto enhance and extend distributed work practices be undertaken in the followingareas.figure 5.1 types of research needed to support distributed work across arange of capabilities.mobile workworking while mobile, for example, while traveling in a automobile orstanding in a customer's office, presents many challenges due to the limitedcommunications bandwidth and computing power that are typically availablecompared to those offered in a stationary environment with wire or optical fibernetwork connections. while pocketsize cellular telephones have enabled voicecommunications for many users, reliable mobile data communications servicesare just now being deployed and are still typically limited to asynchronous, lowbandwidth applications like electronic mail or its equivalent. similarly,computing power becomes limited as equipment size and weight are restricted.laptop computers, weighing a few pounds and suitable for use while sittingdown, are capable of running most programs from a desktop computerenvironment, but computing powerresearch recommendations57research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and thus the programs that can be used become extremely constrained on a''palmtop" device suitable for use while standing or walking.to help increase the usefulness of mobile devices and services, thecommittee recommends a comprehensive research program with the followingmajor elements (goals): increasing the bandwidth available to mobile devices. this mightinclude using multiple channels or transmission technologies toincrease the effective delivered bandwidth. developing network protocols that specifically facilitate mobileaddresses or endpoints. (the current protocols, tcp/ip and iso tp4,were developed under the assumption of geographically fixed endpoints.) effectively and efficiently allocating among multiple media (e.g.,image, text, audio, and signaling) the varying bandwidth that isavailable to a mobile user. both shortterm variances caused bycircumstances such as changes in network load and longtermvariances attributable to advances in transmission technology will needto be gracefully accommodated with minimal user attention. balancing and accommodating the competing service demands andnetwork traffic generated by multiple, simultaneous mobile users. maintaining the essential functionality of communications thatoriginate in a highbandwidth environment but must be delivered inenvironments of varying bandwidth, including those of lowbandwidthmobile devices. managing the realtime tracking and transfer of users moving betweenwireless cells, and ultimately the transfer of users moving from a wiredto a wireless network environment in the course of a single,multimedia work or conference session.1 developing computer processes and programs that can migrate across anetwork with the user as that individual moves from place to place.(ubiquitous computing and a mobile computing environment aresimilar concepts.) facilitating periods of "disconnected work" done when a networkconnection is not available. currently, even the bestconnected1 wireless systems already track users in order to provide uninterrupted service.however, safeguards must be established to prevent the system from being abused as away to simply monitor the movements of citizens for other reasons. this is one concreteexample of the need for implementing privacy safeguards as the nation's technologyadvances.research recommendations58research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mobile workers have some periods when they must work with nonetwork connection at all, such as during commercial air flights. thiscan present a problem when their work involves files that are sharedwith other workers: when a temporarily disconnected worker returns toconnected operations, how can he or she know which version of eachfile is the latest, and how can the changes made by the temporarilydisconnected worker be reconciled with a file that may also have beenchanged by workers within the group who remained connected?complicating but also adding promise in lowbandwidthenvironmentresearch is the fact that computing power and communications bandwidth canoften be substituted, one for the other. for example, if a suitable processor andalgorithm are available, data compression can reduce the need for largebandwidths by effectively decreasing the quantity of information that must betransmitted.multipoint, multimedia distributed worka broadranging technical research program should be initiated to explorepossibilities for distributed work practices using multipoint, multimediacommunications at different, but generally abundant, bandwidths. 2 in additionto facilitating distributed work, a research program in this area would helpensure the timely implementation of the nii. it should include research aimed atachieving the following: understanding and specifying minimum qualityofservice standardsfor a representative variety of application areas. currently, the impactsof conditions such as latency, jitter, buffering, and synchronization ofhighquality, interactive audio, image, and video are not fullyunderstood. for example, the amount of video jitter that is acceptablefor distance learning may be figuratively and literally deadly in atelemedicine application. the requirements for latency, jitter, and thelike may also differ between live and delayed (recorded) viewing.2 related sociological, organizational, and humanfactors research will need to beconducted contemporaneously with technical research. for example, videoconferencingis still a relatively new technique: we use it, but not necessarily well. how can it be mademore effective? what formats are good for meetings? how can both previously preparedand spontaneously written materials best be integrated into a videoconference?research recommendations59research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. predicting and controlling the various types of simultaneouscommunications traffic to ensure the required quality of services forboth pointtopoint and multipoint sessions. this may involveindividuals using devices with varying bandwidth capabilities joiningand leaving during an active session. determining how to charge for distributed patterns of resourceconsumption on complex networks that may include sections ofvarying bandwidth. for example, the current conferencecall model ofcharging a single party with the entire cost of a distributed worksession is very likely to inhibit usage when newer, more complexnetworks and connections are available and are used by multipleorganizations that have agreed to be responsible for their own costswhile cooperating on a particular project. specifically, a partyparticipating via a limitedbandwidth connection in an otherwise highbandwidth, multimedia, sixway conference session may not wish topay onesixth of the total cost of the session. ideally, a variety ofmethods for billing according to bandwidth use or allocation should besupported. establishing multimedia communication sessions among multiple,remote parties, to include notification of individuals and initiation ofthe actual session with minimal human attention.applications researchdomainspecific researchalthough various types of distributed work are currently carried out in theu.s. workplace, the implementation and effectiveness of importantorganizational group processes are often constrained by the lack of relevantcomputing and communications applications in a distributed work environment.for example, the informal methods that people in organizations have for sharinginformation, coordinating tasks, learning new skills, recruiting members, andsustaining group activities cannot be applied easily in distributed settings. thecommittee believes that many of these processes can be facilitated by asustained research effort focusing on computing and communicationsapplications for distributed work.thus, the committee recommends researchoriented field trials ofdistributed work in areas of national or commercial interest, such as delivery ofhealth care in rural areas, collaborative design of complex systems, or themaintenance and repair of deployed equipment. these trials should beconducted across large geographic areas and should utilize heterogeneoushardware, software, and communications services whenever possible. asappropriate, they could be combinedresearch recommendations60research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with other federal and state field trials of distributed education, health care,distributed science, or electronic commerce. the field trials should lead to thedevelopment of applications tailored to improve performance in each of thesedomains. importantly, it appears that with minor modifications they willenhance distributed work in other domains as well. the committee believes thatsimilar efforts in other important areas of distributed work would help solve thedifficult problems of information sharing, group socialization, remotesupervision, and related constraints in the context of employeremployeerelationships. properly designed field trials of distributed work would providethe opportunity to conduct extensive research in important substantive areassuch as education and on tools such as group writing products that couldenhance and extend future distributed work in many other fields or domains.research should be conducted to discover approaches to the following: improving the capability to search for and share unstructuredinformation. research aimed at improving the tools needed to identifypotential group members and to identify and access personal stores ofinformation in the same manner as information stored in libraries andother institutional archives is only starting, and more is clearly needed.even if the technological problem of finding experts were solved, thesocial issues of ensuring privacy and controlling access to expertindividuals across networks need extensive research. numerousopportunities for research also exist in the area of search algorithmscapable of handling nonstandardized information formats onheterogeneous hardware platforms. developing techniques for forming and sustaining distributed groups,including methods for developing group cohesiveness, enabling remotesupervision, providing individual and group motivation and rewards,and ensuring continued commitment to a project or organization.behavioral and organizational research should be conductedconcurrently to better identify exactly how physical proximitystimulates effective recruitment of group members, so that functionallyanalogous processes can be encouraged in distributed work settings. scaling and extending information retrieval techniques so that userscan search all relevant and available databases, not just previouslyknown and selected databases. query techniques that are independentof the underlying database structure will be increasingly valuable asincreasing amounts of information become accessible via publicnetworks such as the internet. related research is needed into highlyreliable global file systems and environments and on improvingresearch recommendations61research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the performance of distributed databases, and their impacts on networktraffic. more generally, research is needed to develop techniques forbrowsing and other ways of facilitating queries in which the user maynot have a wellspecified question. developing portable, extensible tool kits for building distributedremote control systems and their user interfaces. for example, keycontrol functions must be identified and made accessible to remotecontrol, security and safety must be foolproof, and both novice andexpert users must be accommodated. additionally, researchers shouldinvestigate the potentials for controlling heterogeneous devices withthe same end functions through a single remote control program.the field trials recommended by the committee should be interdisciplinaryresearch efforts, with expert personnel drawn from the behavioral and socialsciences as well as from the computing and telecommunications disciplines.social and behavioral scientists have extensive understanding of the functionsthat groups need to fulfill to successfully accomplish their work and experiencein evaluating the success with which new computer and communicationsbasedtools have met these needs, as well as expertise in assessing the social impact ofnew tools and technologies. technology researchers have expertise in inventingsuccessful applications that push the limits of technology, that can begeneralized across domains, and that raise fundamental research issues in thesupporting technical disciplines. together they can explore the interrelatedtechnical, human, organizational, and social factors that can enhance and extenddistributed work across many disciplineand situationspecific domains.generic researchcomputers have provided powerful new capabilities to the nation'sworkers. word processors and desktop publishing programs make writing,editing, laying out, designing, and publishing sophisticated documentsdependent on the skill of the individual rather than on the availability ofexpensive specialized equipment. spreadsheet and graphics programs allowlegions of workers to analyze scientific, financial, and other numerical data insophisticated ways that prior to 1980 were possible only for those with access tolarge mainframe computers. database programs allow workers with onlyminimal programming skills to record, store, retrieve, and analyze hugeamounts of data.however, with these everincreasing capabilities has come increasingresearch recommendations62research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.complexity. workers needing to cooperate with others must now be conversantabout multiple file formats and their compatibility (or general lack thereof),translation utilities, diskette formats, data densities, and even features supportedbetween versions or releases of the same program. while these intricacies arereasonably manageable within a single, physically contiguous organization withample technical support, they can quickly become very limiting within ageographically distributed work group using heterogeneous hardware, software,and communications media. mobile workers may have an even more difficulttime as they attempt to communicate and cooperate across time zones utilizingunfamiliar telephone and data connections with little or no technical support.if the capacity for distributed work is to expand to individuals and groupsbeyond those with considerable technical proficiency, attention must be paid tosimplifying many of the required operations and user interfaces. the committeethus recommends a research program with the following goals: developing distributed work tools, interfaces, and systems that activelyencourage information sharing. this activity is critical to groupaccomplishments and can become difficult in dispersed groups. newsystems should include features to anticipate and accommodate workconditions described in the social science literaturešsuch as socialdilemmas, social loafing, and altruismšto improve information sharing. bridging the gap between synchronous and asynchronouscommunications to facilitate both prior input and followup to groupwork sessions. currently, distributed group discussions and worksessions tend to take place synchronously, using only a fewspecifically preannounced reference or discussion items. extensive preand postsession discussions occurring by asynchronous means such aselectronic mail are often ignored or imperfectly summarized andconsidered due to the difficulties of indexing, referencing,conveniently using, and generally relating them to a work sessionoccurring on a synchronous medium. technical and humanfactorsresearch may reveal methods to better link these two major categoriesof communication. improving and extending the user interface to the telephone networkand services. the nearly universal 12key touchtone keypad hasbecome a limiting factor in many systems. socalled voice responsesystems use audio only on one end of the transaction, and users mustbe led through a long menu tree in order to limit the number of choicesat any one branch. interfaces might be both richerresearch recommendations63research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and easier to use with some combination of alphanumeric display,voice prompts, and audio input from the user. even in an age ofgrowing computer networks, "plain old telephone service" remains themost ubiquitous means of sharing information. improving audio processing technology and equipment to facilitateworking at a distance. this effort should include research aimed atbetter managing and using captured audio as a data type, andimproving noise and echo cancellation in lessthanideal audioenvironments. reducing the human support currently needed for the use ofwidespread, complex networks by distributed workers. currently, widearea network services, whether provided directly through internetconnections or indirectly by valueadded network vendors, generallyrequire large amounts of humanprovided technical support. this isespecially true when end users do not wish to learn about underlyingnetwork technologies. research aimed at better automating longandshortterm network connections as well as ongoing network troubleshooting and maintenance would be valuable to all individualsengaging in distributed work and to most other network users as well. improving the quality and reducing the cost of powerful, highqualitycomputer input and output devices. while these improvements wouldaid all workers, distributed workers in particular must often processlarge amounts of information with little support from others. improvedscanning, optical character recognition, and computer display systemswould be very helpful. better interfaces are needed for browsing,annotating, retaining, and communicating the context of information. improving the reliability of communications and computing systems toreduce the chance of telecommuters becoming isolated due to systemfailures. networks and multiuser systems of all types will need to havethe same or better reliability as today's standalone, singleuser systems.conclusionmany observers believe that the u.s. economy is in transition to apostindustrial model. while the exact outlines of this new economy are not yetcompletely known, it appears that the nation would be well served by enhancingworkers' capabilities to engage in distributed work and by carefully consideringits wider adoption in order to increase locational flexibility, provide expandedemployment opportunities, and make better use of our physical transportationresources. the research recommendations of the committee to studyresearch recommendations64research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology and telecommuting: issues and impacts will by no means be thefinal word on the topic. new opportunities for research will appear as thenation's work practices change and its computing and communicationstechnology continues to advance. the committee is convinced, however, thatthe research it has recommended will provide major new technologicalcapabilities to enhance and extend the use of distributed work in the nation.research recommendations65research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliographyabel, m.j. 1990. "experiences in an exploratory distributed organization." pp. 489510 in j.galegher, r. kraut, and c. egido, eds., intellectual teamwork: social and technologicalfoundations of cooperative work . hillsdale, n.j.: lawrence earlbaum associates.allen, t. 1977. managing the flow of technology. cambridge, mass: mit press.argote, l. 1982. "input uncertainty and organizational coordination in hospital emergency units."administrative science quarterly 27:420434.bagley, m., j. mannering, and p. mokhtarian. 1993. telecommuting centers and related concepts:a review of practice. university of california, davis, institute of transportation studiesresearch report, prepared for the california department of transportation office oftraffic improvement (december).baiylin, l. 1988. toward the perfect workplace? the experience of homebased developers.working paper 199388. cambridge, mass.: sloan school of management, massachusettsinstitute of technology.bly, s., s. harrison, and s. irwin. 1993. "media spaces: bringing people together in a video, audioand computing environment." communications of the acm 36(1):2846.borenstein, n. 1992. "computational mail as network infrastructure for cscw." proceedings ofcomputer supported cooperative work 1992 . new york: association of computingmachinery.bibliography66research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.brooks, f. 1975. the mythical manmonth: essays on software engineering . reading, mass.:addisonwesley publishing company.bullen, c., and j. bennett. 1991. "groupware in practice. an interpretation of work experiences."pp. 257287 in c. dunlop and r. kling, eds., computerization and controversy: valueconflicts and social choices . new york: academic press.christensen, k. 1988. women and homebased work: the unspoken contract . new york: henryholt and company.clark, h.h., and s.e. brennen. 1991. "grounding in communication." pp. 127149 in l.b. resnick,r.m. levine, and s.d. teasley, eds., perspectives on socially shared cognition.washington, d.c.: american psychological association.computer science and technology board (cstb), national research council. 1990. computers atrisk: safe computing in the information age. washington, d.c.: national academy press.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993.national collaboratories: applying information technology for scientific research.washington, d.c.: national academy press.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994a.information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever .washington, d.c.: national academy press.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994b.realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994c.rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities. washington, d.c.:national academy press, in press.constant, d., l. sproull, and s. kiesler. 1994. "the kindness of strangers: on the usefulness ofweak ties for technical advice." organizational science, forthcoming.culnan, m. 1983. "environmental scanning: the effects of task complexity and source accessibilityon information gathering behavior." decision science 14:194206.de sola pool, i. 1980. "communications technology and land use." annals of the americanacademy of political and social science 451 (september):112.dudley, k., r. kraut, and c. steinfield. 1993. american home telecommunications project.unpublished research. morristown, n.j.: bell communications research.eveland, j., and t. bikson. 1988. "work group structures and computerbibliography67research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.support: a field experiment.'' acm transactions on office information systems 6(4):354379.feldman, m.s. 1987. "electronic mail and weak ties in organizations." office: technology andpeople 3:83101.festinger, l., s. schacter, and k. back. 1950. social pressures in informal groups: a study ofhuman factors in housing. palo alto, calif.: stanford university press.finholt, t., and c. huff. 1994. social issues in computing: putting computing in its place. newyork: mcgrawhill.fish, r., r. kraut, r. root, and r. rice. 1992. "evaluating video as a technology for informalcommunication." communications of the acm 36(1):4861.flores, f., m. graves, b. hartfield, and t. winograd. 1988. "computer systems and the design oforganizational interaction." acm transactions on office information systems 6:153172.foltz, p., and s. dumais. 1993. "personalized information delivery: an analysis of informationfiltering methods." communications of the acm 35(12):5160.galegher, j., and r. kraut. 1994. "computermediated communication for intellectual teamwork:an experiment in group writing." information systems research 5(2):110138.garvey, w., n. lin, and c. nelson. 1970. "communication in the physical and social sciences."science 170:11661173.gentile, f., and r. houseman. 1970. a development project in self and home employment for thehomebound. albertson, n.y.: ina mend institute at human resources center.gibbons, j., w. kincheloe, and k. down. 1977. "tutored videotape instruction." science 195:1139.hagstrom, w. 1965. the scientific community. carbondale, ill.: southern illinois university press,pp. 121122.hesses, b., l. sproull, s. kiesler, and j. walsh. 1993. "returns to science: computer networks andscientific research in oceanography." communications of the acm 36(8):90101.hiltz, s. 1993. "correlates of learning in a virtual classroom." international journal of manmachine studies 39:7198.ives, h. 1930. "twoway television." bell labs record 8:399404.katz, d., and r. kahn. 1979. the social psychology of organizations . second edition. new york:john wiley & sons.katz, r., and m. tushman. 1978. "communication patterns, project performance, and taskcharacteristics: an empirical evaluation in an r&d setting." organizational behavior andhuman performance 23:139162.kraut, r. 1988. "homework: what is it and who does it?" chapterbibliography68research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 in k. christensen, ed., the new era of homebased work. boulder, colo.: westviewpress.kraut, r., and p. attewell. 1993. electronic mail and organizational knowledge: media use in aglobal corporation. technical report cmucs93208. pittsburgh, pa.: carnegie mellonuniversity, computer science department.kraut, r., and l. streeter. 1994. "coordination in large scale software development."communications of the acm, in press.kraut, r., c. egido, and j. galegher. 1990. "patterns of contact and communication in scientificresearch collaboration." pp. 149171 in j. galegher, r. kraut, and c. egido, eds.,intellectual teamwork: social and technological foundations of cooperative work.hillsdale, n.j.: lawrence erlbaum associates.kraut, r., s. lewis, and l. swezey. 1982. "listener responsiveness and the coordination ofconversation." journal of personality and social psychology 43:718731.kusterer, k. 1978. knowhow on the job: the important working knowledge of unskilled workers.boulder, colo.: westview press.lai, k., t. malone, and k. yu. 1988. "object lens: a "spreadsheet" for cooperative work." acmtransactions on office information systems 6(4):332353.larose, r. 1983. future demand for teleconferencing and teleconferencing suppliers. eastlansing, mich.: eelra group.lave, j., and e. wenger. 1991. situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. new york:cambridge university press.lund, j., and p. mokhtarian. 1994. "telecommuting and residential location: theory andimplications for vmt in the monocentric metropolis." transportation research record,forthcoming.mcgrawhill encyclopedia of science & technology. 1987. "facsimile." sixth edition. new york:mcgrawhill.miller, j., m. mckenna, and p. ramsey. 1993. "an evaluation of student content learning andaffective perceptions of a twoway interactive video learning experience." educationaltechnology 33(6):5155.mintzberg, h. 1979. the structuring of organizations. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prenticehall, p. 20.mokhtarian, p. 1988. "an empirical evaluation of the travel impacts of teleconferencing."transportation research a 22a(4):283289.mokhtarian, p. 1990. "a typology of relationships between telecommunications and transportation."transportation research a 24a(3):231242.mokhtarian, p. 1991a. "defining telecommuting." transportation research record 1305:273281.bibliography69research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mokhtarian, p. 1991b. "telecommuting and travel: state of the practice, state of the art."transportation 18(4):319342.mokhtarian, p. 1994. "the transportation impacts of telecommuting: recent empirical findings." inp.r. stopher and m. leegosselin, eds., understanding travel behavior in an era ofchange. elmsford, n.y.: pergamon press, forthcoming.mokhtarian, p., and i. salomon. 1994. "modeling the choice of telecommuting: setting the context."environment and planning a 26(4):749766.mokhtarian, p., s. handy, and i. salomon. 1994. "methodological issues in the estimation oftransportation, energy, and air quality impacts of telecommuting." transportationresearch a, forthcoming.national technological university (ntu). 1994. "national technological university: press factsheet." ntu, 700 centre ave., fort collins, colo., august.nijkamp, p., and i. salomon. 1989. "future spatial impacts of telecommunications." transportationplanning and technology 13(4):275287.nilles, j. 1991. "telecommuting and urban sprawl: mitigator or inciter?" transportation 18(4):411432.ochsman, r., and a. chapanis. 1974. "the effects of 10 communications modes on the behavior ofteams during cooperative problem solving." international journal of manmachinestudies 6(september):579619.o'conaill, b., s. whitaker, and s. wilbur. 1992. conversations over videoconferences: anevaluation of video mediated communication. unpublished manuscript. bristol, england:hewlett packard research laboratories.race, t. 1993. "testing the telecommute." new york times, august 6, p. f11.salomon, i. 1986. "telecommuting and travel relationships: a review." transportation research a20(3):223238.salton, g., and m. mcgill. 1979. introduction to modern information retrieval. new york:mcgrawhill books.schramm, w. 1977. big media, little media: tools and technologies for instruction. beverly hills,calif.: sage publications.shellenbarger, s. 1993. "some thrive, but many wilt working at home." wall street journal,december 14, p. b1.smailagic, a., and d. siewiorek. 1994. "the cmu mobile computers." proceedings of ieeecompcon '94. new york: institute of electrical and electronics engineers.svenning, l., and j. ruchinskas. 1984. "organizational teleconferencing."bibliography70research recommendations to facilitate distributed workcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pp. 217248 in ronald e. rice associates, eds., the new media. beverly hills, calif.:sage publications.tang, j., and e. isaacs. 1992. why do users like video? studies of multimediasupportedcollaboration. smli tr925. mountain view, calif.: sun microsystems laboratories.thorn, b., and t. connolly. 1987. "discretionary data bases: a theory and some experimentalfindings." communications research 14(5):512528.tushman, m. 1977. "special boundary roles in the innovation process." administrative sciencequarterly 22(4):587605.u.s. department of energy. 1994. energy, emissions, and social consequences of telecommuting.washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.u.s. department of labor. 1991. dictionary of occupational titles. volume 1. fourth edition.lanham, md.: bernan press.u.s. department of transportation, office of the secretary. 1993. transportation implications oftelecommuting. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.weiser, m. 1993. "some computer science issues in ubiquitous computing." communications of theacm 36(7):4784.whitaker, s., and e. geelhoed. 1993. "shared workspaces. how do they work and when are theyuseful?" international journal of manmachine studies 39:813842.williams, e. 1977. "experimental comparisons of facetoface and mediated communication: areview." psychological bulletin 84:963976.yates, j. 1989. control through communication. baltimore, md.: johns hopkins university press.bibliography71