detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4813keeping the u.s. computer and communications industrycompetitive: convergence of computing, communications, andentertainment90 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309050890 | doi 10.17226/4813computer science and technology board, national research councilkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ito be set with coverkeeping the u.s. computer andcommunications industrycompetitive: convergence ofcomputing, communications,and entertainmentsteering committee on keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, communications, and entertainmentcomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1995keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the following organizations: air force office ofscientific research (under contract n0001487j1110), advanced research projects agency (undercontract n0001487j1110), apple computer corporation, department of energy (under grant defg0587er25029), digital equipment corporation, intel corporation, international business machines corporation, national aeronautics and space administration (under grant cda9119792),national science foundation (under grant cda9119792), and office of naval research (undercontract n0001487j1110). any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed inthis material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.library of congress catalog card number 9466573international standard book number 0309050898additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, n.w.box 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)b455this report is also available on the national academy of sciencesõ internet host. it may be accessedvia world wide web at http://www.nas.edu.copyright 1995 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americakeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steering committee on keeping theu.s. computer and communications industrycompetitive: convergence of computing,communications, and entertainmentdavid c. nagel, applesoft inc., chairpeter f. cowhey, university of california at san diego(at press time, federal communications commission)esther dyson, edventure holdings inc.janice obuchowski, freedom technologies inc.alexander singer, film directorspecial advisorssamuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationrobert w. lucky, bell communications researchirving wladawskyberger, power parallel systems inc.,international business machines corporationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorleslie m. wade, project assistantiiikeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boardwilliam a. wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles m. geschke, adobe systems inc.james n. gray, san francisco, californiabarbara j. grosz, harvard universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorola inc.robert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam h. press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.edward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise a. arnheim, senior staff officerherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjohn m. godfrey, research associaterenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria p. bemah, administrative assistantleslie m. wade, project assistantivkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for theadvancement of science, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studysylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologysusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, rutgers universitykenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatoryhans mark, university of texas at austinthomas a. prince, california institute of technologyjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesl.e. scriven, university of minnesotaa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratoryshmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorvkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection ofits members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibilityfor advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. robert m. white is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academyof sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professionsin the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering inproviding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robert m. white are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethis report on digital convergence is the third in a series of computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) reports focusing on the competitive status of the u.s. computer industry. the first series report, keeping the u.s.computer industry competitive: defining the agenda (national academy press,washington, d.c., 1990), provided insights from leaders of computerrelatedbusinesses and research programs on the broad industry complex and its varioussegments. the second series report, keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integration (national academy press, washington, d.c., 1992),presented expert examination of a technology and business arena in which theunited states has shown leadership, systems integration, to further understandingof how to maintain if not extend that strong performance. this third report buildson a theme in the first two, the close coupling of computing and communicationsin the development of new technologies, goods, and services. it explores thebroader integration of information processing, communication, and generationthat is reflected in the convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment. it reinforces the importance of communications that has been evidentin each report by broadening the series title to keeping the u.s. computer andcommunications industry competitive. in addition to discussing conditions,opportunities, and risks for competitiveness, it also addresses implications of thesubject technologies and their uses for the daily lives of citizens.digital convergence is the most volatile topic considered in cstbõs competitiveness series. from the time cstb selected the topic, through the time itheld a colloquium on it, to this time of publication, several waves of interest andopinion have coursed through the news media and, by extension, the businessviikeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacecommunity and popular attention. as project special advisor and industry executive robert w. lucky observed, there has been a òhype cycle.ó opinions ofwhere digital convergence is heading and when and how it will get there havevaried over that cycle. although this is hardly a time of stability, enough hashappened to allow for greater reflection and more sober assessment of prospectsthan at earlier times in the past two years. toward that end, this report is directedto decision makers in government, industry, and academia. because so much ofits subject matter is new, timesensitive, and lacking in scholarly consideration,this report has drawn to an unusual degree on items reported in the news media.news articles are cited in part to document the hype cycle that, as noted bylucky, itself has fed the very activity that was being reported.in keeping with the previous volumes in this series, this report draws directlyon statements made by principals from industry and academia (appendix a) thatwere aired at an invitational colloquium (appendix b). that stock of statementswas updated and enlarged in this instance by a series of interviews (appendix c)conducted by virginia quesada of vq productions inc. the interviews weredeveloped to support a cstb experiment, the production of a video for limiteddistribution to the federal policymaking community as a companion to this report. as a few colloquium participants noted, it is out of keeping with digitalconvergence for cstb to publish only in text form. the concept for the videoand its initial framing were championed by steering committee member alexandersinger, an independent film director.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive:convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment benefited particularly from the advice and support of special advisors to the steering committee, samuel fuller, robert lucky, and irving wladawskyberger, each of whomhad contributed to the first two reports of this competitiveness series. earlydrafting and organization, background consultations, and data gathering wereconducted by laura ost, an independent science writer retained as a cstb consultant. as always, the anonymous reviewers provided criticisms and suggestions that helped to refine and extend the discussion.comments on this report and suggestions of topics for future activities in thisseries are welcome via internet to cstb@nas.edu or fax to 202/3342318.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixcontents1 overview1visions and reality, 6new products and alliances: industrial convergence?, 8conclusion, 12notes, 122 trends and directions15the outlook for multimedia goods and services, 15software, 19networks, 22expanding bandwidth: is there enough?, 24interconnection and interoperability, 24standards, 26entertainment and the entertainment industry, 29notes, 363 societal implications40the flow of information, 42diversity of information, 44intellectual property issues, 46the shape of technology, 50the need for userfriendly technology, 52a history lesson: the evolution of books as mass media, 55using the technology, 56ixkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacegames, play, and life, 56entertaining education, 59notes, 624 promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles65international competitiveness, 66publicprivate tensions and the information infrastructure, 76perspectives on regulation, 78other useful roles for government, 83notes, 85bibliography88appendixesacolloquium participants99bcolloquium agenda103cfollowup interviews105xcontentskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11overviewdigital convergenceñcombining computing, communications, and entertainmentñis taking shape in the form of new kinds of business and consumerproducts (goods and services) and new business ventures and alliances. it hasbecome a regular topic in the business, trade, and mass media, yet it remains hardto define and hard to interpret in terms of its ultimate technical, business, andsocietal ramifications. the very term òconvergenceó is itself a source of confusion and ambiguity; see box 1.1. as samuel ginn, former chairman and chiefexecutive officer of pacific telesis group, observed at the colloquium that servedas a basis for this report,the whole term òconvergenceó continues to take on new meanings. originally,we thought it was the combination of media and telecommunications. then wediscovered that set[top] devices were a key part of that convergence, and thenwe understood that storage technology was important, and indeed, semiconductor manufacturing, and then the whole applications arena and the programmingarena. now, we understand that games and transactions and retail firms are alla part of this convergence. so this whole idea continues to evolve.as a result, the true nature of digital convergence may not be reflected accuratelyby either its advocates or the popular media. illustrating the swings in opinion,sample headlines and news story themes between mid1993 and mid1994 included òmultimedia is growing by leaps and boundsó; òrace for multimediacrown speeding up: companies team to get jump on interactive servicesó;òmerger to create a media giantó; òwith mergerõs failure, an industry seeks aleaderó; and òhurdles slow information ôsuperhypeway.õókeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveunderlying digital convergence are advances in computer hardware, telecommunications systems, and software. the unifying element is digital technology, which reduces all information to a binary code of 1s and 0s. whereascomputers and software have been digital for decades, audio and video technologies have only recently begun to go digital. once information has a digitalrepresentation, different forms can be blended together (although digitization isnot sufficient for such integration, which depends on the structures imposed onthe bits) and, eventually, transmitted by wire, fiber, or wireless means. thus,digitized material can be defined by what it does rather than the medium onwhich it is transported, stored, or used. moreover, digital devices can be programmed, something that allows them to be more than passive receivers of information. a current realization of digital convergence is associated with òinteractive multimediaó products; see box 1.2.digital convergence could build on, blend, and redirect the functions, products, and cultures of many existing industries. although sales figures for existingindustries are neither directly comparable nor additive, they give an indication ofthe potential economic impact: catalogue shopping ($70 billion in current annualu.s. revenues; wwd, 1994),1 broadcast advertising (currently $27 billion; turner,box 1.1 meaning of convergencewe have been applying the term òconvergenceó to the major information, electronics, and communications industries with increasing fervor for over three decades, going back to the work and ideas coming out of harvard university, themassachusetts institute of technology, and other places in the 1960s. it is time todeal more gingerly with the term. what do we really mean by convergence? whatis it shorthand for? a flurry of mergers and alliances? the common use of bits?or is there something more fundamental to it than that? jacob bronowski warnedof the classical error of regarding a scientific law as only shorthand for its instances. his caveat may apply here.in mathematics, convergence is the property or process of approaching a limiting value. that meaning of the term appears the exact opposite of the wildfire ofinnovation expected from the convergence of industries dealt with in this report.in physiology, convergence refers to a coordinated turning of the eyes inwardto focus on an object at close range. once again, we are confronted with a meaning that is antithetic to the farreaching and longrange changes in thinking andbehavior that we all expect.in biology, convergence refers to the adaptive evolution of superficially similarstructures in unrelated species exposed to similar environments. this meaningmay be closer to what digital convergence may entail.more superficially, convergence may simply mean a meeting ground, or a process of coming together, for example, a place where two rivers join.source: adapted from martin greenberger, university of california at los angeles, personal communication, july 30, 1994.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview3box 1.2 defining interactive multimediaòmultimediaó usually refers to a blend of various forms of media (text, graphics,sound, video) in a digital format, but the meaning of the term varies. multimediacomputing, for example, often combines numerical data, graphics, animation, andaudio, or some subset of these elements. multimedia as a term has also beenused to include interactive television and related services, such as video on demand, remote learning, home shopping, and teleconferencing. it may involve generation of content from existing basic material (as in the generation of video gamesusing movie images and story lines, a movie aftermarket) as well as new content;the emphasis is on the composition of the media and their interaction with thecontent.òinteractiveó products are sometimes treated as a subset of multimedia. whether so categorized or addressed separately, interactivity is regarded by some analysts as the pivotal feature of the new technologies.interactive technologies emphasize the active involvement of the user, as opposed to more passive reception of content, as via conventional broadcast media.interactive technologies range from remote control devices (e.g., for televisionoperation) at the low end to, at the high end, virtual reality, which may involvevisual and perhaps tactile and auditory immersion in a threedimensional computergenerated òartificial worldó permitting multiuser actions and interactions. interactivity has been gaining attention because of evidence that it can enhance education and training, on the one hand, and because it is stimulating growth of suchleisure activities as games, on the other. thus, the internet is often offered bythose familiar with it as a model for interactive communication and as a laboratoryfor interactive applications of digital convergence, from ònewsgroupsó and informationaccess services to multiplayer games. it is already moving to support twowaydigital services with highquality sound, animated visuals, and other elements,themselves the ingredients for products being developed or piloted by cable system operators, telephone companies, information service providers, hardware andsoftware vendors, and other companies.robert stein, a founder of the voyager company, said he never uses the òmwordó because the combination of multiple media per se is already available ontelevision and in movies. òiõm much more interested in the interaction, the relationship between the reader and the material, and the author and the reader, than i amin just the simple aggregate,ó stein said. òeventually, weõre going to go past theaggregate. weõre actually going to invent something new, although i think that isstill decades away.ó1993a), home video (currently $12 billion; turner, 1993a), information services(currently $9 billion; turner, 1993a), video games (currently $6.5 billion; tetzeli,1993; pereira, 1994), consumer electronics, including tvs, vcrs, audio equipment, blank tapes, and accessories (currently $40 billion to $55 billion; sims,1994), and recorded music (currently $10 billion; newman, 1994). unknown arethe new markets that digital convergence may spawn. the commercialization ofthe internet and the growth of online services illustrate some of the possibilities.however, nearterm markets tend to be overestimated or at least misestimated:keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveestimates of the nearterm market for interactive media (e.g., cdrom applications) range widely from $4 billion to $14 billion annually by 1995. projectingthe fate of new markets is notoriously hard, given their small origins and uncertain prospects.2a key indicator is the experience of online services (internal and interenterprise) in the business domain: computerized reservation services for airlines, legal and financial database services, 800number helplines, 900numberservices, and others have become profitable. these services may use a somewhatdifferent mix of media (e.g., they place a heavy emphasis on telephones), but theyappear to offer an analogous experience base. a note of caution comes from therocky experience of online services aimed at households; despite growth andnew entries, such services have had difficulty arriving at user interfaces, pricingschemes, and product and service packages that would generate consistent profits.3computerbased services aimed at the mass market generally may becomemore successful, given astute marketing and management decisions as well as theexpanding base in household equipment: about 95 percent of u.s. householdshave telephones; most households have television sets, and industry analystsestimate that up to 40 percent of all households will have interactive television inthe next decade (schwarz, 1993); over 30 million have personal computers today,and over 10 million of those have cdrom drives.4 anecdotal evidence suggests that the latter part of 1994 saw a surge in computer systems for the home,attesting both to greater interest in digital convergence products and to an expansion of the customer base from the technically sophisticated to more neophytes(markoff, 1995b). this upgrading of home equipment could constitute a turningpoint for educational products, suggested nancy stover of yourchoice tv in alate1994 interview. shortages of capital in schools and homes have constrainedthe educational technology market for decades, but now there is a greater prospect of teachers and students having access from their homes to technology andcontent. cautioned stephen case of america online in another late1994 interview, òdespite all the articles you now read, 5 percent of houses subscribe to anonline service and 95 percent donõt. so thereõs still a lot of opportunity forgrowth.óthe information infrastructure is the broadest concept that builds on theevolving mix of goods and services that embody various aspects of digital convergence. it has been described as òall of the facilities and instrumentalitiesengaged in delivering and disseminating information throughout the nation,óincluding facilities under public and private control for the mass media (traditionally broadcasting, cable television, and newspapers); pointtopoint communications (traditionally telephone and telegraph); and associated information appliances.5 in the present report, the term òinfrastructureó is used in this generalsense to include all types of information technologies, with emphasis on deliverykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview5systems (including settop and other accessfacilitating devices as well as communications facilities).digital convergence is important to industrial competitiveness. computing,telecommunications, and entertainment are singular examples of u.s. strength inexport as well as domestic marketsñentertainment alone generates some $6billion in export revenue, the fourth largest source of exports (behind defense,aircraft, and agriculture), with hollywood producing 85 percent of the worldõsexports of theatrical and television programs (flaherty, 1994). they also represent activities that transcend the specific industries identified by the supply ofassociated goods and servicesñthe economic impacts of computing and communications show up in the performance of those who use these technologies, andmuch that falls under more mundane labels, such as news, can be seen asñand,increasingly, is packaged asñentertainment. entertainment adds emphasis oncreation of content to the more basic themes of productivity and other economicbenefits characteristic of earlier discussions of computing and communicationstechnologies.to help gain perspective on the impact of digital convergence on u.s. competitiveness, the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council sponsored a oneday colloquium in june 1993. thecolloquium examined how digital convergence was taking shape and what economic, social, and legal issues are arising as a result of this set of changes intechnology and associated industries. participants included representatives of thecomputer, telecommunications, and entertainment industries; diverse governmentagencies; the congress; academia; trade associations; and the mediañstakeholders and independent analysts participated.6 the steering committee sought toconstruct colloquium panels with a more diverse set of perspectives than thosetypically aired in todayõs press or in other venues such as industry conferencesand academic conferences.this report presents the principal insights and perspectives offered bycolloquium participants. it relates colloquium discussions to events and observations that developed over the ensuing year and a half. supplementary materialswere used to augment or amplify points made by the participants and are referenced. in addition, selected colloquium participants and other experts were interviewed in mid to late1994 to assess whether (and if so, how) views had changed.the colloquium steering committee, through its deliberations before and after theevent, completed the interpretation of key issues. due to the limited time andspace available, this report provides only an introduction to this very complextopic. however, the content is selected and organized with the intent of framingissues relevant to public policy.the remainder of this chapter describes the state of digital convergence,including visions of the future, new privatesector alliances, and the emergenceof public and privatesector efforts to foster advances in information infrastructure. chapter 2 outlines directions in technology and aspects of the entertainmentkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveindustry. chapter 3 addresses social issues that shape and derive from digitalconvergence. chapter 4 outlines policy issues and obstacles related to promotingcompetitiveness and the evolution of the information infrastructure.visions and realitythe early forms of interactive multimedia are only the primitive precursorsof diverse technologies that even now are transforming the way many americanslive and work. colloquium participants offered an assortment of visions andinsights into how to realize the potential of such technologies.richard notebaert, chairman of ameritech corporation, outlined a vision ofbroadbased benefits. noting that 40 million personal computers were shipped in1992, notebaert said these òislands of intelligenceó need to be interconnected sothat their capabilities can be exploited fully. the availability of lowcost, highquality digital scanners means that information from libraries, shopping malls,catalogues, and government agencies can be digitized and made available to all,he said. òwhat we need to do is take the technology that is available and exploitit to be part of the solution side of societal ills in this country.óeconomist and author george gilder predicted that small, portable deviceswith computing and communications capabilities will become indispensable.òthe most common personal computer of the next decade is going to be a digitalcellular phone,ó he said. òitõs going to be as mobile as a watch, as personal as awallet. it will recognize speech, navigate streets. it will collect your mail, openyour door, and do a great variety of functions that we canõt really anticipatetoday. and there will be a great variety of these pdas [personal digital assistants].ó ginn, now head of a pacific telesis spinoff, airtouch communications,7 showed a pacific telesis video depicting life in the year 2005, when theaverage citizen may have access to video telephones, pdas, longdistance medical care and education, electronic yellow pages, and electronic libraries.like most colloquium participants, ginn remarked on the difficulties anduncertainties associated with realizing the various visions of the benefits promised by digital convergence. economist and economic historian paul david ofstanford university observed that visions, while constructive, can blind people tonearterm, practical impediments to implementing technological advances:private investors and public decision makers are correct in thinking that theydisregard at their peril the real hazards of a condition . . . described as technological presbyopia . . . . itõs a form of farsightedness which, in this case, makesit impossible to focus clearly on the existence of many immediate problems. itcauses the sufferer to gaze too exclusively on the imagined bounties of a distantfuture. and to do so risks overlooking how long it will likely take to get fromhere to there, especially when the òthereó is defined in terms of the acceptanceof novel, complex consumer goods by mass markets or the pervasive adoptionkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview7of distributorsõ systems of production, which require significant investments infixed capital assets by many parties.davidõs caution reflects the history of technological innovation, described byanthony oettinger (1993) as an òanarchic, apparently tailchasing, yet evolutionary processó that generates both ecstasies and agonies:the heroic and dedicated early adopters who dwell at the frontier outposts ofinnovation combine new tools, new information conventions, and new skills tocreate apparent wonders. the entrepreneurial imaginations fired up by thewonders of the early adopters promise those wonders to the prosaic, fickle oldtime dwellers of the comfortable hinterlands as a wealth of new applicationsthat never could have existed within the old confines. hence the ecstasy. butsome products and services will be ripe, others only hype. some products andservices will be ripe but unwanted. others will be seen as too complex; stillothers as too simple. and the ones successful at the expense of someone elseõsmarket often enrage the losers into political action that changes the rules of themarketplace. hence the agony.we are in the midst of a long period of experimentation aimed largely atdetermining what technological possibilities are also economically viable. theexperimentation evident today continues a longterm process; since the early1980s there have been many òwired cityó projects in many locations that did notwork as planned yet generated significant incremental accomplishments in termsof infrastructure development and insight into demand for different kinds ofentertainment (dutton et al., 1987).consistent with history and despite considerable and often highly publicizedmarket testing and formation of new ventures, the telephone, cable, and entertainment industries still concentrate their resources on traditional technologies. theircaution is due in part to uncertainty over where wealth will be generatedñuncertainties that themselves reflect economic, legal, and regulatory as well astechnical developments and conditions. will there be a central component of theevolving information infrastructure, and if so, will it be a telephone, computer,cable, or wireless network, or perhaps some combination? will informationservices catering to the masses ever be profitable, or will significant public investment and private contributions be needed to assure both public access and theflow of publicservice information for which markets may never fully develop?the more elusive questions pertain to what people might pay to do withemerging technologiesñthe word òcontentó becomes a kind of fetish naming thisempty space without beginning to fill it. it is impossible to predict, for example,what new forms of content may emerge; new possibilities for delivering contentprovide greater assurance for predicting that some new forms may not be centrally generated and packaged for consumers (as is common today).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivenew products and alliances:industrial convergence?each of the principal industries associated with digital convergence is characterized by different processes of technological and product evolution. thecomputing and communications industries focus on delivery and tend to be technologydriven, although recent ventures and acquisitions by microsoft corporation, including its acquisition of the rights to display a number of famous artisticimages, illustrate the possibility for new, direct combinations of content, communications, and computing that are motivated by the computer industry (hardwareand software) culture.8 meanwhile, the entertainment industry, with more control over content as well as a growing emphasis on delivery channels, regardsboth computing and communications as tools or means to an end. whether orwhen an audience large enough to be economically viable will emerge to consume the new services and programs is unknown. as a viacom executive wasquoted as saying, òthe technology is all there. whatõs missing is the consumerand exactly what the consumer wants and what theyõll pay for.ó9although a flurry of industry announcements following the colloquium madeit seem as if developments were accelerating through 1993 and early 1994,10subsequent events, including the failures of proposed alliances and delays indelivery of planned products, illustrated the perhaps obvious point that true,fundamental change takes time. most startling of all was the announcement inoctober 1993 that bell atlantic corporation, another regional bell company,planned to buy telecommunications inc. (tci), the largest u.s. cable company,which would constitute one of the largest corporate mergers ever. the proposedmerger received considerable fanfare; typical if breathless were remarks from anarticle in the new york times (fabrikant, 1993):the merger is of stunning significance because it creates a gargantuan companywith both the financial wherewithal and the management skills to chase the holygrail of home information and entertainment possibilities: a vast panoply ofprogramming and information offerings that are available at the flick of a wristwhenever a consumer wants to see them.the two companiesõ plans were not consummated, leading to wholesale reassessment in the media, by investment analysts, and in the business community generally about the merits of such deals. the later demise of plans by southwesternbell corporation and cox enterprises inc. further underscored questions aboutcabletelephone company alliances (ziegler and robichaux, 1994).quoting again from ginnõs remarks at the colloquium,my sense is that as we begin to sort these things out, weõre going to have aboutfive years of utter confusion. youõre going to see a lot of alliances. youõregoing to see some divorces. youõre going to see the industry sort itself outamong people who provide programming, who provide telecommunications,who provide cable, who provide the underlying technology to offer these services. there will be a lot of experimentation.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview9steven wildman, director of the program in telecommunications science atnorthwestern university, suggested in a late1994 interview that the many approaches and separations between potential business partners reflect a pattern ofmovement that companies hope will leave them in the right place once thatbecomes apparent.the shifting industrial landscape reflects several underlying trends. mostobviously, given their large size, telephone companies are scrambling for growthopportunities and diversification. the traditional telephone business is stagnantat perhaps a 3 percent growth rate, and these companies face possible loss ofcustomers and/or profitability as their traditional monopolies vanish and as problems of excess capacityñconstraining profitabilityñpersist or grow. the telephone network has been relatively low cost in part because of slow depreciation,which may not be consistent with the rapid depreciation needed to deploy multiple advances in the information infrastructure, and the relatively high levels ofautomation and standardization of installation, maintenance, service order fulfillment, and other operations may be difficult to sustain in an environment withrapidly changing and more diverse technologies, services, and applications. similarly, broadcasters are facing challenges from digital direct broadcast satellite andsoontobedigital cable and fiber television services.11 meanwhile, the cableindustry is fragmentedñsome 11,000 systems owned by some 1,700 independent operators are spread across the country, lacking scale economies for effective competition against telephone companies in many instances (samuels,1994b). it is hard to predict the result of a situation in which, for example, bothregulated and nonregulated providers of voice and video services seek to use thesame technology and serve the same target markets, despite differences in approaches to standards, market share, pricing, and so on.despite the raising of expectations and ambitions in many quarters, the merefact that new business activity or alliances have been launched does not mean thatindustries are truly converging; that would require significant shifts in industrycultures that will take a long time to achieve, as well as changes in fundamentaltechnologies and in consumer behavior. although much of the discussion aboutdigital convergence seems to focus on the development of a delivery infrastructure for entertainment and other products, many challenges remain for joining thediverse cultures of computing, communications, and entertainment to make aswell as deliver globally competitive products.12 as wildman observed wheninterviewed, at the very least evolution and adaption are likely within each segment in response to new tools, product concepts, and distribution possibilities.how may dissimilar industries, which must cooperate on research and development and agree on how to implement technical solutions in standards, bejoined? the computing, communications, and entertainment industriesñthemselves aggregates of rather different component industriesñshare certain characteristics, such as rapid growth in selected areas, but they are quite different interms of structure, size, regulatory tradition, corporate culture, and the expertisethey can contribute to digital convergence. for example, in terms of approach tokeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveinformation services, the telephone industry focuses on installing intelligence atthe heart of the network. by contrast, the computer industry focuses on developing computerbased devices that can use intelligence at the periphery of networksñan orientation epitomized in the design and use of the multinationalcomputer network known as the internet, which is itself an application of theunderlying telephone circuits in its backbone and various access networks. nevertheless, like the computer industry, the telecommunications industry and several segments of the entertainment industry have for years depended oncomputerbased equipment and software for a variety of operations. this internalization of common technological elements is fundamental to manifestations ofconvergence in product, process, and corporate innovations.to hedge their bets, some companies, such as at&t, have invested in virtually every emerging information technology, although not all of the investmentsor plans have endured.13 (at&t is even getting back into the local telephonebusiness, having purchased mccaw cellular communications, the largest u.s.cellular company; see the economist, 1993a). however, very few companieshave the resources to hedge so broadly. others pursuing a vertical integrationstrategy may focus on specific segments. sony corporation, for example, hasemphasized creating software and making machines to bring it into the home, butnot the transmission of the programming (lubove and weinberg, 1993). bycontrast, time warner and newscorp have investments in both programmingand delivery systems.some of the joint ventures bring together all three industriesñtelecommunications, computers, and entertainmentñfor example, the formation of prodigyservices by ibm and sears. another example is the diverse and internationalgroup of computing and communication companies that invested in generalmagic inc. to develop software for wireless communicators.14some alliances demonstrate how technology is lowering the boundaries between industries. us west inc. put down $2.5 billion for a 25 percent share oftime warner entertainment (a unit of time warner), and nynex corporationinvested $1.2 billion in viacom inc. (washington post, 1993). although therehas been conspicuous activity among telephone companies buying into cablesystems outside their service areas, interaction between telephone and cable companies underscores how what is technically possible becomes confounded bywhat is legally feasible and economically attractive (kim and wloszczyna, 1993).the time warner full service network experiment illustrates the complicating factor of evolving technology. the day before the colloquium, cableoperator and entertainment supplier time warner inc. and highperformanceworkstation maker silicon graphics inc. announced a joint field trial to delivervideoondemand services in orlando, floridaña major twoway interactive network implementation. several months later, however, the partners announceddelays attributed to technological difficulties associated with developing the necessary software and combining computing and cable technologies in an arrangekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview11ment involving video servers and special settop boxes (developed by scientificatlanta inc.; robichaux and clark, 1994). actual service began in december1994 (shapiro, 1994).the electronic game arena may be a bellwether for a variety of corporate andproduct developments. electronic games are increasingly available over networks, but the principal market has been for access through special platforms(e.g., nintendo and sega systems) and on generalpurpose devices, includingpersonal computers and cdrom players, plus various hybrid devices, such asthat offered by 3do.15 at&t, time warner, and matsushita electric industrialcompany backed the company 3do, which in early 1993 unveiled its design foran òinteractive multiplayer,ó a cdbased machine that hooks up to a televisionset and combines graphics, text, and highquality sound. the 3do venture epitomizes the uncertainties characterizing the digital convergence marketplace. although over 300 software developers were estimated to have begun developingprograms for the 3do platform, a new type of game system challenging othersthat were already established, were available at a substantially lower initial system cost, and offered yet more software was risky. in late 1994, 3do scaled backsignificantly.16some observers have questioned the wisdom of huge investments in a multimedia future that has yet to prove its market value. this caution surfaced incorporate finance circles early in 1994 in the wake of the termination of the bellatlantic/tci merger plans (ziegler, 1994c). the telephone industry in particular,having built its reputation on conservative reliability, is seen by some to beabandoning its core business and character, assuming the style of hollywoodmovie studios in gambling on huge payoffs in unknown territory.17 observedrobert lucky of bell communications research in a late1994 interview,in the past 3 years the telco role has gone from doing nothing to doing everything, to something in the middle right now. . . . so far, the telcos have not beenterribly successful or aggressive, iõd say, in cutting deals with the content providers, so that their role has been more that of providing a delivery vehicle. butwhatõs changed in these last 3 years is the reality of telcos being in the videodelivery business. . . . if you went back 10 years to the breakup of at&t,nobody saw entertainment as the big plum where the big bucks were. but itõsonly in the last 3 to 5 years that suddenly that has become the place where thenew opportunities are.currently, ventures appear to be small relative to the telephone companiesõ size,and not especially integrated into core operations or operating styles; similarly,cable companybased ventures appear to extend more traditional business patterns for the most part (markoff, 1993).an added complication is the difficulty in assessing what the real investmentrequirements may be. the discussion of the anticipated improvements in network (facilities) aspects alone, which imply huge investments in physical plant(cable and switching), marks a contrast with the investment associated with diskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivetributing information in print forms, commented john blair of the raytheoncorporation at the colloquium. high initial fixed costs, noted paul david, arecharacteristic of the economics of network industries. on the other hand, asnoted by lucky, industry estimates for the cost of installing fiber have fallen overtimeñapparently due to the combined effects of competition and political jockeying.conclusionnumerous obstacles must be surmounted in developing and assuring accessto new information technologies, as well as in promoting positive consequencesof their use over negative ones. some of the problems are technical: for example, highbandwidth, twoway communications systems are neither cheap norwidely available; there is a multiplicity of standards for representing raw information, while lack of consensus exists on standards for integrating services acrossdifferent systems, a problem that threatens to grow as new interfaces proliferate.new technical bottlenecks are appearing, since video and imagerich interactivecommunications require new systems, communications, and storage architectures.on the other hand, technologists and industry analysts agree that the mostcritical problems are nontechnological, and also more diffuse. digital convergence is generating a host of economic, regulatory, legal, cultural, and socialissues. the atmosphere in which these issues must be resolved is chaotic andvolatile; the rise of expectations for and the ultimate failure of proposed telecommunications reform legislation during the 103d congress is but one illustration ofthe uncertain policy environmentñitself affected by disagreements between companies, industry groups, and various other interests.this report puts the technological and business trends associated with digitalconvergence into a larger framework. it seeks to advance what must be a longterm process of relating commoditization and convergence of digital electronics,communications, and entertainment products to changes in the nature of theeconomy and the social fabric. the intention is to provide a sense of the scopeand the pace of changes transforming a set of important industries, identify someof the potential short and longterm social and economic impacts, and frame thepolicy issues and dilemmas that are going to have to be resolved for all of us,whether directly or indirectly involved.notes1.according to one estimate, home shopping via television, which has $3 billionin annual sales (after some 10 years), could reach $25 billion per year by the end of thedecade if the shift to sales of upscale products succeeds. this is still only a fraction ofthe $245 billion in apparel and jewelry sales realized in 1993 but will likely be retailõskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview13fastestgrowing sector. obstacles include high return rates from dissatisfied customersand the possibility that only commodity items will sell over tv, not higherquality items(mcmurray, 1994).the medium is still dominated by downscale products such as offbrand jewelryand clothing. a first hurdle for new networks is obtaining channel space on cable systems(reilly, 1994).2.a dataquest survey found that 45 percent of 200 firms had annual revenuesunder $100,000; 90 percent had fewer than 50 employees (kruger, 1994).3.see weber (1994). news articles differ considerably in how online servicesubscribership is reportedñprodigy services, for example, is reported as having between1 million and 2 million customersñbut they do point consistently to negligible profitsamong the larger firms, including prodigy, compuserve, genie, and america online(lewis, 1994a,b; ziegler, 1994b; samuels, 1994c; washington post, 1995). on the otherhand, smaller, nicheoriented online services, such as the well, are reportedly profitable.4.by the end of 1993, the installed base of cdrom drives in u.s. homes was 7million and was projected to reach 16 million by the end of 1994 (samuels, 1994a).5.egan and wildman (1992) citing ntia (1991).6.due to a scheduling conflict with a major industry conference, no representatives of the cable television industry were able to attend the colloquium; their perspectives on key issues were solicited in the months following the meeting.7.the spinoff was approved by california regulators in november 1993 (sims,1993).8.see hudson (1995). see also zachary (1994): microsoft announced plans tobuy softimage (montreal), a leading supplier of movie specialeffects tools, for $130million in stock. òin a recent interview, microsoft chairman william gates said that thecompany was vigorously pursuing growth opportunities in the socalled multimedia field,where sound, images, and moving pictures are meshed together with the help of computers and software.ó9.òthe hard part is figuring out just which of these and a plethora of other services people wantñand how to design them so they are as easy to use as television andyet bring improvements that are tangible enough so that people will pay for themó(andrews, 1993).10.the trade newsletter digital media identified 348 alliances in multimedia services (laderman et al., 1993).11.in flaherty (1994) the senior vice president for technology at cbs describedprogress toward hdtv. cbs is also reported to be the first network to begin conversionto digital broadcasting. cbs plans to use hewlett packard video broadcast servers, including software that controls scheduling commercials and programming (mccoy, 1994).12.executives from at least two entertainment conglomerates (walt disney co.and mca) have expressed disdain for interactive media, and even among the playerscommitted to some level of development there is a persistent assumption that the newtechnology will displace traditional forms of entertainment. executives made the sameassumption 20 years ago, when they took manufacturers of video cassette recorders to theu.s. supreme court with the argument that the traditional movie business would end ifcustomers could view movies at home. that construct requires a belief that consumersare trapped in a compartmentalized universe where it is inconceivable to go to a movietheater and rent a video, play a video game and read a novel. meanwhile, regionalkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiverivalries have emerged among multimedia communities: los angeles argues pop cultureis key, new york sees publishing and information as models, san francisco is technicallyoriented, and seattle follows microsoftõs lead (shrage, 1994).13.at&tõs consumer products group dropped plans to market a modem (calledòthe edgeó) designed to connect sega game playersõ equipment via phone. earlier,at&t had dropped plans for 3docompatible gear. òat&t executives said consumerproducts will aim its investments instead at 3 product areas: digital wireless phones,where it has been deficient against mounting competition; phones for foreign markets;and intelligent phones for the home that the company plans to begin marketing next yearó(keller, 1994).14.investors include apple computer, motorola inc., sony corp., at&t,matsushita electric industrial co. (owner of mca inc. and its universal studios), andphilips electronics nv. see hill and yamada (1993).15.video games are now about a $6.5 billion business. lee isgur, of a san francisco investment bank: òyou can talk all you want about the electronic highway andvideo on demand, but the only place anyone has ever sold anything interactive is ingames.ó over the past seven years, nintendo and sega have sold [over] 64 millionmachines in the united states. their tack is to sell hardware cheap and license thesoftware (classic bundling). see tetzeli (1993).16.the saga of 3do is chronicled in the economist (1993b) and in turner (1993b).see also pitta (1993), carlton (1994d), king (1994), and markoff (1994).17.the enormous risk of venturing into this unknown territory, particularly in collaboration with hollywood executives, can be illustrated by a review of foreseeablechanges in the entertainment business. established entertainment centers (i.e., los angeles, new york) are no longer secure in their hegemony. in the next few decades, they will find that the dominanceassociated with physical concentrations of specialists, facilities, and mystique will besubject to profound change in the developing digital convergence matrix. locationindependent communities, improving microprocessorbased production tools and methods, and the rapid dissemination of many skills in expanding world markets, all undermine centrality. just as òdetroitó is a metaphor, so it will be with òhollywoodó also.as fresh waves of creative people struggle for access to the ballooning field, theywill be far less bound to past organizational structures and practices (e.g., major studios,unions, traditional communities of the likeminded). although this industry has acenturyõs experience with change and readjustment, digital convergence exacerbates theprocess by another order of magnitude. the increasing pressure of new recruits and thehuman resources conflicts they engender will increase the level of disorder just enough tosuggest a new chapter on chaos theory.meanwhile, it is clear that the corporate culture interface has been a lowprioritytopic in planning for digital convergence. sooner or later, computer and telephone companies will have to confront the implications of collaborating with entertainment mogulswhose market studies have all the reliability of the average shamanõs chicken bone readings, in spite of the armani suits.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152trends and directionsalthough it is premature to predict which technologies and applications willsucceed, general directions in underlying technologies can be discerned. thischapter outlines prospects in multimedia and interactive technologies and explores applications, particularly in entertainment and education. not intended tobe comprehensive, this chapter aims to depict the fluidity of the technologies andthe uncertainty of the trends they are motivating.the outlook for multimediagoods and servicesenabling interactive multimedia to flourish are rapid advances in computerhardware, driving changes in telecommunications and other industries. relevanthardware includes basic devices (e.g., microprocessors, memory chips and otherstorage devices, drives, access devices), larger computer systems that use thosedevices (e.g., personal computers, telecommunications switches), and other information appliances (e.g., television systems, settop boxes).advances in hardware performance (and consequent reductions in the costrequired to achieved any given level of performance) as measured in quantitativeterms will continue to be made at very rapid rates. in the past 30 years, forexample, the density of integrated circuits has improved by a factor of 10 millionñseven orders of magnitude!1 such incredible progress in such a shortperiod of time has led to significant changes in the kinds of products that can bebuilt from such powerful components. this rate of improvement is expected tocontinue at least until the turn of the century, when complex microcircuits maykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivecontain hundreds of millions of transistors, david nagel, senior vice presidentand general manager of applesoft, said.in a very real sense, convergence has been enabled by advances in digitalhardware technology, which have in turn been driven by development of engineering processes that result in the ability to etch more and finer lines on crystalsof silicon. better lithography and more lines per millimeter enable the creation ofgreater and greater numbers of the active elements of digital signal processingñtransistorsñon any given area of silicon. one of the early pioneers of the integrated circuit, gordon moore (now chairman of intel corporation), coined aheuristic that describes the doubling in this ratio that has occurred almost likeclockwork for the past 25 years, a heuristic now known as mooreõs law(karlgaard, 1994). having more and smaller transistors on a single chip ofsilicon allows those transistors to be operated at lower voltages and with lowerswitching currents. this in turn allows the transistors to be operated faster and atlower electrical power levels, with the net result that the microprocessors thathave evolved from the earliest 10transistor integrated circuits now have computing speeds measured in hundreds of millions of instructions per second. at thesespeeds, realtime multimedia computing becomes possible; advanced compression algorithms that can reduce the required bandwidth of communication systems can be implemented with circuits at price points compatible with massmarkets.although physical laws limit how small lines can be made using the currentoptical lithographic technologies (a limit that would be reached shortly after theend of this century), new technologies using shorterwavelength etching beams(e.g., xray, plasma) that allow significant progress below the limits imposed byvisiblelight lithography are now in early prototyping stages. however, newtools of all sorts are also needed to manage the incredible complexity of circuitsthat contain tens or hundreds of millions of switch elements. while design toolsare being developed that can automate much of the design, a new problem hasarisen for which no immediate solution is apparent: how does one adequatelytest these circuits? but while the problems of designing and testing of massivelycomplex chips representing the very fastest hardware systems may begin to slowprogress by the end of the decade, it certainly will be possible to create systemswith the computing performance of todayõs fastest chips and all that is needed toput a complete computer on a single chip by the end of this decade. thesegeneralpurpose computing systemsñcomplemented by more limited purposelogic for performing tasks such as highspeed compression, decompression, andeven recognition of audio signalsñwill enable engineers to build digital systemswith the overall computing power of todayõs supercomputers in products pricedlike commodity consumer electronics. in fact, the term òcomputing,ó whichimplies numerical computationñarithmeticñno longer adequately describesproducts currently being designed and sold based on highperformance digitaltechnology.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions17thus, quantitative improvements in process and component technologieshave led to qualitative differences in the products built from them. one significant change has been the creation of products described as multimedia personalcomputers (pcs)ñòmultimediaó in this context emphasizing the realtime creation, processing, and presentation of sound and still and moving images orvideo. as discussed in chapter 1, multimedia computing has enjoyed a rapidascendancy in the marketplace, since images and sounds can in many situationsbe more efficient than text for transmitting information to humans. today, multimedia pcs outsell by a wide and growing margin personal computers withoutthe ability to manipulate sound and video.for multimedia computing to be practical for products associated with massmarkets, microprocessors have had to evolve to the point that they are capable ofexecuting millions of instructions per second. equivalent advances in memoryand mass storage have also been key, because information in the form of highresolution images may contain tens or even hundreds of megabytes of information in typical electronic publishing scenarios.illustrating the impact of advances in hardware is the digitization of videogeneration and delivery, accelerating and enhancing the coding and decoding ofvideo signals, including associated compression of video signals (necessary forall digital delivery formats, including cable, wireless, or packaged media). compression is important for expanding the capacity to deliver a variety of telecommunications services over a given infrastructure (e.g., a network provided by atelephone company or cable systems operator) and to increase the flexibility for acompany to offer different packages of services (possibly obtained from differentvendors) to different target audiences (hodge, 1995). costs, quality, and tradeoffs between the two are changing with advances in the fundamental technology.for example, signal processing on a microprocessor chip may obviate the needfor larger amounts of specialpurpose hardware supporting multimedia applications; at least one such product has been announced.2 major computer systemsand workstation manufacturers have meanwhile been developing and targetinghigherend systems as engines for videoondemand services and associated market tests by cable and telephone companies.experience with cdrom technology, popular for storage and retrieval ofmultimedia products, provides some insight into the current market. cdromrefers to a highcapacity compact disk that can store text and video as well assound. the number of interactive cd players in u.s. homes has been growingdramatically as a result of declining cost and proliferating software. estimates ofhardware sales and the installed base vary, but overall (homes and businesses),some 4 million cdrom players were sold in the united states in 1993, and theinstalled base in 1994 was expected to grow to 10 million to 16 million (landis,1993; johnson, 1993; flynn, 1994; samuels, 1994a).despite this growth and apparent potential, consumers have voiced dissatisfaction with the problems of configuring or affording pc technology to use cdkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveroms satisfactorily, and also with the quality of the cdrom software available (carlton, 1994b). these problems, while possibly temporary and typical ofrelatively new technology (and expansion into a relatively unsophisticated consumer market), raise questions about consumer acceptance and about the durability of the format over time unless early problems are solved quickly andaffordably. at a minimum, there is a need to improve data ratesñwhich affectthe quality of the video image that can be accessed, storage capacity, digital datareading technologies (e.g., through new laser techniques; rosen, 1993), and response time for interactive uses (carlton, 1994c). as esther dyson of edventureholdings inc. observed in a late1994 interview, enhanced speed will be animportant factor in gaining broader applicability and consumer acceptance.in the next several years, even greater performance and higher levels ofcircuit integation will enable the development of products that have all of thecapabilities associated with multimedia personal desktop computers today butthat are much different in design and function from the pcs typically found inhomes, schools, and offices. based on established trends, we can expect severallines of development.in one, characterizable by miniaturization and mobility, we will see thefunctions of desktop systems available in devices the size and weight of todayõselectronic calculators. products of this sort3 will be made possible because (asnoted above) as circuits of a given level of performance can be made smaller andsmaller they can be made to consume less and less electrical powerñand thus canbe made battery powered and portable. highperformance wireless digital communication systemsñpacket radio, infrared, digital cellular, and so forthñhavealso been enabled by the general evolution in hardware technology.in a second line of development, the object is not so much to reduce the sizeand increase the portability of devices as to reduce the cost. in this category willbe found digital television and other products that have been described as digitalinformation appliances. key to the commercial success of such products is theachievement of manufacturing costs in the range of those for other kinds ofappliancesñroughly a factor of 10 less than the costs associated with todayõspersonal computer products. such improvements are achievable well before theend of the decade because it will be possible to shrink the entire circuitry associated with highperformance multimedia pcs today to a single integrated circuit.one indicator of this progress is the introduction of pcbased devices includingfunctions historically found in radios, televisions, telephones, answering machines, and fax machines (associated press, 1994).the addition of a central processing unitña computerñcould enable televisions to select a personalized viewing schedule, automatically record material,and provide memory in a hard disk, random access memory, or other solidstatedevice (rosen, 1993). development of such technologies is under way.4 theseinnovations not only store programming but also meet an important emergingneed, offering consumers assistance (often referred to as ònavigationó) in sortingkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions19through the expanding range of choices. this type of information processing/systems integration service illustrates the contention for consumers that is emerging between televisions and more generalpurpose appliances, specifically pcs.while pcs may come to play a greater role within the household, computers mayproliferate within the household without looking like computersñthey may beincreasingly embedded into consumer electronics.5 what may continue to differentiate appliances called computers is their generalpurpose nature, includingtheir expected use with a wide range of software, while more specialized appliances may run more specialized software.one product that has been widely discussed is the consumer product associated with interactive television systems, a digital version of the socalled settopbox (stb). the first product that could be legitimately termed a digital stb hasalready appeared in the consumer market in the form of a decoder for digitalsatellite television broadcasts. while only weakly interactive, since digital satellite today supports high bandwidth only in the outbound direction (the currentsystems allow òinboundó or customer response by virtue of an analog phoneconnection in the back of the product), these products clearly point the way to thefuture.6the communications companies and the entertainment industry have all become actively interested and involved in the development of both the infrastructure (see ònetworksó section below) and the products necessary to enable creation of interactive television. but the key to commercial success for interactivetelevision depends on the ability to design and manufacture inexpensive stbs (orcomparable television set components). based on historical rates of improvement, we can anticipate that the necessary technology base to support productswith the performance of todayõs multimedia pcs and highperformance graphicsworkstations but with the price points of consumer electronics systems will beachievable within the next two to three years. since interactivity will allow thecreation of entertainment, communication, and other products unlike anything inthe market today, these new capabilities could significantly alter the economicsof all three industries: computing, communications, and entertainment.softwarea major obstacle facing multimedia developers is the scarcity of appropriateñcompatible and consumerdesirableñsoftware. software products are proliferating, ranging from crude translations from a traditional medium (e.g., print)to more innovative (if experimental) designs that challenge or provide a sense ofcontrol to the user (such as the computer game òmystó; see rothstein, 1994).also lagging are software design and computer programming capabilitiesñreflecting shortcomings in design and method as well as engineering effortñwiththe result that new devices cannot be exploited fully. software will be the keygrowth area in the years to come, according to nagel, but it progresses on akeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveslower time scale than does hardware. explaining the centrality of softwareduring a late1994 interview, richard notebaert of ameritech remarked, òthereal question that we are faced with is not the technology. itõs how we interactwith the technology. how do we use point and click? how do we get voiceactivated computers? the real question is in the world of softwareñthe abilityfor humans to be able to use the software in a way thatõs as simple as dialing thetelephone.ónagel contended that two trends could bring about significant progress. thefirst trend is the development of objectoriented programming and componentsoftware. today, software is monolithic. to make software distinctive, developers add new features to existing applications, creating òbloatwareó that has marginal value, nagel said. but eventually software may be sold in pieces, and userscould assemble their own applications by selecting a framework and a set ofcomponentsñincluding images, sounds, and text. this practice could invite adramatic expansion of the software industry, allowing for more innovative applications, he said.a second emerging trend is platformindependent software, such as, forexample, software that can run on both pcs and macintosh platforms. developers currently write software to conform to applications programming interfaces,which are unique to each platform. the platformindependent principle shouldbe incorporated into the national information infrastructure, nagel said, becauseit would invite broad participation and innovation, which would hasten the evolution of the system. software development tools for crossplatform systems areimmature (millison and lagrow, 1993).generation of multimedia content implies a need for creativity as well astools and technology. as with theatrical motion pictures and television programming, experimentationñwhich requires time and some freedomñshould be expected. for example, the early motion pictures were essentially stage plays thatwere filmed, using stage makeup and stage acting techniques. as the producersbecame more familiar with the medium of film they developed new techniquesthat were specific to motion pictures. on the other hand, digitization in the musicindustry has until recently (bermant, 1994) proceeded largely independently ofcreative authorship (except, perhaps, for sampling). thus, while creative authorship, per se, may not drive technology change, it will respond to opportunitiespresesented by new technologies and, over time, may generate new requirements.in general, explained steven wildman in a late1994 interview, the nature andmix of creative talents that provide comparative advantage to individuals andorganizations will change.7skillsñincluding those of graphic designers, film and video producers,scriptwriters, and teachersñwill be needed in how to communicate in new mediausing digital tools. in a followup interview, robert stein commented on howevolving multimedia products call for new approaches to narrative and storytelling, approaches that will account for and anticipate the growing ability of thekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions21user or audience to control the pacing and sequencing of story elements. similarly, in producing music products, òover the next couple of decades musicianswill come to the fore with a broad set of skills. they wonõt just be able to singand play the guitar; theyõll be able to do that in both a visual sense like with musicvideos, and then also in an interactive sense. youõre going to see musical presentations that are almost like minioperas, where a cd isnõt just for sound, itõs alsopictures and motion pictures, etc., and all under the control of the listener.ó atpresent, the nascent market means that job opportunities are small in number.8but colloquium participants emphasized the need for skills and insight, particularly the need for prospective authors who are bright, curious, and motivated.alexander singer, a film director, said the requisite mechanical skills can betaught and learned; what is more important is innate desire:i have taught this stuff and itõs learnable . . . . i taught film production techniques to a group of disadvantaged minority youth 25 years ago, and i wassuccessful. some were barely literate; a number had police records . . . . whati found is, they were hungry to have a voice, and the hunger was threequartersof the game. several of them found their way into the entertainment industry,got paying jobs, and do good work. the methods [for teaching] will be found.i think in terms of backgrounds, i would infinitely prefer somebody who was athinking person and who had a background in the humanities, but who also hadthe capacity to be wide ranging, to anybody who had a specific skill, all ofwhich i think is learnable.stein agreed, adding that such ideal students are difficult to find. òweõremissing young people who have minds that are working, that have the ability totake complex subject matter and go out and wrestle it to the ground in a way thatis satisfactory, and to bring it back to a broad audience in a way that makes anysense. òthe schools are producing all kinds of kids with computer skills andgraphic skills, et cetera. itõs one in a million that seems to be able to understandwhat to do with those skills . . . . óon a more practical note, sherry turkle, a professor of the sociology ofscience at massachusetts institute of technology (mit), said crosssector partnerships are needed to provide training in softwarewriting skills. she offered asevidence mitõs $70 million athena experiment with computers in education.the mit faculty was to write the software in this project, on the theory that theirinnate intelligence and professional expertise would be equal to the task. however, the experiment demonstrated that writing appropriate software requiresspecialized cognitive skills and an artistic as well as a scientific approach; newskills or highquality teamwork are required, turkle has said.9òi think you really do need partnerships [involving] people who are in theentertainment business, who are in the computer business, [where] the technologists are learning the anthropology, the cognitive science, the psychology, thesociology, or [they] are learning how to do studies of societal impact, of personalimpact, of how people think about thinking, of how people use software, howkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivepeople learn . . . .ó whereas special talent and training may be needed to generatecommercial products, however, the internet phenomenon also points to an alternative path: that of enhancing the infrastructure to the point that individual usersand even commercial authors can develop content products without having toòprogramó as we now understand that art.networksbuilding on but also paralleling advances in hardware is progress in networking. the full exploitation of advanced information technologies depends onnetworks that provide connectivity among input, display, processing, and storagesystems dispersed within offices, buildings, campuses, cities, and beyond. fromthe userõs perspective, networks can facilitate instant access to resources andintegrated tools for collaboration, as well as more options for undertaking different kinds of activity from the home. george gilder, for example, noted that moreand more pcs are being connected to networks: the percentage of pcs that areinterlinked grew from only 7 percent in 1989 to 60 percent in 1992. (nagelsuggested that this number will approach 100 percent by the end of the decade.)improving upon and integrating various networks, advanced information infrastructure can provide a delivery vehicle, user interfaces, and interfaces among thecomponents that make up interactive multimedia systems.nagel put current trends in computer technology into a larger historicalcontext:despite its young age, the computer has already gone through several wrenching and displacing changes. in the 1950s and 1960s, the mainframe computerwas really the dominant paradigm or the dominant mode of interaction forcomputing and calculation. the mainframe was supplanted as the sort of centerof gravity in the industry, both economically and intellectually, shifted to theminicomputer in the 1970s. in the 1980s, a third shift took place from theminicomputer to the microcomputer, again driven in large measure by processimprovements and integrated circuit technology. today, we appear to be poisedfor yet another major shift from microcomputing to perhaps intimate computingand also, to an era of ubiquitous networking or universal networking.nagelõs emphasis on connectivity of computerbased devices and uses of networking contrasts with the current multimedia product emphasis on platformsthat may be used apart from networks, notably cdrom players and gamesystems, although even these devices are being integrated into or substituted forby networkbased applications.networkbased applications facilitate interaction among people, whereasstandalone applications emphasize interaction between people and computers.as dyson observed, òinteractiveó can cover both concepts, but the distinctionmay be relevant to both the technology chosen and the impacts on the users.thus, although questions have been raised about the prospects for cdromkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions23applications to devolve to online information services, observers differ as towhether the market will shift largely to one format or the other or whether it willevolve in two tracks.an assortment of transmission networks is now operating or under development in the united states. each network has its strengths and weaknesses; todate, none constitutes a complete national information infrastructure, but collectively they are fragments of the foundation. telephone companies, limited todayby the existence of vast networks of twisted copper pair wiring in the localsubscriber loops, are seeking ways of upgrading these lowbandwidth analogdelivery systems to support digital transmission of information at rates requiredfor display and transmission of highresolution imagery and sound toñandfromñdigital stbs. cable tv companies (multiple system operators) alreadypossess a highbandwidth distribution system (coaxial cable can support transmission of digital information in the range of hundreds of millions of bits persecond). these systems, too, require significant upgrading if they are to supportinteractive television services since they were designed for transmission of analog television signals in one direction (outbound) only and lack both the necessary topology and switching or routing capabilities for twoway transmission ofdigital information. both the plant and potential mix of services are changing tofacilitate delivering the muchtouted 500 video channels to the home that somesystem operators may offer, and digital servers and other digital facilities fordelivery of movies on demand, interactive games, home shopping, and eventelephone services. in particular, cable distribution is evolving to a combinationof fiber and (for short residential links) coaxial cable, a hybrid approach alsobeing adopted in many quarters of the telephone industry.10 indeed the cableindustry is beginning to examine providing basic telephony services using somesmall fraction of the great bandwidth provided by their distribution systems.the rapid advance of wireless technologies holds the promise that personaldigital assistants and other forms of wireless communications eventually will becompetitive with wired communications for a growing variety of applications.11,12wireless technology is not new; television already is delivered by radio signalsbroadcast over the air, wireless cable (microwave radio frequencies used to deliver signals to rooftop antennas), and satellites; satellites have fostered the development of cable television, providing cable networks with an affordable methodof linking thousands of cable systems. (satellite broadcast services are growingrapidly in europe, and u.s. satellite capacity continues to expand; ntia, 1993.)the cellular telephone business, launched in 1984, has grown into a more than$10 billion per year business with well over 15 million customers, with continuedgrowth expected. growing competition, miniaturization of computer power, theimminent digitization of cellular phones (which will use the radio spectrum moreefficiently than do their analog counterparts), and the low cost of establishinglinks to homes in comparison to fiber networks are among the factors behind thistrend. the federal auctioning of licenses for personal communications systemskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivenetworks should provide a further stimulus to wireless technology, application,and market development.expanding bandwidth: is there enough?a fundamental issue in digital convergence is how to assure sufficient bandwidth to transmit huge volumes of digital bits very rapidly, over a wide area.video packaging and delivery require a substantial amount of storage and transmission bandwidth in comparison to simple numbers, text, or even still images.video raises additional technical concerns related to multicast communication,quality of service, protocol support with the increasing deployment of asynchronous transfer mode (atm), and so on.gilder was extremely optimistic about the technological prospects, claimingthat the transmission speed of fiberoptic technology will multiply to the pointthat bandwidth will cost virtually nothing.13 òthat changes fiber from a replacement for copper to a replacement for air,ó gilder said. òit makes possible a hugeexpanse of bandwidth. it means that all the various technologies that have beenbased on the assumptions of scarce bandwidth are deeply problematical in thisnext era. i think a major driving force of the world economy over the next 20years is going to be the plummeting cost of bandwidth, of communications power.. . .ó although optimistic, gilder did not address timing or what it takes toachieve a truly national capability in a timely mannerñthe kinds of issues beingaddressed in the context of telecommunication and information infrastructurepolicy debates.the meaning of available bandwidth is not always clear. for example, thefact that a given network may carry aggregated traffic at 2.5 gbps on its òbackboneó links does not mean it will be able to transmit large numbers of simultaneous multimedia sessions that include video (or that any individual user willexperience a 2.5gbps rate). although some commercial networks already operate at 155 mbps, a very high speed that remains difficult to exploit, even 10 mbpsor less to an individual user can support some very sophisticated interactivemultimedia applications. but key technology goes beyond simple capacity toinclude the ability to reserve adequate bandwidth for a given period and use, theability to use certain kinds of signaling in unswitched versus switched environments, and so on.interconnection and interoperabilitythe number and variety of networks give rise to concerns about means ofinterconnection and functional exchange of information or interoperability. elinoam, professor of finance and economics at the columbia graduate school ofbusiness, foresees a future òsystem of systemsó managed by both traditionalcarriers and the systems integration industry, which would buy transmissionkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions25capabilities and offer packages of services to consumers. this scenario wouldhave the effect of òtransforming the entire medium of communications into asystem of systems in a software sense, superimposed on a physical structure of anetwork of networks,ó noam said.the complex of technologies, services, and systems integration activitiesanticipated by noam is already in evidence in the internet, where service development has been initiated by individuals and research teams but subsequentlyaccelerated and diversified by commercial ventures (cstb, 1994b). indeed, thevariety of services, service providers, and even customers is richer and the fitbetween supply and demand greater in the internet than appears evident in thevarious interactive and other advanced television trials to date. one reason forthat variety is the internetõs support for symmetrical (twoway) communications,with which individuals can supply as well as receive information or contentgenerally and services. whether the internet leads or becomes subsumed in thedevelopment of a yet larger and more complex information infrastructure, thecommercialization of the internet provides a laboratory for observing the interplay of technology, business development, and ancillary policy considerations.14michael borrus, codirector of the berkeley roundtable on the internationaleconomy, offered a somewhat different prospect. he perceives a òportfolioó ofnetworks emerging at different rates, managed separately and for different purposes. he contends that there is no ideal configuration and that flexible designpermits specialized networks to meet the needs of particular user groups. allnetworks are evolving toward expanded bandwidth and increased intelligence,borrus said, but each is driven by different market and policy dynamics and isevolving different applications. òeach of these . . . networks, in very differentways, requires very different degrees of privacy, of liability and the like,ó borrusobserved. òit isnõt at all clear to me that one allsinging, alldancing infrastructure can provide that diversity at the moment, or whether it should provide thatdiversity.óborrusõ reservations foreshadowed the debates that have emerged subsequently over the federal initiative to advance the nationõs information infrastructure. those debates revolve around the issue of what it means to have òaónational information infrastructure, especially if such an entity is not monolithicor homogeneous and is not financed or controlled by a single entity. borrusõargument suggests a greater polarity of alternatives than may be feasible, especially from the perspective that the information infrastructure will grow fromexisting roots. cstb has explored these issues in its 1994 report realizing theinformation future, which argued the need for an overarching framework orarchitecture that could tolerate and accommodate multiple and competing technologies, facilities, services, and businesses as well as evolution in these elements. multiple networks are likely to persist, given the heterogeneity of consumers and differentiation of offerings from different network providers. thismultiplicity will give rise to both translation approaches (e.g., via stbs) andkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivemore direct integration of services.15 given the reality of diversity, a key issuefor both information infrastructure and the broader phenomenon of digital convergence will be standards.standardsa standard is a set of technical specifications followed by manufacturers orservice providers, either tacitly or as a result of a formal agreement. standardshave emerged as a theme in cstbõs series of competitiveness colloquia, butdigital convergence magnifies the challenge as well as the opportunity associatedwith standards setting in individual technology areas or industries. a standard fora mass media product can enhance both consumer and producer welfare. thesuccess of the internet, for example, is attributed in part to the standards thatpermit the various member networks to link together. indeed, the internet iseffectively defined by a set of standards that outline the minimum requirementsfor connectivity and access to associated services, the essence of interoperability.economic historian paul david of stanford university eloquently framed theimportance of standards, an otherwise prosaic topic that lies at the heart of achieving convergence across both technologies and industries:a fully articulated vision of the future and the future shape of any complextechnological system serves a crucial role in coordinating and stimulating thediverse, decentralized undertakings on the part of many actors that the successful, practical development of such systems typically requires in the context ofevery capitalist market economy. standards . . . are part of the set of coordination devices which are needed to engage the activities of the suppliers of manycomponents in developing the kinds of systems that are being discussed. but,there is also the conceptual standard, the vision, a coordinating vision whichplays an important role. in the context of the evolution of network technology,itõs been especially true that technological visionaries have been potent as agentsof industrial progress.as suggested earlier, consensusbased technical standards are needed inmultimedia. decisions need to be made, for example, with respect to standardsfor compression, which will affect how much fullmotion video can be stored ona cdrom and how cheap or expensive it is to communicate fullmotion videoover different kinds of networks.16 other areas where approaches differ andstandards may be valuable are in digital sound processing,17 stbs, and otherelements of interactive video systems (ziegler, 1994a; corcoran, 1994; hodge,1995).when and how to establish technical standards are contentious issues.18timing is critical, david observed, because setting standards too early can foreclose opportunities,19 but waiting too long can hinder technology development.as david noted:keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions27a standard . . . has the properties of public knowledge. . . . itõs a public good.you canõt have a standard just by yourself. other people have to be able tocoordinate with it, if what youõre producing is a system which has many participants forming a distributed system, and you want to have a continual processof incremental improvement and elaboration. . . . the issue of standards is notwhether to have them, but timing. how soon and how long do you hang up thedevelopment in the field by not having standards, or how soon do you foreclosepossible opportunities by setting standards too early? i think these are thetiming questions that we should be thinking about.although standards may have the qualities of public goods, they may containproprietary elements; òopen,ó òpublic,ó and òproprietaryó are not necessarilyexclusive. this issue arises in a wide variety of standards relevant to digitalconvergence. for example, cable television laboratories inc. has proposedestablishing a clearinghouse for intellectual property rights for components of themotion picture experts group (mpeg)2 standard for digital video transmission.mpeg2 core technology includes many different patents from companies andindividuals worldwide; a reasonable, fair, and nondiscriminatory way to accesssuch patent rights will speed adoption of an international standard. as borrusnoted, the fastestgrowing products in todayõs electronics systems marketsñwhether computers, telecommunications equipment, or consumer electronicsñare developed around proprietary standards that evolve rapidly in the marketplace through competition. game companies are competing to invent the nextunique platform, which, if it becomes the dominant standard, would bring itscreator substantial rewards, nagel said.20 the reconciliation of òopenó standardswith proprietary technology is debated among executives and scholars.21different players in the digital convergence arena have different experiencesand traditions when it comes to standard setting. older technologies, such astelevisions, fax machines, and telecommunications equipment, evolved aroundpublicly developed standards. standard setting here has been relatively formaland slow. in the communications arena, the internet engineering task force andthe atm forum illustrate two venues in which standard setting has proceededrelatively quickly, belying the notion that standard setting is always very slow.the marketcontention approach to standards setting, which originated in thecomputer industry, is the strategy nagel favors for advancing the national information infrastructure. òbasically,ó nagel said, òthe idea is that, rather than getting in a committee room and arguing about the nature of standards and the idealstandards for any given application, the practice in the personal computer industry has been for groups of engineers to get together to build systems that demonstrably work. the best of these systems eventually comprise a de facto standard.óan approach based on working implementations is epitomized by internet standard setting, which involves ratification of demonstrated technologies. when itcomes to de facto standards, however, it is not always clear that the best technology wins, a point made by observers of videocassette (vhs vs. beta) and otherkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivearenas; strategy, marketing, and other factors relating to market presence can beat least as important as òtechnology,ó per se.this process stimulates innovation and elevates the standard, with the inventor owning and profiting from the intellectual property that defines its value,nagel said. òi think the whole standardsetting process is becoming a lot moresophisticated . . . the telecommunications industries and the computer guys arebeginning to get together [to develop standards], and it almost binds them.ó theprocess remains imperfect and contentious, however, with cultural differences aswell as different technical preferences constituting impediments to more rapidresolution. another factor is market power: in the software arena, microsoft hassufficient market presence that its products often serve as de facto standards, aphenomenon that has motivated rival standardsoriented consortia.one effort to keep the software and other digital convergence arenas as fluidas possible is the òopen referenceó platform, which has òmaximized the impact ofindividual innovation, particularly in the software world,ó nagel said. this termrefers to abstract or generic software and hardware combinations, which are openin the sense that anyone can exploit them. an example is the ibm corporationõspc, which spawned a series of òclonesó; software designed for the ibm versionwill run on all clones. more than 600 companies now build specific productsbased on that concept, nagel said.in the entertainment industry, standards traditionally have been set either bydominant companies or through cooperative efforts;22 the latter approach is beingpursued with multimedia and other digital technologies. for example, the mpeghas developed criteria for the compression of moving audio and video (yadon,1993), and the cable industry makes use of mpeg2 chip sets, anticipating economies of scale and interoperation with other digital coding applications, as inconsumer electronics devices (ncta, 1993c).23some standards for digital convergence are being developed through forumsinvolving all three industriesñcomputer, telecommunications, and entertainment.one avenue is the interactive multimedia association, which sponsors an openforum (the compatibility project) to develop recommendations on crossplatformcompatibility of multimedia data and applications. an issue for progress indigital convergence is the proliferation of standardsetting groups, some formedexplicitly to compete with others. even where there may be overlapping corporate membership it is not clear that people in industry a are fully involved instandard setting dominated by industry b, and so on. further, with so manystandardsetting activities, the ability of a given company, even a leader in itsfield, to participate adequately will be inherently limited given the need to devotetime, talent, and other resources. the problem is magnified by the increasinglyinternational nature of relevant standard setting; u.s. efforts must reflect andanticipate global deployment and competition. the nature of the standardssetting process varies somewhat across countries, and delays are compounded bythe need for crossnational consensus in international standard setting. the inforkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions29mation infrastructure standards panel launched by the american national standards institute in 1994, with the involvement of multiple trade, standardsdeveloping governmental, and other organizations, represents an effort to forge abroader consensus, although the broader the group the more difficult the processof reaching consensus.symptomatic of the problem is the tendency of some to look to industryconsolidation as a way around the standardsdevelopment problems. for example, the collapse of the proposed bell atlantic/telecommunications inc.merger led some observers to wonder about the consequences of not having aòunified force that might have set nationwide technical and operating standardsfor networks delivering videoondemand, homeshopping and highspeed dataservicesó (andrews, 1994b). the need for and alternatives to recognizable market leadership remain subjects for debate and analysis, although the demise of thebell atlantictci deal is generally accepted as a sign of the slowing of the paceof both industry consolidation and technology deployment.24 the challenge ofdeveloping standards is recognized as a pacing factor for the enhancement of theinformation infrastructure.entertainment and the entertainment industryif entertainment and creative content are what differentiate digital convergence from the narrower merging of computing and communications, the entertainment industry becomes a central player. the approximately $6 billion u.s.market for homebased video games is hard evidence of the business potentialfrom creating programming for interactive technologies. yet such firstorderproduct revenue estimates do not capture the larger, secondorder revenues associated with service, manufacturing, and other activities. and the game marketillustrates the fact that it may be hard to ascribe revenues to any one industry,since electronic/video games are offered as computer software, online services,and programs for specialpurpose game systems, and they may draw on components derived from other products (e.g., motion pictures or television shows),giving them the character of an aftermarket product. similar questions arise forhome shopping, whichñas a television offeringñcan be considered entertainment by some and retail distribution by others. in this instance, the differentiation of revenue passed through to product vendors from revenue associated withthe delivery medium (e.g., a cable television shopping show) is important, alongwith determination of the extent to which new shopping activity is stimulated asopposed to diversion of shopping to the new media from more conventional ones(e.g., onsite store shopping, mailorder, or conventional catalogue and phoneshopping). if, as suggested by nagel, the way to maximize returns is to dominatea particular layer or link in the multimedia production and distribution chain, thedifficult task of understanding the structure of the industry complex and how it isevolving becomes essential.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivethe entertainment industry is far from monolithic; it is really a set of different industries that produce such products as feature films, television programs,recorded music (records/cds and tapes), and games. each of these areas facesdifferent production problems and different distribution and marketing problems.further, individual entertainment industries have different cultures and concerns,resulting in a situation where those who work in one of these industries do notusually have much to do with the others unless there is some overlap of interests(as when the makers of theatrical motion pictures see that one can design andmarket games based on hit movies).in evaluating how the new digital technologies and media interact with theentertainment industries, it is important not to generalize too much. for example,many of the technologies most heavily discussed in the context of digital convergence have to do with new methods (e.g., optical fiber cable to the home) ofdistributing existing products but will not make major changes in the type ofproduct that is distributed. thus, for example, the recorded music industry embraced digital technology some time ago but has begun to go interactive onlyrecently.25 other technologies (e.g., cdroms) allow for new types of productsthat have not previously existedñalthough they may be used initially to repackage traditional products (e.g., as a substitute for vinyl records) or to complementthem (e.g., online discussion groups organized by fans of television shows;barron, 1994).the entertainment industry will use digital technology in the following ways:(1) as a new delivery system for existing products (e.g., video on demand),providing essentially a new aftermarket for existing products;26 (2) in electronicgames (and other ways of using digitized material, thereby increasing the varietyof delivered products;27 (3) for directresponse sales (òhome shoppingó); (4) fornew entertainment products that are in the process of being invented (e.g., robertwinterõs musical òbooksó demonstrated at the colloquium); (5) for potentiallynew distribution systems that would allow distribution of products to audiencesthat are not reached today; (6) for locationbased entertainment, such as òhightechó theme parks based on visual simulation and other offshoots of both theaerospace and electronics industries; and (7) for new production methods toenhance and/or lower the costs of existing products (e.g., computer animation orusing virtual reality to design set lighting, or use of nuances of sound as dramaticelements). digitization allows for new types of special effects and productiontechnologies, often building on technologies and applications developed for scientific research contexts (e.g., visualization), that can be incorporated into existing types of media.given these opportunities and possibilities, it is important to consider thedifferentiation between those parts of the entertainment industry complex thatproduce the programming (software) and those that distribute the programmingthat is produced. for example, in theatrical motion pictures, box office receiptscompose only a part of the market, and producers look to the aftermarkets (forkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions31eign, videocassette, sale to television (pay, network, and syndication)) to show aprofit. the production of television programming is a deficit business: to coverits production costs, a tv program needs to be sufficiently successful to stay onthe air for some 65 episodes, a threshold for sale to syndicated television. theissues facing these two areas of production are different from those facing thecable television owner or the overtheair broadcaster that distributes the programming already produced.another distinction pertains to those who wish to distribute existing types ofprogramming in a digitized format and those who wish to create new types ofprogramming using digital methods. the former category allows for a broaderconcept of the entertainment industry, one that would embrace cable televisionoperators and computer network operators and possibly telephone companies, forexample, as well as possible changes in the role of movie theater operators.consider, for example, group interactive electronic games, which provide a newform of distribution. they may employ largescreen, sophisticated computergraphic imaging, and programming at a level of narrative complexity and character depth well beyond that available in current video and arcade games. developments in interactive storytelling concepts alongside advances in computersoftware and hardware are evolutionary corollaries of present systems.28although the actual òworkersó in interactive media may be at secondarylevels of the industry, it is clear that all major entertainment companies at theirtop levels have made a commitment to exploring ways that the digital convergence can interface with their products. virtually every major hollywood studiohas established a subsidiary to create interactive products, typically computeradventures games based on movies. so far, most are repackagings of existingproducts, but that could change with the recent focusing of industry attention ongames and the recognition that game revenues (over $6 billion per year) nowexceed box office receipts (over $5 billion per year) (siegel, 1994; rothstein,1994). similarly, record components, seeing music production innovations beingled by specialized multimedia (software) companies, are adding interactive media functions to their staffs (bermant, 1994).29,30 the new academy of interactive arts and sciences has been established to confer awards in the field, thehouston international film festival has established new prizes for interactivemultimedia products, and the american film instituteõs (apple supported) computerbased graphics, editing, and multimedia classes are overflowing (siegel,1994; turner, 1993a). the process of exploration is highly fluid and uses a widerange of information and technological dissemination, networking, alliances,seminars, schooling, capital investments, and research and development.in terms of generating and delivering creative products generally, the unitedstates has dominated the global mass entertainment market since the turn of thelast century. òthere is an accusation from almost every civilized country onearth that america is a cultural imperialist,ó singer observed. òif you talk to ajapanese anthropologist about how many pieces of japanese electronics there arekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivein america, heõll tell you, ôyes, but youõve captured our children. they walkaround in batman masks all over tokyo, and ucla tshirts. . . .õó similarly,nagel has observed that daily activities in bali have been undertaken to theaccompaniment of broadcast u.s. rap music.31singer attributed this dominance to the many generations and networks ofcreative talent that have resided in southern california over the years. hollywood always has catered to a mass audience, he said, beginning with the nickelodeon, which for a nickel would entertain viewers with a womanly form, a couplekissing, the barrel of a gun, or horses or trains moving. significantly, japanadapted the nickelodeon for the intellectual aristocracy, singer said.hollywoodõs inventive tradition can be traced to the unique nature of american culture, according to singer. the nationõs relative youth ògives us permission to play,ó and, as immigrants, americans have an innate sense of adventureand dreams of possibilities. moreover, californians traditionally have been explorers; the early leaders of the entertainment industry, such as louis b. mayer,were itinerant salesman, singer noted. the early influx of immigrants from otherstates, as well as foreigners escaping turmoil overseas, brought new ideas andexcitement to hollywood, a phenomenon that continues. los angeles todayis characterized by òan anxious and driven spirit of reinvention,ó he said. seebox 2.1.market forces also play a role in the global dominance of the u.s. entertainment industry. wildman said the industry is more commercial than its foreigncounterparts and, furthermore, it commands not only a huge domestic market butalso the worldwide market for englishlanguage products.32 about half of majoru.s. producersõ earnings from movies and television come from foreign markets,33 and so entertainment is a major positive contributor to the u.s. balance oftrade,34 wildman said. the large audience for u.s. video productsñfor whichthe costs of distribution are small compared to the initial cost of producing thecreative productñhas enabled producers to command huge production budgets,allowing them to invest heavily in entertainment value and audience appeal,35and thereby propelling the export advantage, he said. u.s. film producers spendsome four to ten times the budgets of european counterparts, resulting in pioneering special effects (embodying digital convergence) and higher production valuesgenerally.the introduction of new technologies is transforming the structure of theentertainment marketplace. as more outlets or channels are added, the return toeach individual producer shrinks, wildman explained. for example, the rise ofcable television was paralleled by a decline in the three major broadcast networksõ share of the primetime audience (u.s. doc, 1993). smaller shares meanlower advertising revenues and smaller production budgets for primetime programs, wildman said, as evidenced by the proliferation of lowbudget òrealityóshows (although the impact of changes in share depends on the type of audienceaffected, which itself affects advertising revenues). on the other hand, the emerkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions33box 2.1 a message from hollywoodseriousminded executives may doubt they have anything to learn from hollywood. to be sure, film director alexander singer acknowledged, hollywood is apeculiar place, a land of fantasies and dreams. òthere are people who wear suitsand sit in an office when in fact ôvisions of sugar plums dance in their heads,õó hesaid. òthey are filled with the fantasy of boundless possibility. the brass ring of a$500 milliongrossing film is so intoxicating that it leaves ordinary and sensiblepeople dizzy with desire.ómovie makers are gamblers, taking wild chances on expensive bombs such asishtar and unexpected blockbusters such as home alone. òthey do not knowwhat it is that works,ó singer said. òthey cannot know. they never know.ó yet,ironically, they are highly paid to know. this environment of high risk, high stakes,and relentless pressure to appear in control makes the entertainment businessprofoundly insecure and unstable, singer said. moreover, the odds against success are astronomical. for example, about 30,000 screenplays are registeredevery year by the writerõs guild of america; only a few hundred are purchased,and a fraction of those are actually made into movies, he said. all of this fosters acreative atmosphere, but one with òa sickly quality . . . a sense of addiction.óthis creativity is struggling to find the application to multimedia. hollywoodexecutives are notoriously fearful of venturing beyond the familiar; singer foundsenior entertainment executives to be òconservativeó and òanxiousó when confronted with virtual reality technology entertainment concepts during the early 1990s.such reactions cast doubt on the prospect of the entertainment industry serving asa model for systematic innovation.yet in one way the industry does serve as a prototype for survival in the information age, according to singer, who believes hollywood is a kind of precursor forcertain forms of work forces and lifestyles of the future. a large part of this cultureis one of impermanent but highly skilled production group teams. these temporary task forces, brought together for a single movie or televisions series, workintensely with a high degree of skill, quickly building personal relationships andteamwork comparable to that of a string quartet or a baseball team, singer said. atthe completion of the assignment the team dissolves and the individuals search fornew employment. they are motivated as much by professional pride as by monetary gain.these workers must be highly independent: they need to inform themselvesabout industry activity, network to find jobs, and upgrade their skills regularly. theyalso must raise families and stay sane and healthy while living this momenttomoment lifestyle. (time lost for illness is among the lowest in any industry.) it is amodel that could serve as a useful variant for the business community, singersaid, as job impermanence comes to characterize much of american life.gence of new media creates new òwindowsó in the distribution chainñnewaftermarkets. the overall effect is to increase the aggregate audience for a givenproduction, wildman said.another transforming factor may relate to financing. for example, filmindustry financing changed with the introduction of sound in motion pictures.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivepreviously, most film production had been financed by entrepreneurial individuals working in the industry or their associates. sound imposed serious newtechnical demands on filmmaking that required expensive equipment and talent,prompting hollywood to turn to new york capital markets, which had underwritten earlier stages of the industry. this experience provided the rudiments of thecurrent film industryõs financing structure, with profound consequences for thecharacter (both technically and in terms of content) of a major part of the entertainment industry. thus, beyond its effect on what it is like to see a movie, soundchanged the movie industry into something new, and that new thing produceddifferent products than the old thing.36 by analogy, the longterm effects of newdigital convergence technologies may be more profound with respect to alteringthe traditional definition of the industry than on the industry as currently defined.overall, a major part of that transformation may be from a goodsproducing to aserviceproducing orientation.wildman also observed that as channels and programming proliferate, muchof the òvalue addedó starts to reside in the technology that allows us to sort,sample, and select what we want to use. as noted above, competing industriesare offering different methods and approaches for those processes of findingentertainment content to consume.only technologies that provide meaningful benefits to the creative community will take hold in the entertainment industry complex. the integration of newtechnologies will be driven by (1) enhancing the creative tools used by the entertainment industry to create its art form; (2) demonstrating cost economies andoperational efficiencies; and (3) enabling new forms of entertainment and/orinnovative ways to simulate reality. for example, with its 360degree stereoscopic computergraphic universe, individual spatial volition, and simultaneousinteracting multiple players, fully evolved virtual reality currently is the mostpotent and problematic technology of the whole interactive spectrum. this medium gains particular relevance in the way it reflects aspects of the òvirtualcommunitiesó emerging from the computer networks (rheingold, 1993).thus, while the popular and business press tout prospective impacts fromgreater bandwidth in communications capacity, applications of virtual realityfrom cdroms and other new devices, and other digital convergence components and products, it remains premature to determine what difference individualdevelopments may make. the bandwidth breakthroughs of today are impressive,but in context they may prove no more earthshattering than earlier transformational jumps in communications capacity such as multiplexing of telephone trunkcircuits or transformations in entertainment such as the addition of sound andcolor to film. the changes brought about by todayõs instances of digital convergence may be changes in degree or in kind; some may be changes in degree thatare so significant as to be changes in kind. ginn contended that ability to satisfyaudiences is more important to success than is the kind of business: òif your viewis that markets will segment, and i think they will over time, then those compakeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions35nies that have the understanding of markets and how to satisfy customer needs,irrespective of where they are in this value chain, will be able to be very profitable. this includes cable companies and telecommunication companies andothers in the distribution end.óreinforcing ginnõs view that it is insight as much as origin that matters wasthe apparent confusion at the january 1994 information superhighway summit, agovernmentindustry gathering that addressed, in a group more heavily dominated by entertainment industry executives, some of the issues raised at the cstbcolloquium. as reported in the los angeles times (lippman and harmon, 1994):not atypically for hollywood, the most compelling reason many gave for attending the conference was that everyone else was. for the last year, representatives of the communications and media industries have demonstrated an almost compulsive need to trade information highway metaphors at symposiumsand conferences with titles such as òdigital world,ó òmultimedia expoó andòdigital hollywood.ó although everyone agreed that the highway is comingñand soonñthere was little consensus about how it will evolve, how much it willcost or how quickly people will be able to access it through their computers,telephones or television sets . . . . yet members of the hollywood crowdseemed unsure of their place in the sparring between phone, cable and computerexecutives over how digital age entertainment and information will be delivered. òi feel like an english major in an organic chemistry course,ó said disneyõs [michael] eisner.notwithstanding the many ways that digital convergence can affect and beaffected by the entertainment industry, there is likely to be a broader interactionwith entertainment, per se. entertainment is an essential part of human activity aswell as an industrial classification signifier.37 the latter does not encompass theformer in any meaningful way. conventional measures of activity regarding theentertainment industry reflect no more accurately on the human activity of entertainment than measures of fertilizer production reflect accurately on the state ofworld nutrition, obesity in the united states, or changing fashions in cuisine.failure to see the breadth and depth of entertainment as a central element inhuman activity, extending into many other realms of òproduction,ó probablyaccounts for the consistent misprediction of growth in markets for such productsas consumer electronics and such services as longdistance telephone. thesemarkets, at least from an economic perspective, have appeared to be almostcompletely òsupplydrivenóñthe economistõs euphemism for the fact that no onepredicted the growth that actually occurred when the market took off. yet theyclearly have tapped deeply into some fundamental demand structure. wildlyoptimistic and misplaced expectations for the picturephone and interactive television illustrate the same confusion about the real nature of entertainment. thesimple fact is, we donõt understand the issue of entertainment very well.in looking for and predicting the impact of digital convergence, it may beuseful to consider the potential of existing information goods and services askeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveentertainment: newspapers are information services catering to the masses, andcommercial television almost defines that concept. commercial television newsis clearly a kind of information service, reporting facts, but it is also largely anentertainment product. a significant fraction of network television news budgetscome from the networksõ entertainment budgets, and the proliferation of ònewsyóshows with celebrity anchors shows just how profitable such òinfotainmentó canbe. some would even argue, a la h.l. mencken, that government itself is asource of entertainment (certainly supported by the success of the cable televisionnetwork, cspan), raising questions about some fraction of political expenses(polling, campaign consultants, and other election costs) relating to entertainment. as discussed in chapter 3, related arguments might be madeñand aremade, seriouslyñin the context of education. the question is not what willhappen with the new technologies and entertainment, but rather, what will thesetechnologies add to the technology/entertainment mix already well in place?notes1.in 1962, an integrated circuit (ic) contained 10 transistors; today, one ic contains millions of transistors.2.òintel corp. and spectron microsystems, inc. [plan] software that will supportnative signal processing on a pentium chip, allowing multimedia software to run on theprocessor instead of requiring dedicated hardware . . . . the pentium processor, thoughnot fast enough to handle joint photographic experts group and motion pictures expertgrouptype compression, will be able to compress and manipulate audio signals. thismeans that recorded speech can be slowed down or sped up . . . . the initial release willsupport audio only; video and communication will be supported lateró (mohan, 1994). avariety of specialized hardware components is used to support a variety of functions, fromsound to graphics to communications, increasingly displacing specialized boxes and subsystems. much innovation is taking place in more miniature and more integral communications componentry, for example, providing phone, fax, and voice mail capabilitieswithin personal computers. see corcoran (1993).3.new termsñòpersonal digital assistants,ó òpersonal communicators,ó and thelikeñhave already been coined to describe these products.4.for instance, at&t and a small company specializing in digital signal compression are developing an electronic òblack boxó for television set tops, to provide for reception and decoding of movies and other video services using telephone lines (klein andaston, 1993). hewlett packard and tv answer collaborated to build a settop box thatprovides interactive services; the system uses a portion of the radio spectrum to uplinkand download signals from a satellite (millison and lagrow, 1993).5.the overlap between computers and conventional consumer electronics was notedin connection with the newcomer role of microsoft and intel at the 1994 las vegasconsumer electronics show. òtheir inclusion illustrates just how blurred the line hasbecome between computers and consumer elecronics. while sales of more traditionalconsumer equipment languish, computer concerns hope to spur purchases of multimediakeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions37personal computers, handheld ôdigital assistantsõ and sophisticated computer gamesó(carlton, 1994a).6.see hodge (1995) for a discussion of technical and design issues for stbs thatcould support interactive television. hodge asserts that an stb consistent with openarchitecture is òa remote control unit for the video server, to which it connects through anatm network. this is the distinction between this unit and preitv [interactive television]. it provides bilateral, full duplex communications to the video serveró (p. 154).7.wildman commented on how the introduction of sound in film ended careers ofactors with poor voices and enabled careers of actors whose voices carried well.8.ò[w]hile virtually every major publishing house and hollywood studio has announced plans to develop sophisticated, highquality multimedia software, and thoughcable, telephone and computer companies are forming alliances to test interactive tvsystems, many of these ventures are in their infancy and wonõt translate into large numbers of jobs for yearsó (kruger, 1994).9.sherry turkle, personal communication, november 11, 1993.10.with research under way in numerous technical areas aimed at leveraging itsnetwork architecture, the cable industry is billing its infrastructure as òthe missing link tomyriad multimedia applications,ó including personal communications services (dukes,n.d.).11.information can be carried on electromagnetic impulses or waves in various frequencies, the sum of which is known as the spectrum. the full electromagnetic spectrumranges from radio waves (relatively long wavelengths) to xrays and cosmic rays (at shortwavelengths). transmission through the air is concentrated in a narrow portion of theradio spectrum; radio frequencies that are very low cannot carry enough information forvideo, while radio signals at high frequencies cannot penetrate objects. competition isgrowing for the prime bands of radio frequencies (chiddix, 1991).12.a comprehensive analysis of wireless technology may be found in the economist (1993a).13.this argument hinges on the development of amplifiers that can increase thespeed of fiberoptic transmission. today, fiberoptic technology is constrained by anelectronic bottleneck: every 22 miles, the signal must be converted to electronics andthen regenerated, gilder noted. this means that, despite its wide bandwidth, fiber opticsis limited in speed to 2.5 gigahertz (2.5 billion cycles per second). but the true capacityof fiber optics is 25,000 gigahertzñ1,000 times all the frequencies used in the air today.òit could accommodate all phone calls in america on the peak moment of motherõs day,ógilder said.14.experimentation with realtime audio and video conferencing over the internethas begun using the socalled mbone multicast backbone (eriksson, 1994).15.this phenomenon is discussed in katz and shapiro (1994).16.the motion picture experts group (radcliffe, 1993) and a variety of corporatealliances and consortia (markoff, 1995a) have pursued standards for video compressionand video storage.17.sound systems for films with digital sound are expensive and variable. digitaltheater system places the soundtrack on a disk separate from the film and synchronizesthe two. sony dynamic digital puts the soundtrack on the outer edge of the film, whiledolby uses the space between sprocket holes (fantel, 1994).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive18.an overview of the standardssetting process for information networking is provided in cstb (1992), p. 56.19.for example, the standard for audio cds is lower than current recording capabilities. the òred bookó standard calls for music to be stored in a 16bit format, meaningthe sound is sampled at 16 places along the sound wave 44,100 times per second; bycontrast, studios now can record digitally using a 20bit system, sampling 16 times moreinformation and creating richer sound (herschman, 1993).20.see pereira (1994) and carlton and king (1994).21.the intersection of standards setting and intellectual property rights managementhas been tracked in the annual telecommunications policy research conference seriesand in a 1994 workshop on standards setting for information infrastructure sponsored bythe national institute of standards and technology.22.for instance, the de facto standard for studio film productionsñ35millimeterfilm at 24 frames per secondñhas survived for more than 60 years; the òred bookóstandard for cds was set by philips nv and sony corp. (ntia, 1993).23.in addition, the multimedia and hypermedia experts group is developing codingfor multimedia to manage throughput on distribution networks (dukes, n.d.).24.according to farhi and sugawara (1994), ònone of the experts is suggesting thatthe information superhighway wonõt get built, just that early predictions of its quickcompletion were grossly overstated.ó25.a number of major artists are pursuing interactive ventures, and consumers canbuy products that allow them to create music out of preconstructed parts, or experiencecombinations of music, art, and games (david, 1993; goldberg, 1993; bermant, 1994).26.where material can be confined to digital formats, economies can be reaped, forexample through the electronic cinema concept, reducing the need to undergo the expenseof conversion of motion pictures to film (especially likely where material is producedexpressly for electronic distribution rather than traditional theatres).27.walt disney co. licensed microsoft and sony imagesoft to develop multimediatitles featuring disney characters. òindustry analysts say collaborations of this kind willproliferate as entertainment companies like movie studios seek new media to exploit forlicensing revenue and as software publishers seek characters of proven appeal for interactive games and storiesó (fisher, 1994).28.a rare insiderõs perspective on the difference between storytelling structure andvideo games may be found in parkes (1994).29.see landis (1993), lohr (1994), and schwarz (1993). multimedia projects underdevelopment by major studios include interactive cartoons; explanatory versions of oldmovies showing, for example, how certain dance sequences were created; a virtualbiopark, which will enable children to experience an animalõs lifestyle; interactive television shows, including games, dramas, and mysteries; and interactive amusement parkrides.30.a notable late entrant was the walt disney co., which initially stayed out of themultimedia technology business and instead licensed its standard programming for multimedia use. chairman michael d. eisner said of interactive media, òi donõt like it so wewonõt invest in itó (the superhighway summit, academy of television arts and sciences, los angeles, january 11, 1994). eisner also has expressed concern that morechannels will mean more mediocrity: òa real nightmare is finding out that the superhighway has turned into a detour . . .ó (laderman et al., 1993). in late1994, however, disneykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and directions39announced plans for greater activity revolving around interactive software products(turner, 1994b).31.david nagel, personal communication, october 1994.32.the united states is òby far the worldõs most important supplier of films forinternational trade,ó wildman has written, citing unesco statistics (wildman and siwek,1988). these authors suggest there is a strong, positive relationship between the purchasing power of native speakers in any languageñthe englishspeaking population happensto be wealthy and populousñand the importance of trade in films and television programs in that language.33.this figure comes from wildmanõs analysis of a period of 30 years ending in1988 (wildman and siwek, 1988).34.the u.s. film industry had a positive trade balance of approximately $1 billion in1985, even though foreign earnings are reduced significantly by a number of trade barriers, as well as by piracy (wildman and siwek, 1988).35.the value of film and television products to consumers is òdetermined almostentirely by such publicgood elements as the appeal of the story portrayed, the quality ofthe writing and acting, the perspective of the director, and the competence of cameracrews and other technical personneló (wildman and siwek, 1988). a public good isnonexclusive; that is, its value is not diminished by its use.36.of course, new, foreign sources of investment may also provoke major changesin segments of the entertainment industry, but that issue was beyond the scope of thisproject.37.see huizinga (1950) for a discussion of the role of play in society.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive403societal implicationsdigital convergence is expected to transform every field and every aspect ofu.s. society, from business and education to health care and libraries, from thestructure of the nationõs economy and laws to the psychology of the individual.samuel ginn observed: òat a minimum, [digital convergence] is going to impacthow we work and play, and that is to say that itõs going to affect our standard ofliving. indeed, it will influence our competitiveness as a nation. itõs going toinfluence how we relate to one another, how we educate ourselves, how weadminister health care, how privacy is protected. even the whole concept ofnational sovereignty is going to have to be dealt with.óadvanced communications services, fostered by digital convergence, areseen by many as key contributors to social and economic prosperity (egan andwildman, 1992). several trends make this possible, including the developmentof powerful new technologies, growing pressure to address social problems suchas inadequacies in public education and rising health care costs, and a new appreciation among businesses, other organizations, and analysts of the role of information and communications in economic productivity (egan and wildman, 1992).the internet demonstrates some of the possibilities: for example, there are agrowing number of efforts (e.g., oncolink from the university of pennsylvania)to use the internet as a kind of electronic òpatientõs desk referenceóña sourceof hard to find or anecdotal information for people with rare or serious diseasessuch as cancer or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als)ñor for selfhelp discussion (bulkeley, 1995; foderaro, 1995); there are the network pedophiles (amongthe first, it would appear, to exploit both the anonymity possible through electronically mediated conversations and the vulnerability of precocious adoleskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications41cents); there are the first òexperimentsó with attempts to use the great efficiencyof the information distribution capabilities of the internet for advertisingñandthe first squeals of protest from those who (probably rightly) see a whole newworld of electronic junk mail opening up; there is an internet òradio stationóbroadcasting music from santa cruz, california, and beginning to strain thecurrent limits of copyright law and performance; and there are merchants rangingfrom a small used clothing store in los gatos, california, with world wide web/mosaic access through which customers can query a database regarding availablestock, to digital equipment corporation, which derived some $100 million worthof sales for a particular product line from publishing product literature and enabling benchmark testing over the internet.1although many activities and products will not change, there will be newoptions in various arenas, and corresponding changes in market share for optionson how to spend time as well as money. the frenzy of activity and òhypeó notedin chapter 1 points to the problem of differentiating a longterm vision fromunrealistic promises of nearterm products. the expectation for change in manyquarters raises questions about what can be done as a nation and a people to learnfrom past mistakes with other media.discussion at the colloquium underscored a fundamental reality: while manyexecutives and scholars recognize the potential for achieving social good, actualofferings of goods and services will depend on what sells, and perhaps as well onsome broader vision of what is possible. while the profit motive is expected topromote multimedia programming for entertainment and various business applications, many colloquium participants emphasized the importance of developingother applications (e.g., for health and education). their reasons were cultural,intellectual, and altruistic, and, in the context of debate over telecommunicationspolicy reform, politically astute. by way of illustration, richard notebaert outlined a number of applications of telecommunications and information infrastructure to the improvement of health care. for example, the wisconsin healthinformation network (whin) enables at least seven hospitals, over 250 doctors,and insurance companies to send and receive patient information electronically,through the public network.2,3 while such experiences arouse interest in advancing the information infrastructure, the goal of maximizing benefits for healthcare, education, and libraries as well as more businessoriented domains raisespractical questions of how to achieve sufficient scale, affordability, andinteroperability.perhaps the most important theme of the colloquium discussions was therecognition by technologists, industrialists, and social scientists that there is noone way that digital convergence technologies and applications will or mustdevelop. this variability is a principal reason that the social consequences ofnew media are among the most difficult of all effects to predict. who, forexample, would have predicted the emergence of òthe patriot networkó of the1990s (farley, 1994), which links ad hoc citizen militias, based on looking at thekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveuses and users of networking as a preferred means of communication in the 1970sand 1980s? the existence of alternative paths for development of content andprogramming and for the mechanisms by which they are delivered will allow avariety of businesses to emerge and grow. public policy, in turn, can affect theappeal of specific alternatives.this chapter outlines some of the social issues raised by digital convergence.it focuses on issues where colloquium discussion clustered, including the enhanced flow of information, the shape that technology and applications may take,and the contrast between multiuser games and education as instances of the use ofdigital convergence technology. the chapter is intended to illuminate areaswhere choices by industry, consumers, and government will influence the benefits received from digital convergence.the flow of informationeven excluding entertainment, the proliferation of computing systems andtheir integration with communication systems has led many to predict that peoplewill increasingly face a deluge of information. the human information processing system clearly is limited in capacity, leading many to wonder how growinginformation processing burdens will affect society. the social phenomena associated with tv and radio (e.g., the emergence of the òcouch potatoó in modernsociety) seem to signal a risk of potentially stupefying effects of sensory signaloverload. the tighter integration of entertainment will compound that situationby providing more attractive packaging and delivery as well as more creativeforms for that information. eli noam remarked that the challenge will be to sortthrough all the options. to date, he observed, computers generally have beenused to produce new information rather than to manage it. he predicted that thetechnologies and business of systems integration will help process and reduce theglut of information. others speculated about a need for wholesale rethinking ofthe business, public policy, and cultural aspects of information generation andmanagement.most elaborate in his analysis was richard lanham, a professor of english atthe university of california at los angeles, who called for a ònew economics ofhuman attentionó (a somewhat different usage than customary in psychology).information used to be more difficult to locate and assimilate in commonlyavailable raw and often bulky formats, but no longer: technology is facilitatingaccess to information. today, the rarest fundamental resource is human attention, which gives information meaning and direction. lanhamõs use of the wordòeconomicsó emphasizes the problem of allocation of attention as a scarce resource.as the market for multimedia products develops, manufacturers must analyze human attention structures to learn what sells. thus, the filmmaker and theliterature professor who are skilled in getting attention, whether from viewers orkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications43students, assume central roles in the new economics. òwhat is converging is notonly the technology of digital computation with the technology of mass entertainment. a larger conversion has occurred. . . . the arts barter the crucial economicgoodñattention,ó lanham said, principally because digitalelectronic expressivespace differs from the printed page and analogbased icon and sound.lanham argued that it is time to rethink and reorient our approach to theinformation marketplaceñin terms of both structure and social implications.òwe have to bring the new economics of human attention to focusñnow,ólanham advised. òwe canõt afford to study the problem to death.ó in definingthe economics of human attention, lanham outlined five fundamental differencesbetween print and digital information:1. print, being fixed, is more authoritative than digital information, which isvolatile, interactive, conversational.2. the transition from print to pixel alters the text from a twodimensionalprinted surface to a threedimensional mixture of word, image, and sound, andthus requires a new mix of human attention skills.3. these new skills introduce the process of modeling, with dramatic results.the viewer is encouraged to contemplate òwhat ifs.ó4. the meaning of òoriginalityó changes radically, with the result that current intellectual property law becomes obsolete. (this issue is discussed below inthe section òintellectual property issues.ó)5. finally, as ideas move into the rich space and sounds of digital expression, human motives change, with competition and play animating practical purpose in a fundamentally new way. this particular concept appears to emphasizethe positive contributions that entertainment may bring to otherwise more seriousendeavors. as discussed below in òentertaining education,ó however, achievinga net positive effect will not be automatic.to benefit the most from digital convergence, society must acknowledge andrespond to these transitions, lanham warned. in education, for example, lanhamargued that the campaign to improve literacy is based on the old economics: nomultimediabased attention structure has yet been chosen to replace the traditional textbook, and there has been no accord on how to train librarians, or how toreconceive school òbuildingsó now that information is disembodied rather thanfixed. nevertheless, there are indicators that these conditions may be changing,however slowly (cstb, 1994b). there is, for example, a substantial corpus ofwork developing on òconstructive learning,ó which does begin to challenge thecentrality of the hardbound textbook and does begin to explore and exploit newways to òmanage attentionó through, for example, use of simulation and òconstruction environments.ó experiments with electronic publishing and the elements of digital libraries may provide other examples.lanham identified two fundamental barriers to addressing such issues. thekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveprofessional barrier, recognized by a number of colloquium participants in othercontexts, is the rare and awkward nature of communication among the variousdisciplines involved. that challenge was noted by musicologist robert winter incommenting on his demonstration of multimedia music exploration applications:òi almost never do this in front of musicians. theyõre converted and they love itand they go do it. i preach to surgeons and physiologists and groups like thisbecause what iõm addressing here and what bob [stein] showed you in his veryexciting new projects are issues that are crossplatform, crossdiscipline, crosswhatever.óthe second obstacle is cultural. at one extreme is the camp that resiststransforming the arts into commodities, while the opposing contingent seeks tomaximize profits above all. òjust networking these two warring camps togetheris no solution,ó lanham said. òoptical fiber, no more than twisted copper pairs,cannot heal a religious war.ódiversity of informationrobert stein of voyager related the influence of profitmaking strategy tothe level of diversity in the information products delivered, building on his statusas a publisher in both entertainment and education as well as on his personalphilosophy. he said multimedia software appears to be developing along twotracks, the movie model and the book model, with the former prevailing. that is,hollywood movie companies and game companies, and some traditional publishers, are focusing on expensive, largescale productionsñequivalent to moviescosting tens of millions of dollars to produce. as a result, the number of u.s.films produced is limited;4 the figure has been consistent at about 300 a year,wildman has written (wildman and siwek, 1988). by contrast, approximately150,000 new book titles are published in the united states each year,5 therebyensuring diversity in the marketplace.òit is extremely important in society to have this breadth and diversity ofmaterial,ó stein said. òwouldnõt it be a shame if there were only dozens of newthings produced in new media and that was how our entire culture was beingdistributed . . . as a society, iõm not sure itõs in our longterm interests to focusonly on the blockbusters where you can make the money. i think you also haveto have some diversity of thought. . . .ó compounding the need for diversity is thegreater ability to exploit aftermarket opportunities, as discussed in chapter 2,afforded by digital convergence technology. the impact of any one idea may beamplified by the ubiquitous, attentioncommanding power of recursive deliverysystems: the movie is the television show is the video game is the magazine is thecereal box is the talk of the schoolyard and the office.true or full diversity of information is not necessarily an unmitigated good.some observers have warned that, if the medium is the message, then advancedtechnology is bound to undermine cultural values. such a concern was impliedkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications45by janice obuchowski, president of freedom technologies inc., who noted thatin simpler times the cultural message was clearer. òas we move into this distributed, interactive, somewhat undersurface, almost anarchic environment,ó shesaid, òwe need to at least concern ourselves to some degreeñwithout becominghystericalñabout the issues of our society and who will communicate the cultural center.ó although that center may become obscured by the ability of emerging systems to deliver an ever widening menu of cultural inputs and outputs, thatdiversity and pluralism are also positive developments, as noted by robertjohnson of black entertainment television (bet) in a late1994 interview.johnson related the proliferation of programming options to the recognition thatthe audience need no longer be assumed to be in one place, or homogenous.others put on the table the fact that greater flow of information in general impliesgreater (and qualitatively different) flow of information that some find undesirable.ethical questions concerning programming shadow all the new conduits andforms of delivery, some of which, like the electronic theater, naturally attractsocial pressure. society finds itself moving unwillingly into an uncomfortable,openended, and confrontational discourse to define òpornographyó in media andcalibrate damage to the young, the psychologically unstable, and the economically vulnerable.6,7 in the same interview, johnson observed that while a roughconsensus may exist on the inappropriateness of pornography for children, it doesnot for other material that might be considered undesirable by some because of itspolitical or hatemongering character.8the potency of pornography, violence (kolbert, 1994), and gambling demand that mechanisms be developed to satisfy the everchanging parameters ofsocial values and government regulation, alexander singer has said.9 indeed,there is a skeleton at the feast of the entertainment industryõs success, because itsmost profitable segment is the òactionó genre, usually a euphemism for violence/sadism. also chafing to get into the starting gate is the $30 billion gamingindustry (including lotteries, offtrack betting, and local bingo games).10 with itsdeeply addictive overtones and its appeal to vulnerable populations, this industryis not likely to enhance the reputation of interactive services, although it mayenhance profits. singer has warned that if the private sector is unable to regulate itself thenpolitical and social extremists will impose rules from outside (harmon, 1993;jensen, 1994; lippman, 1993). singer has predicted that the complicated questions posed by new technologies will lead to the emergence of professionalspecialists in communications ethics. recent announcements about voluntarystandardization and labeling by the video game industry illustrate the kind of selfregulation that is possible, especially when the threat of government regulationappears imminent to an industry.11 the telephone industry has also respondedwith mechanisms to control access to certain 900number services.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveesther dyson of edventure holdings inc. commented in a late1994 interview on the interplay between private ground rules and individual choice:private organizations have a strong role in creating and managing environmentswhere there are rules. people can decide for themselves which kind of environment they prefer, and go into those, as long as there are competing sets of ruleswhere people can go. one of the nice things about cyberspace is that you caneasily pick your environment. in the physical world, if you donõt happen to likewhere youõre living, itõs hard to move. itõs expensive, and there may not beroom where you want to go. but in the internet world, itõs fairly cheap tochange your environment, and i think itõs very important that the governmentallow different outfits to set up places with different rules and then people canjust decide where they want to go. . . . there should be some way to keep kidsout [of inappropriate environments]. but i hope thatõs going to be more the jobof the parents than of the government.singer emphasized at the colloquium that, regardless of attempts at control,the market will be flooded with information products of questionable value. thisphenomenon will not spell the extinction of artistic merit, but it will exploitbusiness opportunities and consumer demands. the existence of demand fordigital pornography is already well in evidence.12 noting that pornography wasthe driving force behind vhs videocassette technology, singer said the sheervolume and diversity of new products may obscure the quality work. ònone ofthose groups will control anything,ó he said. òthis is not a controllable phenomenon. you will get a tidal wave of garbage, of excitement, education, penetratingintelligence and appalling degeneracy. count on it . . . . it is appropriate, i think,for regulatory agencies to have certain limits on obscenity, privacy, and so on.all of that seems well advised, but you cannot stop the flood of junk . . . .óintellectual property issuesthe supply of information available will reflect a variety of environmentalfactors and incentives, which relate to risks, rights, and responsibilities for buyers, sellers, and others (cstb, 1994c). the most identifiable and at the sametime most controversial area of incentives is that of intellectual property protection.13 intellectual property rights command special attention because the content dimension of digital convergence consists of intellectual property.14 thediscussion below highlights some of the issues; a comprehensive assessment isbeyond the scope of this report. the issue of intellectual property elements inassociated technical standards is noted in chapter 2.as many have observed (cstb, 1994c), digital technology effectively invites piracy: audio, video, and textual material can be copied perfectly, easily,and inexpensively. broadcast networks, for example, have begun to face theproblem of finding images to which they own rights (e.g., from programs thatthey own) rebroadcast over the internet, where they are accessed for viewing andkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications47other uses on personal computers.15 this situation is one of many that raisequestions about how rights owners will be able to track down or even find outabout infringers. some suggest that it may be time for a new model of intellectualproperty rights that takes into account these changing conditions; others observethat copyright, introduced for printing, has been successfully adapted for cameras, radios, player pianos, and so on and will adapt yet again.multimedia introduces unique problems into the copyright arena, because itsvarious components have different legal traditions. for example, the book publishing industry relies on comprehensive contracts, while the movie industryfrequently employs short òdealó memos, and the computer industry has littleexperience with copyright issues such as òperformance rightsó (radcliffe, 1993).whereas the movie industry typically asks for compensation up front, the musicindustry has traditionally sought royalties based on performances. compoundingthese differences among producers of multimedia materiel is the new controlafforded the customer: the number of times something is performed, displayed,or distributed is up to the user, and therefore hard for the producer to measure orestimate in advance. for example, new videoondemand systems that allowviewers to watch a program any time of the day could involve thousands ofòbroadcastsó a day of a given program (chartrand, 1994). such patterns aredriving media industries (e.g., publishing, tv/video, movie, music, and software) to explore new approaches to collecting money for use of their intellectualproperty, including various kinds of blanket payments in lieu of paying at eachinstance of use.a related issue pertains to enforcement and administration. for example, thedistribution of songs through databases offered by such commercial providers ascompuserve has raised questions about who is liable for copyright infringement:the person who provides a copy of the copyrighted material may clearly beinfringing, yet the owner of the database may be much easier to target (woo,1993). case law is beginning to define or refine expectations, although thepossibility of legislative reform remains.the very nature of interactive mediañits malleabilityñcan make it difficultto pinpoint the original òauthoró or even the confines of a òworkó itself. as oneexpert in the field has observed, òin a certain way, the distinction between theauthor and user of material becomes blurred, if not obsolete. therefore, in thenottoodistant future, there might hardly be any more authors, but a multiplicityof ôcontributors.õó16a fundamental issue is the interplay of creativity, communication or sharing,and compensation. this was illustrated by singer, who recounted the networkingexperience of the writerõs guild of america (wga), an association of scriptwriters. wga members developed a network for conversing and exchangingideas. according to singer, the network fostered òwitty, bright, and rich interchange between some hundreds of people who were rather isolated and need onekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveanotherõs support.ó but after a year and a half, uproar over alleged theft of ideasled to the dissolution of the network, singer said.a new arena in which existing law may be tested is that of fine art. computer and software companies are negotiating with museums around the world forrights to scan images of famous photographs or paintings for distribution ofcopies via cdrom or electronic networks. technology allows both highresolution image storage and display plus copying via printing by users. to date,a typical arrangement has been a nonexclusive license to reproduce the highquality photographs museums make for other purposes (hudson, 1995).u.s. copyright law was strained even before the digital revolution. in practical experience, originality involves borrowing elements of the past, blendingmemory, repetition, chance, and invention in a new mixture, lanham said, offering insights based on his own experience as an expert witness in some 50 copyright violation cases. by contrast, copyright law is based on the premise thatthere can be absolute originality. òin this view, the ôoriginalõ is the poet, alone inthe garret, coming up with something absolutely new and, of course, redemptivefor mankind. the history of copyright law in america has been a series ofattempts to adjust this exaggeration to how originality actually works in humanlife. the new space of digital expression now forces us to make this adjustmentin theory as well as in practice,ó he said.copyright law could constrain multimedia development, lanham warned.he identified three problems that need to be resolved.the first problem is how to define òsubstantial similarityó of visual images.that is, if a generative code can create images, and those images can change in aninteractive environment, then what is being compared to what? when this issuearose in a case involving an apple computer user interface, the judge invoked aneven stronger standard of òvirtually identical,ó which is even more difficult tomeet for images, such as computerscreen desktop representations, that changeall of the time as a function of their use. increasingly, that dynamism is characteristic of user interfaces as well as multimedia titles.the second problem is structural. multimedia technology, by enabling thereader to rearrange, rewrite, and link text in a nonlinear manner, has eliminatedthe fixed concepts of beginning, middle, and end, which traditionally have beenthe principal points of comparison between two works. third, any discriminationbetween idea and expression is impossible when a digital code can generatemusic and images, lanham said.òwhat emerges, for better or worse, from the multimedia environment as ithas operated on young people and as i think it is going to operate in the future, isreally a redefinition of human reason,ó lanham asserted. òitõs a redefinition ofthe nature of propositional thought. . . . if that changes, then the whole nature ofthe relationship of expert testimony, for example, to how a jury thinks about theordinary common reader, common viewer, common listener experienceñandhow they judge a caseñis going to change.ókeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications49in the information age, the law of real property may become secondary to thelaw of intellectual property, lanham suggested. inasmuch as digitization broadens and increases the volume of information access, there may need to be arethinking of whom rights owners really want to protect against. thus, forexample, according to lanham it may be appropriate to establish two levels ofintellectual property, one for software professionals and another for amateurs thatextends the principle of fair use (i.e., a copying that is not an infringement).given scholarly traditions regarding proper citation and crediting correct sourcesof ideas and other inputs, questions arise about prospects for greater flexibilityand acceptability in situations that involve òborrowing,ó say, of pieces of film ortext for student projects. the act of borrowing is becoming easier; the context,constraints, and culture are therefore becoming stressed.the debate over compensation for intellectual property revolves around thefundamental premise of intellectual property protection: that compensation induces production, and that therefore intellectual property issues must be addressed if new information technologies are to be developed fully. as suggestedabove, interesting and vexing intellectual property issues are associated withmultimedia òmaterialó other than content or interactive titles, such as the multimedia interfaces of computing or other digital information systems. in the area ofcomputer interfaces, courts have weakened laws over the past few years. cancopyright and patent laws be evolved to protect what in many cases are vastlyexpensive research and development investments in, for example, human interface design? these issues are actively being contested in courts todayñif theòlook and feeló of a humancomputer interface cannot be protected by currentcopyright statutes, as many have argued, will it be possible to protect multimediacontent or interactive òtitlesó? or is content easier to produce than interfaces,suggesting a different set of issues?the intellectual property conundrum is compounded when the issue of patents is added in, although patents have received less attention in this context thancopyright (because of the volume of activity involving some form of publishingor expression of ideas, which is the domain of copyright). however, a fewcontroversial patent cases illustrate the potential for small businesses to substantially influence industry directions as well as costs. for example, in 1989comptonõs new media, a division of the tribune company, applied for a patentrelating to indexing functions that could apply to both cdrom and onlineservices, described as the òmultimedia search system using a plurality of entrypath means which indicate interrelatedness of information.ó a patent wasawarded in august 1993 and announced, together with comptonõs intentions tocollect royalties, in november 1993 at a major trade show, comdex/fall (lewis,1993b). the legitimacy of the claim was reevaluated by the u.s. patent andtrademark office (pto), and the patent was disallowed shortly before the 1994session of comdex (chartrand, 1994). another recent patent case involved datacompression technology, affecting a variety of software and electronic communikeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivecations and resulting in a settlement combined with equity interests between theparties, microsoft and stac. a recent change in pto hiring policies to increasethe computer sciencerelated skill level in its work force is a step in the rightdirection. so is ptoõs own moves to exploit information technology by creatinga digital library of patent information.the shape of technologyprecisely how new information technologies will change american cultureremains a matter of conjecture, but also a matter of choices to be made by manyparties. noam observed that, historically, analysts have been overly optimisticabout the shortterm impacts of technology but have underestimated the longterm effects, such as the extent to which the automobile or the television haschanged how people live, work, and interact. stein, who questioned whether, inhindsight, the automobile in its present form was a positive invention, emphasized the need for a longrange vision in technology development. he acknowledged that,no doubt technology is going to get better and stronger and weõll find lots ofuses for it, but fundamentally, it comes down to where we want to go. theseare questions which i think particularly this society, the american society, isnot very good at asking. we donõt usually ask ourselves where, as a society, dowe want to beñwhich machine do we want to build, and for what purpose? . . .[e]specially because weõve had so much experience now with technology in the20th century, itõs the question that, it seems to me, we could start to ask ourselves. what is the longterm meaningñnot just in terms of next yearõs profits,but the longterm in terms of decades and centuriesñof the machines that weõregoing to build? i donõt believe for a minute that machines are neutral.colloquium participants suggested that intelligent management of new information technologies is the key to maximizing their benefits. this view wasmost optimistically advanced by george gilder:i think the technology is enormously beneficial . . . i donõt think there is anysignificant downside. i think that technology is what we are as human beings.we create new tools. thatõs how we emerge from the muck. this is theadventure of our lives and our culture. to pretend that itõs somehow an optional or negative force is to deny the very essence of human beings. i just thinkthat itõs a positive force that has to be intelligently managed, but itõs entirelypositive.itõs particularly an egalitarian force. these technologies are getting cheaperand cheaper, and they will be most beneficial for poor people, who currentlysuffer most from our school system, for example. these technologies reallywill allow any person [in any neighborhood] to take instruction from the bestprofessors on the face of the earth, or to walk through the halls of the louvrewith close examinations of the paintings. the world opens through this door. . . .keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications51by contrast, donald norman of apple computer inc. cautioned about overlyoptimistic predictions:the history of technology shows that every successful technology has beensuccessful in directions that were not forecast by the people at the time. . . . thefax machine was invented in 1870 and it still has not made major inroads intothe homes. technologies have to meld themselves into the fabric of society, butif weõre not careful, itõll lead us in ways that we donõt want. you canõt controlwhat really happens, but we might be able to prevent the negative from happening and thatõs my message for today.noam remarked on the complex interplay of technology, behavior, and institutions or norms:the notion that somehow everything will be the same except that you now havea more convenient way of getting to joe smith is simply unrealistic. weõll haveto develop protocols of who can talk to whom and when. then, the sense ofcommunity is going to radically change because again, we have certain constants. if itõs much easier to talk to some people with whom it was moredifficult to talk in the past, it means that something has to give. certain formsof communications atrophy as other forms of communications become cheaperand more convenient. the sense of community changes and you begin to develop electronic communitiesñtelecommunitiesñ[raising] all kinds of interesting political issues.stein remarked on how difficult it can be to predict the full impact, includingbenefits, of entertainmentrelated technology by observing that while the placingof a person on the moon had been long anticipated, one of the significant aspectsof that milestone was not predicted: that it would be televised, allowing hundredsof millions of people to watch it together. stein noted that from the 1930sthrough world war ii, machines were portrayed in educational films as liberatingpeople, whereas advertisements in the 1950s paired housewives and domesticmachines.while gilder appeared to assume relatively steady demand for bandwidth interms of the applications he mentioned, stein emphasized that the adequacy ofavailable bandwidth depends on who the users are, and by extension, the kinds ofuses and therefore the kind of bandwidth needed per communications channel.if you think about sending video out the way it is sent out now, there is plentyof bandwidth. but if you think about the possibility of everybody on earthcommunicating with everybody else, and high resolution with moving picturesand sound, under georgeõs definition of what is enough bandwidth, there probably isnõt enough bandwidth. i donõt doubt that humanity will solve the problem and weõll eventually have more bandwidth, but i think the question is,what kind of society do you see? do you see a society where a small group ofpeople is talking to everybody, or do you see one where everybody is talking toeverybody else?keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivesteinõs comments underscore the challenges of achieving scale and universalaccess in supplying new services and the associated questions about who controlswhat. the benefits gilder described, for example, are attainable once fiber isdeployedñbut the high cost of that deployment, combined with investorsõ needsto reap returns on that investment, suggests that considerable cost barriers remainto redeploying moderate bandwidth.stein contrasted the big investments associated with things like game technology with a paucity of investment that supports good thinking. òi would loveto see somebody think about making a machine whose goal was to present aprogram that encouraged people to think about somethingñto reflect and also tocommunicate with other people who are thinking about these things.ó explainedstein, òiõm obsessed with two things. one is getting people to think. the otheris getting them to think with each other.ó stein suggested that, given the differentkinds of computing and communications systems already being developed, somekind of hybrid system to achieve his vision is technically feasibleñbut technology alone is not sufficient. òthe problem is itõs probably not a machine thatanybody wants to buy in terms of itõs not a productivity tool, a game machine, butitõs something our society probably needs desperately.óone reason that such a machine seems elusive may be the divergence incultures and approaches of the industries that might have to combine to make itwork. as norman noted, technologists focus on producing technology while theentertainment industry focuses on producing content. òi would imagine what weneed is what singer and stein were arguing for, which is some attention to thecontent . . . what our media are about and not simply the technology that linkspeople, but perhaps in a mindless way.ó a full convergence remains to beachieved.the need for userfriendly technologya call to action was submitted by norman, who said it is more importanttoday than ever before to develop òhumaneó technology that takes into accountuser needs and capabilities. the current approach to technology development,norman said, has barely evolved since the 1933 chicago worldõs fair, for whichthe motto was òscience finds, industry applies, man conforms.óthe technologycentered approach requires users to operate in ways notconsistent with their natural or learned predispositions; often the human behavesin òappropriate waysóñit is the technology that does not! this mismatch resultsin a high proportion of industrial accidents caused by human error, making occupational safety and health a motivation for progress in humanmachine and humancomputer interaction. a more humancentered approach could reduce human error, decrease training time, increase acceptance of technology, and bolsteru.s. competitiveness, norman said. although the united states leads the worldin research, development, and application of humancentered design principles,keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications53especially in industries such as personal computers, the lead is tenuous, and mostindustries still rely on extensive training to reduce errors.òthis is a critical issue as we move toward a fully interconnected, fullycommunicating world in which the social and organizational issues will be asimportant as the technological ones,ó norman said. part of what is required,observed nancy stover in a late1994 interview, is reducing the emphasis on howtechnology works. this is essential to making the technologies of digital convergences less intimidating. a sign that a technology has succeeded, accordingto stover, is a focus on its benefits; how many of us know or need to know howthe telephone works?singer suggested17 that added complications arise in connection with decisions that are, at a fundamental level, aesthetic. what appear to be primarilytechnology choices profoundly affect the most powerful existing communications mediumñthe picture. he went on to observe that the consequence of whatwill be a significantly more compelling image could have broad social and economic ramifications. for example: what would be the impact on local economies if the huge increases likely in tv òcatalogueó sales (via the shoppingchannels) seriously displaced conventional retail sales income?information processing will alter video consumption options, according tosteven wildman. òas we add more channels, what weõre changing is the logic ofthe consumption of the video product,ó he said. òif we change that logic, then thenature of the assistance provided to consumers or programmers by the industryitself changes as well.ó although opportunities for greater user or audiencecontrol and format choices are expanding, it is likely that consumers will continue to receive, in the traditional manner, the wellestablished and wellreceivedforms of passive entertainment that now exist. as betõs johnson noted, whenpeople use a television, they do not expect to ask it to retrieve or analyze data.johnson speculated that computerbased technology may permit a return totraditional behaviors:it used to be [that] youõd sit around a campfire, or the living room, and someonewould start telling a story. and if you didnõt understand something, you couldsay, òwait, tell me about when the knight came upon the dragon, what happened?ó and you could ask, òdragon? how big was this dragon?ó you couldinteract, and get the information you wanted. well, itõs only since televisioncame along that you canõt stop, and you canõt ask somebody to explain whathappened because the film is running, or the tape is running. interactivity issomething that has been a part of our information access for a long time.the introduction of the remote control device increased viewer control overvideo consumption, but providers still ònurtureó the consumer to some extent,wildman said. for example, cable operators prefer to position their channelsnear a broadcast network, to increase the likelihood of attracting viewers whoòsurfó the channels. but the market will respond with new techniques for searchkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveing across channels, wildman said. he suggested two possible paths: programming services offering a preselected menu of different types of shows (i.e., prepackaged video magazines), and settop converters or òintelligentó televisionsets, which would help viewers make their own selections of programs and services. in a variation on the latter concept, the cable television industry is developing interactive program guides that viewers will be able to operate using aremote control device (ncta, 1993c). interactive program guide work atcablelabs will enable consumers to search for programs by time of day, channel,and theme, and facilitate selection for taping. the starsight program guidetechnology, drawing on broadcast control codes, is being licensed to tv andvcr makers as well as satellite and cable tv operators (fleischmann, 1995). ina late1994 interview, robert lucky cautioned that the design of program selection technology will affect its impact:even if all content providers have equal access to a telephone line, if the personthat builds the interface to your settop box is making it difficult for you tochoose someoneõs programming, youõre not going to ever get there. and thereõsgoing to be such a plethora of material that the way youõre gently steered, oneway or another, is going to make all the difference in the world. this is something even more than a technical problem. itõs going to be a problem for ethicsand culture to truly make this open. actually it will be very difficult.although too new to receive much attention at the colloquium, the explosivegrowth of the world wide web and its mosaic interface suggest a computernetwork variant of the user selection concept, one that has even spawned businessventures aimed at helping individuals and businesses to use the web (churbuck,1994). the contrasts between the internet and emerging televisionbased interactive environments underscore that òinteractiveó and òtwowayó may be matters ofdegree. argued stein in a late1994 interview,the thing about the internet is that it isnõt twoway communication, itõs everyway communication. thatõs where the big struggle is going to be, to maintainthat kind of environment, because weõre going to have very different kinds ofprogramming if we maintain everyway communication than if we go to simpletwoway communication.other speakers stressed that technology should be related to context. steinnoted that, in pacific telesisõ conceptual video of life in the year 2005, advancedtechnology was in wide use but apparently had not improved the quality of life:the neighborhood was run down, workers suffered job stress, and student skillsand parentchild relationships were poor. òthere is no sense that peopleõs actualexperience has changed at all . . . the reality is, unless we are conscious of thekind of society we are building, the machines are not going to make equality forus. they never will,ó stein declared.steinõs comments underscore the importance of making improvement of thequality of life an explicit objective in introducing new technology. but they begkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications55the question, whose objective should that be? stein, an entrepreneur, acknowledged that businesses competing in the information marketplace focus on objectives supporting the quest for profit and growth, raising yet other questions aboutthe role of government and other players.a history lesson:the evolution of books as mass mediain an ideal world, technology would be available on an equitable basis to all.one model for achieving universal access is the distribution system for printmedia. this infrastructure includes a taxpayersupported system of postal carriers and roads for the physical movement of publications, as well as public libraries. the farreaching system has provided for a richness and diversity of printresources, encompassing a wide range of perspectives and unfiltered sources ofinformation.18whatever the possibilities of an idealized future, paul david warned againstoverlooking nearterm realities. the issue is not the technology itself, davidsaid, but the need to develop and apply it by acting within social organizations, toaddress problems of trying to mobilize resources, especially other peopleõs moneyand talent, for the uncertain and unproven.and the difficulties donõt end there, david said. òwhen all the foregoingdaunting challenges have been met, and when the innovations and questions areperceived by others to be potentially competitive with and, therefore, disruptiveof their established interestsñas all important innovations turn out to be in somerespect or otherñthen there may ensue the lifeanddeath struggle against seeingthe whole venture aborted by hostile takeovers, or crippling regulatory restraints,or outright suppression of its use by political authority.óas an example of tortured evolution of technology, david recounted thehistory of the book as a platform. it is a tale of long delays, significant technicaladvances in multiple fields, and strategic intervention by authorities.movable type was invented around 1440. but initially the gutenberg revolution transformed the reading habits of only elite european society, not themasses. it took more than two centuries for the first popular novelñpamela, bysamuel richardson (1740)ñto be printed, ushering in the era of books as massmedia, david said.there were difficulties concerning standards, concepts, and layout, and thebookõs ultimate form was shaped by its development under a set of monopolyprivileges that had nothing to do with authorship, but rather protected an industrythat was unstable because of high firstcopy costs, david said. predictably, themonopolists focused on the luxury market, packaging books with bindings andother expensive attributes. òin that sense, they delayed the development as a massmedium, which could have been developed at an earlier stage using graphics,ódavid said. ògraphics was available, and there was a market for it. cheap bookskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivewere available, too, but the market structure . . . that existed pushed it in adifferent direction.óthe evolution of printing hinged on technical progress in various trades;these advances set the stage for eventual exploitation of the small market that hadcreated the culture of the manuscript book. developments in the linen industryprovided an inexpensive paper medium, and advances in optics made readingglasses possible for the farsighted. the practice of metallurgy was affected aswell, because gutenbergõs invention essentially signaled a breakthrough infoundry work and processes, david said.finally, the venetian aristocracy promoted development of the printed bookby underwriting and financing the work, coping with related political problems,and using books for government publications. òthey developed the book togovern what was veniceõs growing empire, as an aid in that as well as in pursuitof a set of humanistic values which were embodied in the culture of the book,ódavid said.using the technologythe nature of the content and the delivery system will evolve more or lesstogether, in the context of the ways in which they are used. games and educationcapture two ends of the spectrum and yet are increasingly discussed as elementsof common applications.games, play, and lifethe growth in the popularity and profitability of electronic games has inspired interest from many quarters. indeed, cable industry moguls john maloneand ted turner have speculated publicly that games may be an ideal vehicle forencouraging consumers otherwise accustomed to passive television watching tobecome more interactive users of tv (lippman, 1993). a variety of entrepreneurs have begun to find business opportunities in the new means and mechanisms for play, providing striking echoes to the scholarly description by huizinga(1950):summing up the formal characteristics of play, we might call it a free activitystanding quite consciously outside òordinaryó life as being ònot serious,ó but atthe same time absorbing the player intensely and utterly. it is an activity connected with no material interest, and no profit can be gained by it. it proceedswithin its own proper boundaries of time and space according to fixed rules andin an orderly manner. it promotes the formation of social groupings which tendto surround themselves with secrecy and to stress their difference from thecommon world by disguise or other means. (p. 13)interactive games and services delivered over computer and other networkskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications57expand the potential beyond that offered by standalone game platforms. advanced information technologies allow individuals who have never met, who areseparated by thousands of miles, to get to know each other. for example, manystudents use the internet to participate in multiuser domains (muds), virtualcommunities that were designed initially as sophisticated roleplaying games.since the first mud program was written in 1980,19 several hundred similargames have been developed based on various concepts, such as the televisionprogram star trek: the next generation. researchers and scientists also arebecoming interested in these communities.as identity workshops for issues related to control and mastery, muds canserve a therapeutic purpose, according to sherry turkle, who called the phenomenon a òdeadly seriousó game world, òprecisely because they are not simpleescapes from the real to the unreal, but because theyõre betwixt and between,theyõre both in and not in real life.ó turkle has argued that a computer is like arorschach test20 in allowing for projections of the self, but that the computer goeseven further than a standard psychological test because it is part of daily life.extending this metaphor, virtual communities not only enter into daily life, butcan also become daily life, because unlike conventional games, they do not havean endpoint. explained turkle:the boundaries are more fuzzy. the routine of playing them becomes part oftheir playerõs real lives. such blurring of the boundaries between role and selfpresents new opportunities to use the role to work on the self, and not the leastof these is the opportunity to play an aspect of yourself that you embody as aseparate self in the game space.thus, virtual communities extend the potential value of roleplaying games byblurring the line between the game and the real world, she said.in the star trek mud, more than 1,000 players spend up to 80 hours a weekengaging in intergalactic exploration, creating new roles for themselves, andinteracting with others. a player explained the attraction of the game to turkle:you can be whoever you want to be, you can completely redefine yourself ifyou want. you can be the opposite sex. you can be more talkative. you canbe less talkative, whatever. you can just be whoever you want really, whoeveryou have the capacity to be. you donõt have to worry about the slots otherpeople put you into as much. itõs easier to change the way people perceive youbecause all they have is what you show them. they donõt look at your body andmake assumptions. they donõt hear your accent and make assumptions. allthey see is your words . . . .the situation is a little more complex, since through grammar and diction wordscan be quite revealing, yet there is evidence that at least among school childrenthe desire to present the best appearance to oneõs peers can promote greaterattention to writing skills (cstb, 1994b).the mud experience has transformed peter, an isolated physics graduatekeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivestudent whose life revolves around his work, turkle said. peter never has traveled. muds offer him an opportunity to interact with people, travel, and createan ideal self. òhis favorite mud is actually located on a computer in germany.he calls this travel. itõs from muds that peter has learned what he knows ofpolitics, economics, and the differences between capitalism and welfare statesocialism . . . the room [space] he inhabits on the mud is elegant, romantic, outof a ralph lauren advertisement. beyond expanding his social reach, mudshave brought peter the only intimacy and romance he has ever known.óin a larger cultural context, such role playing provokes examination of notonly individual identity, but also cultural identity. using muds, turkle said, ò. . . people are exploring, constructing, and reconstructing their identities. theyare rethinking social issues about gender, about privacy, about property, andabout what constitutes legitimate authority in a community.óthe muds, their parallels in computer group gaming, and virtual realitytechnologies doubtless provide a unique and invaluable laboratory for socialpsychologists. this utility comes at a price, however. unlike the withdrawal intothe interior, reflective world of the book, the new environments vastly amplifytheir effects. as systems become more refined, complex, and compelling, theirexplorers enter terra incognita. some of the less stable pioneers may becomeaddicted or, as biologists say, òlost to the gene pooló (oõneill, 1995). indeed,one incident that generated media and cyberspace attention involved the suicideof a young man who immersed himself in electronic network environments,environments that close observers maintained had sustained rather than alienatedhim.21 more recently, attention flowed to a situation in which network users wereable to mobilize assistance from afar to avert a suicide (bowles, 1994).turkle underscored how rich the concept of digital games really is:sometimes, this dismissive notion of òall theyõll do is play gamesó [ignores thefact that these are] a very serious and, in many ways, very constructive kind ofgame. . . . [what] iõm describing is a mixture of the creation of text, thecreation of literature, and programming. it really is the first best example thatiõve ever seen of [the] potential for an entertaining crossing of the twoculturedivide. people who are working in these worlds need to create objects with theprogramming language and also create text as they work. many of them arekids. they are learning by building objectsñtheyõre actually learning to construct and make thingsñwhich is the best way to learn. theyõre forming communities of people with whom they remain in contact, often breaking theiranonymity and finding another setting. so, if you allow this revolution to reachpeople, theyõre going to do what kids enjoy: at this point, what gives people joyis communicating with other people.the social dimension of interacting over a network and the combined entertainment and educational value of that interaction were recurring themes in late1994interviews with esther dyson, stephen case, samuel fuller, and david nagel.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications59for example, samuel fuller of digital equipment corporation commented on thevalue ofa distributed learning environment where a group of a dozen people could workon a topic, maybe moderated by a teacher, but where the content that is flowingback comes from asking questions or responding to other questions, so that theyas a group of a dozen people begin to learn about a topic.in addition, the individual and group interactions that take place over networkshave important secondary effects. observed nagel in another interview,you are seeing new cultures, new forms of journals or magazines, which aredevoted to a growing, and i think an avant garde, subculture of people whospend a lot of time in what they refer to as cyberspace. itõs becoming, in thesame way that mtv did a few years ago, . . . a general understanding among thegeneral population, even if they donõt participate in it. . . . the idea that itõs animportant phenomenon is becoming part of the popular culture.entertaining educationthe potential benefits of interactive multimedia in education are perhapsobvious, and colloquium participants were poetic about the possibilities. singer,who developed entertainment programming concepts for virtual reality, foreseesbreathtaking applications of this technology in education: òimagine taking a tripthrough the brain, for example, for a group of surgical students. a brain the sizeof a cathedral, in the presence of a master surgeon or a master teacher . . . .ó suchapplications could be all the more stunning in an electronic theater, he has noted.progress toward this vision is under way with release for access via the internet ofa threedimensional, computergenerated body produced by the national libraryof medicineõs visible human project (rsna, 1994). as paul david said, just asthe printing press has done, multimedia learning environments will òempowerindividuals, unlock worlds of knowledge, and forge a new community of ideas.ósee box 3.1 on the benefits of interactive media. publishers, news services, cablecompanies, software companies, and others have been experimenting with pcbased, online, and broadcast multimedia programming for education, with mixedsuccess.on a broader level, several participants emphasized the promise of longdistance learning, which could bring the best teachers and latest techniques toeven the poorest districts. the telephone and cable industries are involved ininteractive distance learning projects, as are various segments of the internetenvironment (state and regional networks, supercomputer centers, universities,and so on).22notebaert pointed to ameritech projects as illustrations of the potential. forexample, the superschool traveling demonstration model involves more than 30applications for education available through the public telecommunications netkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivebox 3.1 the benefits of interactive multimediasome interactive products permit the type of reflection and experimentationthat donald norman describes. a successful purveyor of this approach is thevoyager company, which has published electronic books, plays, and music oncdrom and movies on optical video disk. managing partner robert stein focuses on the òexperience that is developed for the reader or user in conjunction withthe author,ó rather than on the nature of the medium.interactive multimedia offers a number of advantages over conventional media,according to stein:¥it allows the user to experience history. voyagerõs cdrom version of au.s. history book adds approximately 5,000 original documents to the basic text,along with audio, video, and animated graphics. history books are essentially afilter of the authorõs analysis of original documents, stein said, whereas cdromprovides for a dialogue with the author and òallows the reader to become muchmore of a participant in the process of history.ó of course, cdrom does noteliminate biases.¥it can further understanding of cinematic history. voyagerõs optical diskversion of the beatlesõ movie a hard dayõs night contains added material such asfilm outtakes, script excerpts, background information on songs, and profiles of thecast and crew.¥it can attract a new audience to an old art form. voyagerõs interactive version of macbeth allows the user to play a chosen characterõs role, a karaoke feature that could make shakespeareõs play come alive for reluctant readers. similarly, a cd companion to beethovenõs symphony no. 9 allows music students toexperience and learn by òbrowsingó through the composition, repeating sectionsas desired and calling up information about particular instruments.work, including distance learning classes between the united states and themontreal world trade center, a usercontrolled weather laboratory featuring athunderstorm simulation, a computersimulated voyage through the human body,and a homework hotline.23 another project, thinklink, connects the classroomsof 115 michigan fourthgraders to their home television sets via fiberopticcables.24 ameritech has an agreement with the school district to procure programming, schedule it, and package it; local teachers select the programs, such asa drama series on solving math problems (ameritech, 1993a).25 observednotebaert, òitõs hard for me to accept the fact that children go to school today ina 19thcentury classroom and then go home to music television (mtv), which ithink is far more entertaining and educational, although on the wrong end.óexpanding on that concern, donald norman, a cognitive scientist who is anapple fellow, warned that the mtv model is not entirely appropriate for education, in that television programming and advertisements are divided into verysmall segments so as to retain viewersõ attention. òthe experiential mode ofthinking that this creates, i think, is the opposite of the reflective mode, which iskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications61what is required for new thoughts. what i am afraid of, as we merge theseindustries, is that this fun and enjoyment of the experiential mode might tend todominate and take over from the reflective mode,ó he said. the ease with whichmultimedia can incorporate recreation and fun into educational material is wellestablished, but that capability may not be an unequivocal benefit. educationalapplications should be longer term and deeper in substance than entertainmentapplications.òmtv is a good model for the entertainment industry, but school isnõt meantto be entertaining; itõs meant to be educational, profound, and deep,ó normansaid. òitõs meant to allow people to reflect and to experiment.ó betõs johnsonpointed out that òedutainmentó is not newñthere were occasional instances in1950s and 1960s television programmingñbut that the new media are fosteringmore of this kind of programming. norman explained that what is at issue is howcapabilities presented by new technologies are selected and used:this is not really a statement for or against technology. this is a statementabout the ease of doing something with one technology that may drive out otherthings. we know that we can create technologies that lead to reflection and wesaw a wonderful example at the prior lunch demonstrations. robert winterõsdemonstration of a music program, which allows you to reflect, to compare, toplay this segment of music and play that segment of music and go back andforth and compare and contrast them, and to count the rhythms and watch thescore and to read an analysis is a kind of reflective medium that comes out ofthat technology. what iõm trying to argue for is that when we develop ourtechnologies, we worry a lot about what they make possible, whether it is easyto do and whether it is hard to do. what iõm afraid of is that we will be tooeasily driven to a machinecentered view and to this experiential view.several speakers argued that, if distance learning is to be successful, entirelynew approaches must be developed. notebaert explained that new media drivethe need for new approaches: òwe are currently working with indiana universityin teaching distance learning in indiana. the professors that are doing the coursedevelopment, the curriculum, have had to go back to school using what theentertainment industry already knows and redefine the content and the methodology for delivering the content in this different medium.ó this teaching methodcan have a remarkable effect, he said. òeach student is then able to interact at hisor her own pace and own speed, so those kids that normally would have beencalled hyperactive, all of a sudden we find being different individuals,ó he said.similar explorations are being applied to adult education and (re)training.26another factor creating a need for new networks may be the increasingemphasis on visual material. in a late1994 interview, janice obuchowski explained,people are reacting much more to the visual than to the textual. you see that inthe declining readership of newspapers. that is very much a generational thing. . . . in fact, iõve heard it said that video has become the language of the home.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivethatõs going to present a real challenge to teachers. theyõre going to need tocommunicate more visually. at the same time, theyõre going to have to persuade their students that thereõs still some value in something other than thatmore rightbrained visual response. to make it in a highly competitive worldeconomy, you have to be analytical, you have to be literate, you have to benumerate and some of that doesnõt get learned just visually.despite the emergence of the technical capabilities, however, it is not clearwhether they will necessarily resolve the motivational issues that underlie reflection and learningñand that drive the markets for the goods and services thatembody these capabilities. educational experts have noted, for example, that thesupply of good software and other content materi”l for computer and communicationsbased education remains limitedñthere are lots of products, but the quality is often disappointing. moreover, the relatively limited penetration of personal computers into both homes and schools and the difficulties experienced byeducators in incorporating computer and communicationsbased technologiesinto schools underscore the fact that a range of financial, cultural, programmatic,administrative, and technical hurdles must be overcome for these technologies toachieve the potential envisioned by gilder and others (cstb, 1994b). as johnsonobserved, the profit remains in the business market, which serves sophisticatedcustomers willing and able to pay for new technologies; the pace of implementation in education will continue to be slow, reflecting the existing technology baseand limited availability of funds.winter of ucla, who developed the beethoven cd with stein, was enthusiastic about the new technology, asserting that, while education is indeed amatter for òserious, profound, and deeply appropriateó work, it is also true thatchildren learn by having fun. the traditional method of teaching novices to readmusic is about as captivating as giving a beginning swimmer òa lecture on fluiddynamics,ó winter said.winterõs goal is to attract new customers, òpeople who absolutely hated highculture, who hated beethoven. . . . i think this technology, in a sense, is a way ofgetting new customers for whatever youõre doing . . . . weõre hearing beethovenor stravinsky or dvorak or anybodyõs music in ways they couldnõt hear it.ónotes1.samuel fuller, digital equipment corporation, late1994 interview, characterizing a late1993 new product line launch.2.a doctor can fill out a generic insurance form, for example, which the softwaretranslates into the particular form required by the patientõs insurance company. thesystem is expected to improve patient care and to reduce paperwork generation and administrative training needs. administrative costs have been reduced by over 19 percent,according to notebaert. information concerning whin was drawn from notebaertõspresentation at the colloquium as well as ameritech (1993b,d).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.societal implications633.the cable television industry also is involved in the health care arena. forinstance, nursing students and faculty members in idaho can watch live surgery underway at a local clinic on a cable system originally designed to broadcast college basketballgames; the students also can ask questions of the operating team. see ncta (1993b).4.approximately 800 hours of cinema production compare to some 8,000 hoursof television production in hollywood (flaherty, 1993).5.reed reference publishing, new providence, new jersey, personal communication, november 8, 1993.6.some research has provided examples of tvlinked increases in violence(kristol, 1994).7.this concern must be considered within the current context of extremeintergenerational conflict. while it always has been true that the primary injunction foryounger generations seems to be to agitate and defy the establishment, contemporaryvariations on this theme suddenly make the game meanerspirited (imagine interactiveògangster rapó) and oddly disquieting. the cacophony not only has turned nasty but alsosuggests a questioning of values hardly seen since the years of the flower children and thevietnam war. for instance, a popular rap song encourages murder of the police; asyndicated cartoon show, beavis and butthead, has incited mimetic behavior resulting insuicidal arson and delivers its enormously popular message in a form seemingly òdumbeddownó to witlessness; and within a twoweek period the three major television networksbroadcast competing versions of the same murderous teenaged sexpotõs òreal lifeó story.the principal changes in moral values and particularly in pop culture across the last halfcentury may be less fundamental than the result of a confluence of symbiotic phenomena.these phenomena are readily identifiable. also consider the very real cultural chasmbetween age groups. the propensity of successively younger age cohorts to live increasingly in electronic environments accentuates the erosion of cross contact between agegroups: 12yearolds cannot make contact with 16yearolds, who have little in commonwith 20yearolds. clearly, the familiar 25year generation separation is splintering intoshortened cycles of generational change, reflecting the shortened cycle of technologydevelopment. older forms of expression are beleaguered and seem illsuited to the times.the discourse sometimes seems to be in an unfamiliar tongue, given the profound impending cognitive change in the way humans think about and use language (see lanham,1993).8.see schwartz (1993); cstb (1994c).9.the material in this and the next paragraph was drawn from alexander singer,personal communications, february 1994.10.in march 1995 st. martin (caribbean)based internet casinos inc. announcedplans to launch a casino accessible through the world wide web by mid1995 (iisr,1995).11.video game cartridges will be rated by the interactive digital software association, and pc software and cdrom games will be rated by the software publishersassociation (farhi, 1994).12.at the major computer trade show comdex in 1993, hundreds of new softwaretitles were on display, moving beyond early generation of reference books to includechildrenõs games and xrated items. òone japanese computer dealer, who asked that hisname not be used, said it appears that pornography may be the longawaited ôkillerõapplication that will spur the sale of cdrom drivesó (lewis, 1993a).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveòôin the privacy of their own home, people will try things and do things that theywould never be caught dead going to an adult bookstore for,õ said howard rheingold,author of virtual communityó (garreau, 1993). interactive entertainment over a networkhas unique properties: òcomputer sex has obvious similarities to 900number phone sex,not to mention magazine sex. but this new medium is also quite different. after all,these are real people finding each other in cyberspace, not a paying customer calling aprofessional.ó13.there are several legal issues associated with the evolving national informationinfrastructure (nii), such as privacy, security, free speech, and intellectual property rights.considerable attention was paid to these issues in 1994, through the administrationõsinformation infrastructure task force and its information policy committee and throughcongressional hearings.14.disney, for example, is noted as recognizing the value of its copyrights forcreative content as a critical asset, one giving it relatively high levels of flexibility; seeturner and king (1993).15.personal communication with minna taylor, fox broadcasting company, october 10, 1994.16.see dreier (1993); dreier is department head at the max planck institute forforeign and international patent, copyright and competition law in munich.17.alex singer, personal communications, february 1994.18.this analogy is drawn from kapor (1993).19.a brief history of muds can be found in kelly and rheingold (1993).20.the rorschach test, named for swiss psychiatrist hermann rorschach, is apersonality and intelligence test in which a subject interprets inkblots.21.ò[nathaniel davenportõs father] eventually understood how some people havefound something so compelling in this online computer world that they have all butpulled up stakes and moved into cyberspace, paying little attention to what most of therest of us think of as real life. and in the end, davenport came to believe three things:that computers did not kill his son. that he had not known his son. and that his son hadbeen a bold and gifted pioneer in something exciting and creative and scary and cool, astillfurtive revolution in art and expression . . .ó (schwartz, 1994).22.an extensive listing of cable projects, including those related to the òcable inthe classroomó initiative, may be found in ncta (1993c).23.the applications have been used by students in washington, d.c., and thegreat lakes region (ameritech, 1992, 1993f).24.the system is based on the òvideo dialtoneó concept. a switch in the neighborhood telephone center feeds signals between the homes and the two schools; televisions and computers are connected to data sources by highspeed telephone lines. thesystem includes a settop box and special remote control unit and òmouseó pointingdevice.25.sixtyseven percent of the homes accessed the thinklink system at least 20times during a twoweek sample period; parents indicated the material not only has enhanced their childõs learning but also has allowed them to be more involved. seeameritech (1993a,d) and lashinsky (1993).26.in work settings, electronic training systems involve virtualizing tasks withintensive use of simulation, and providing justintime knowledge and learning systems(including groupware) to frontline workers (perelman, 1993).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.654promoting competitiveness:policy issues and obstaclesdigital convergence introduces new problems into the ongoing debates overinternational competitiveness, telecommunications policy reform, and the evolution of the information infrastructure. policymakers are challenged to balancethe different priorities, national interests, and legal and regulatory traditions ofthe telecommunications, computer, and entertainment industries. at the sametime, there is pressure on government to actñboth to relax existing laws andrules and to enact new onesñbecause information technologies are evolvingmore rapidly than ever before.central to the policy debate are the prospects for an enhanced informationinfrastructure, which galvanized private and publicsector attention during 19931994.1 legislative efforts during that period constituted the first major attemptsince passage of the communications act of 1934 to alter the goals and frameworks for state and federal regulation and the constraints on business entry bycommon carriers provided by the communications act of 1934 and the modifiedfinal judgment codifying the breakup of at&t.2 although telecommunicationsreform legislation failed to pass in 1994, new legislation was introduced in 1995.contention about the specifics suggests that whatever legislation does pass willlaunch a process in which various parties will seek to fix and finetune thoseaspects that affect them.3developments over the ensuing months indicate that comments at thecolloquium were symptomatic of the kinds of concerns being expressed in multiple forums. they reflect the political process that has driven legislative effortsto overhaul the legal and regulatory framework for telecommunications. forexample, samuel ginn, speaking then as the head of a regulated common carrierkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive(pacific telesis), was perhaps the most forceful in criticizing the constraints ontelecommunications firms, contending that òpublic policy and regulatory policieswill be the most significant factor in determining whether these kinds of servicescan be made available to the public, not technology.ó ginn asserted that publicpolicy and regulation will be the most important factorñand one of the toughestchallengesñin making advanced information services available to all. similarly,ameritechõs richard notebaert said government policy is the òmajor speed bumpóinhibiting the application of technology to solve societal ills. beneath thesegeneral statements lie concerns about the mechanisms (e.g., delays and uncertainties associated with multiyear proceedings) as well as the objects (e.g., ability toenter certain markets, terms of participation in certain markets, and pricing constraints) of regulation. those concerns were aired universally in a series of late1994 interviews (appendix c lists those interviewed), suggesting that between1993 and 1995 both interest in market entry and concern about constraints hadgrown among the various players in the digital convergence arena.despite concerns about the impact of regulation on the cost and profitabilityof a given investment, comments by several participants suggest a broad recognition that absent government intervention, the owners of key capabilities controltiming and access. thus ginn observed, òitõs not clear to me, given the way themarkets are developing, that there is an opportunity here to serve all elements ofsociety unless you have intervention in terms of social policy.óthe proliferation of public interest advocacy groups in the 19931994 periodattests to a broadening concern about how the public policy agenda for information infrastructure is being set and how various objectives are weighted whendecisions are made. yet another face on this concern was provided by the changein the congress with the 1994 elections. this process of politicization alsoreflects a recognition that the distribution of benefits from digital convergencewill vary over time: costs come down and access can broaden over the long term.the question raised by public interest advocates is, how long will and should bethe wait for mass access to technologyõs benefits? the question emphasized bybusiness is, who pays to direct or accelerate receipt of benefits that do not derivedirectly and naturally from the evolution of various markets?international competitivenessbecause of leadership in the fundamental markets associated with it, digitalconvergence, in the judgment of the colloquium steering committee and otherobservers, should contribute significantly to the economy and international competitiveness of the united states. u.s. companies lead the world in most aspectsof computing and communications technology and entertainment programming;in addition, innovationstimulating market competition is more prevalent in theunited states than in rival nations, and english increasingly is becoming theinternational language of commerce and entertainment (memmott and maney,keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles671993). david nagel asserted that, despite recent erosion of u.s. dominance incomputers, òitõs clear still that nearly all of the interesting innovations, both incomputing and in telecommunications, are being driven in the u.s. industrialbase.ó whether this dominance is sustainable, nagel said, depends on whetheru.s. firms have learned the lessons of the past and can apply and profit from theirown innovations.entertainment adds a new and unknown variable to the mix: it is seen as asource of economic benefit to its purveyors, but unlike computing and communications tends not to be seen as an òintermediate goodó or vehicle to broaderbenefit except as an item of mass consumption. there are therefore more assumptions than facts when it comes to assessing entertainmentõs contributions tocompetitiveness. in a late1994 interview, peter cowhey, formerly a professor ofinternational relations and political science at the university of california at sandiego, noted that entertainment products are receiving more attention in tradepolicy, with leaders in some countries showing growing concern about the prevalence and impact of u.s.originated programming. it may require explicit action,he suggests, to point out and ensure that the expanding, advancing global information infrastructure will provide capacity for distributing cultural outputs fromeveryoneñit is not an exclusive vehicle for distributing u.s. content, althoughglobal distribution outlets (of which music television may be a crude forerunner)are likely to emerge, and it broadens the market for cultural outputs generally(i.e., it makes the pie larger).a sister issue, notes cowhey, is the issue of ownership of media. currentu.s. policy restricts foreign ownership of broadcast media to 25 percent,4 andsome countries are introducing reciprocal restrictions or program quotas to limitu.s. entry, in particular.the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia)also warned in a 1993 report that the united states òcannot afford to be complacent about the success of u.s. media firms in international markets. recentregulatory and technological changes require u.s. policy makers to continue toadapt in order to promote the development of international mass media marketsthat are open and competitiveñthe type of markets in which u.s. firms historically prosperó (ntia, 1993). the ntia made a series of recommendationsdesigned to foster economic growth in the mass media industry, not only in theunited states but alsoñbecause of the global nature of the industryñworldwide.the united states has provided fertile ground for development and application of a number of services that provide a working foundationñin the form ofcorporate learning and consumer familiarity and expectationsñfor digital convergence. as michael borrus has argued, technical progress depends on aneconomyõs potential for òlearning by doing and by usingó (borrus, 1993). seebox 4.1. use of digital technologies has not only benefited organizations andindividuals within the united states, but has also provided the basis for thedevelopment of global enterprise, including global service industries that tap andkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivedeliver knowledge and talent wherever it resides or is needed (cstb, 1992,1994a). this phenomenon has itself resulted in a refocusing of trade policy andtrade negotiations on trade in and conditions for service industries as opposed tophysical product or commodity distribution. cowhey remarked on these developments in a late1994 interview:digital technology made it possible to start thinking about global service enterprises. . . . a bank in cleveland can be a bank in tokyo. so the digitalrevolution allowed services to imagine themselves to be global enterprises, andnow the trade negotiators are starting to say that means we have to integrate andliberalize these markets and bring them together. a second great revolution isthat trade negotiators are now tackling the problem of foreign investment rights,and starting to bring some notion of what are minimum rights of foreign investment. and in turn that means that these hightechnology enterprises start to beable to define the fact that yes, i can go to my customers, and yes, i can find away of bringing my technologies to bear in your market by being on the groundand seeing what people need.box 4.1 contributions of businessorientednetworkbased servicesseveral successful, highly profitable online services (legal, financial, and medical) serve professionals and specific industries (e.g., computerized reservationsystems (crss) in air transport). crss have dramatically improved the efficiency,speed, and effectiveness with which travel agents can make and change reservations, and they have improved load and resource management for the airlines.they are also increasingly accessible to individual consumers for direct reservation transactions.800number services now generate about $10 billion per year for telecommunications companies; they constitute a major portion of longdistance telephone network traffic during certain hours, are profitable, and are growing. almost everyoneuses them to make reservations, to order merchandise, and to contact the customer service organizations of providers of goods and services. 900number services,which tend to be more entertainmentoriented, are also a large and profitable business, as are automated voice response systems.all of these information systems are enabled by the convergence of computersand communications, and sometimes entertainment as well: the customized callprocessing in 800number service is enabled by complex computer systems; interactive voice response systems (for inquiries about an account, to change investment options in a 401(k) account, to issue a buy or sell order for securities, and soon) involve consumer use of touchtone pads to communicate upward to a server,which communicates downward with synthetic speech. although these systemsuse a different set of multiple media, they are completely analogous to using akeyboard on a terminal to communicate upward, and the display on the terminal tocommunicate downward from the server. the apparently large and growing economic impact of these online services provides a basis for expecting growth inother services combining various computer and communicationsbased media.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles69cowhey noted that the large and diverse installed computing base has led toan artificially large u.s. lead in digital convergence.5 he observed that it isreasonable to expect greater diffusionñand associated benefitsñof personalcomputers and other systems in at least the industrial nations. moreoever, explained fuller in another interview, òby its very nature, an information utility oran internetwork will be global as well as national in scale, and issues of geography will become less important.ó as cowhey noted, the 19931994 public statements of president clinton and vice president gore focused attention on information infrastructure across the industrialized world, making it folly to assumethat only the united states would place emphasis in that area. indeed, the òg7óindustrial countries held their first ministerial summit devoted to a single industrywhen the european union hosted the february 1995 òg7 ministerial conferenceon the information society.ó the european union particularly championed theevent in order to build political support for european regulatory reforms necessary to catch up with the united states. box 4.2 lists 11 multinational pilotprojects agreed upon at the g7 summit, which also resulted in agreement onseveral highlevel principles:6¥promoting fair competition;¥encouraging private investment;¥defining an adaptable regulatory framework; and¥providing open access to networks while¥ensuring universal provision of and access to services;¥promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;¥promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity;and¥recognizing the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular attention to less developed countries.european nations have recently moved to launch their own videoondemandtrials, often drawing on u.s. technology. the cable television business is moreadvanced in the united states than elsewhere: u.s. firms are supplying cableequipment and programming worldwide. further, as george gilder observed,òno other country in the world has broadband connections to 60 percent of homesor passing 90 percent of its homes.ó although there have been publicized instances of highlevel capabilities in specific locations overseas, the actual average capability available to almost all households appears higher in the unitedstates than elsewhere. on the other hand, foreign suppliers of consumer andother electronics, such as thomson consumer electronics, are a significant presence in the u.s. market. although slower european progress has been attributedto the high cost of installing highbandwidth communications facilities, advancesin data compression and other technologies for more fully exploiting copper wireand advances in computer systems have been cited as encouraging europeankeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivebox 4.2 g7 project matrixtheme areamain project objectiveglobal inventoryto create and provide an electronically accessiblemultimedia inventory of information regarding majornational and international projects and studiesrelevant to the promotion and the development ofthe global information society. an assessment ofsocial, economic, and cultural factors impacting onits development will also be undertaken.global interoperabilityto facilitate the establishment of international linksfor broadband networksbetween the various highspeed networks andtestbeds supporting advanced applications.crossculturalto provide innovative approaches to languageeducation and traininglearning, in particular for students and for small andmedium enterprises.electronic librariesto constitute from existing digitization programs alarge distributed virtual collection of the knowledgeof mankind, available to the public via networks.this includes a clear perspective toward theestablishment of a global electronic library networkthat interconnects local electronic libraries.electronic museumsto accelerate the multimedia digitization ofand galleriescollections and to ensure their accessibility to thepublic and as a learning resource for schools anduniversities.environment and naturalto increase the electronic linkage and integration ofresources managementdistributed databases of information relevant to theenvironment.efforts. moreover, cellular telephony has spread relatively rapidly in europe,aided in part by agreement on a supporting standard (gsm).tempering the discussion of competitive advantage and disadvantage, borrussuggested that evolving international business relationships may become morecomplex and cooperative. he noted that the united states controls the òsoftó sideof the electronics industryñfrom design, architecture, and marketing to softwareand systems integrationñbut that key hardware technology and manufacturingactivities have been migrating to asia. òno one geographic region, and certainlyno individual company, has all of the necessary knowhow to develop this nextgeneration of electronic systems,ó borrus said. yet the persistence of u.s. leadership in software and u.s. reliance on offshore manufacturing raise questionskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles71about what trends and indicators are most reliable. moreover, it may be thatdigital convergence represents an opportunity to reclaim areas lost to foreigncompetitors, such as consumer electronics, to the extent that such areas becomemore computerlike.eli noam has said that international asymmetries hamper the global systemof systems, which will function effectively only if it is competitive at each stage,and if regulation establishes nondiscrimination. at present, the information infrastructure stands at uneven levels of development in technology and policyacross the globe; most countries still have an established monopoly communications provider, and outside of the united states monopoly remains the dominantcommunications paradigm. government policies and limited competition abroadglobal emergencyto encourage the development of a globalmanagementmanagement information network to enhance themanagement of emergency response situations,risks, and knowledge.global health careto demonstrate the potential of òtelematicsóapplicationstechnologies in the field of telemedicine in the fightagainst major health scourges; to promote jointapproaches to issues such as the use of data cards,standards, and other enabling mechanisms.government onlineto exchange examples of experience and òbestpracticeó in the use of online information technologyby administrations in establishing procedures forconducting electronic administrative businessbetween governments, companies, and citizens.global marketplace forto contribute to the development of an environmentsmall and mediumfor open and nondiscriminatory exchange ofenterprisesinformation and to demonstrate the interoperability ofelectronic and information cooperation and tradingservices on a global scale for the benefit of smalland medium enterprises.maritime informationto integrate and enhance environmental protectionsystemsand industrial competitiveness for all maritimeactivities by means of information andcommunication technologies, including applicationsin the area of safety and the environment, intelligentmanufacturing, and logistics networks.source: matrix reproduced from a document found on the world wide web athttp://www.ispo.cec.be (ec information society project office webserver) underg7 information society conference category and key documents subcategory.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivemay be a greater impediment than available technology; certainly, those factorshave limited both deployment and experimentation with computing and communications technologies in the past, to a far greater extent than have policies in theunited states. telecommunications reform is emerging in many countries(hudson, 1994; lavin, 1995), and considerable discussion has surfaced over thedesirability of more marketoriented regimes (bangemann et al., 1994).in a late1994 interview, cowhey seemed to anticipate the 1995 òg7 ministerial conference on the information societyó by describing the importance ofpolicy relating to broad social objectives as a factor in the international competitiveness dynamic:now europe, for example, has been very strong in emphasizing public servicethrough the digital technologies, but theyõve been weaker on benefiting fromcompetition, and theyõre trying to change their mix today. and if the europeans get the mix right and we donõt, then they may become the model for the restof the world. . . . the united states has to show that this digital revolution doesspeak to larger concerns about making schools work, making hospitals work,and making it possible for people to share in the benefits of information technology, not just in new york, and washington, d.c., and london, and tokyo,but also in the many poorer countries of the world.borrus also pointed to the need to address international asymmetries in technology access. he has warned that the u.s. supply base is likely to be moreaccessible to foreign rivals than is the japanese market, and that software skillsand technology can be appropriated more easily than can manufacturing components and expertise (borrus, 1993). borrus outlined the problem of how to assureequitable access to both u.s. and foreign companies. it is easy to invest in a u.s.company and thereby gain access to knowhow,7 but very difficult to gain similaraccess to a japanese company, for example. the japanese have discriminatorypublic procurement policies (coc, 1993), and their keiretsu system of businessalliances establishes preferential sales, supply, and capital allocation arrangements that impede market access by new entrants.8 also, there are far fewerpublicly held companies in japan (2,000 as of 1987) than in the united states(24,000; gerlach, 1992). borrus anticipated a shift in u.s. trade policy to dealwith the access problem. experiences in the semiconductor arena illustrate thepossibilities; see box 4.3. in pursuing open markets worldwide as a trade policyobjective, suggests cowhey, the united states must attend to concerns in othercountries that they not open their markets at a point in time when the unitedstates appears to be closing its own.another, more perplexing problem, according to borrus, is to identify theforeign technologies and knowhow that should reside in the united states, and tofind ways of moving them here. an example is flat panel displays, used inapplications such as laptop computers. flat panel displays were invented in theunited states over 35 years ago, but japanese companies now control over 95percent of the burgeoning $3.5 billion market and outspend u.s. firms on displaykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles73research by more than 20 to 1. various means have been explored for strengthening the u.s. base in display technologies. òdumpingó duties were imposed onimported japanese displays in 1991, but that trade policy has had mixed results.the advanced research projects agency launched a research initiative to promote innovation. a broader approach may be called for. however, the republican congressional leadership has expressed strong doubts about such programs,worrying that they constitute little more than subsidies for large electronics firms.symmetrical international access to technologyñincluding increased u.s.access to certain technologiesñwill not emerge unaided. there is no unanimityon the precise mix of policy. for example, gilder has criticized the semiconductor agreement praised by borrus. but borrus captured the terms of the policydiscussion when he wrote that trading blocs need ò(1) to agree on a set of principles that endorse reciprocal access to regional markets, investment opportunities, and supply base technologies; (2) to negotiate for tangible results that mitigate the disruptive impacts of domestic practices that violate agreed norms ofbehavior; and (3) to develop new multilateral institutions for coordinating bilateral regional movesó (borrus, 1993).cowhey has noted that trade pacts have limited effect, in part because somuch of world commerce is now determined by investment flows and globalproduction strategies of multinational firms. this has heightened the importancebox 4.3 semiconductors and trade policythe united states relies on foreign suppliers for some computer hardware components, such as dynamic randomaccess memory (dram) computer chips.* thesemiconductor chip was invented some 30 years ago in the united states, but inthe mid1980s japan gained a majority share of the global semiconductor market,and u.s. companies were virtually eliminated from the critical dram market due tojapanõs system of industrial organization and its dumping (belowcost sales) ofchips in the u.s. market (coc, 1993; cowhey and aronson, 1993). in the u.s.japan semiconductor arrangement of 1986 (renewed in 1991), japan pledged toprevent dumping, to help u.s suppliers gain access to its markets, and that u.s.firms would have 20 percent of the japanese chip market by 1991. in addition, theu.s. government and industry cooperated to form the research consortiumsematech. both of these approaches have had some success, and by the endof 1992 the united states had regained its leadership in the global semiconductormarket, and japanese firms were moving some of their production overseas (coc,1993; cowhey and aronson, 1993).*see borrus (1993) for an accounting of gaps in the u.s. technology supply architecture for components and u.s. dependence on foreign semiconductor equipment and materials.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveof emerging industrial alliances in international competition. for example, ibmcorporation has established a joint factory with japanõs toshiba using the latterõsliquid crystal display technology, and the two companies are working with siemens of germany to develop an advanced (256megabit) dynamic randomaccess memory (dram) chip (cowhey and aronson, 1993). of particular significance is the location of development teams at ibmõs facilities in new yorkstate. such alliances permit the development of common, global infrastructuresfor technology development and allow firms to reduce the costs and risks ofproducing extensive product lines, cowhey has noted (cowhey and aronson,1993). national technology and trade policies, especially those for the information infrastructure, have to be evaluated in light of their impact on these alliancesbecause much of the worldõs information infrastructure will be developed bysuch alliances.how to design policies to stimulate innovation and promote competitivenessremains a subject of contention. a council on competitiveness project recentlyconcluded that, if policymakers determine that u.s. development of a certaintechnology is in the national interest, òthen they must create an integrated, systematic approach to the industry which includes capital market reform, the establishment of consortia, [and] support for the underlying technology infrastructure,along with trade policyó (coc, 1993). that report argues that policies to stimulate technological innovation in the united states are a necessary complement totrade policy.unfortunately, achieving an integrated, systematic approach is elusive. experience in economics and industry suggests that chaos and conflicting efforts dobetter. the highdefinition television (hdtv) situation, subject to a variety ofinterpretations, is a case in point. see box 4.4.one area where there appears to be consensus on the need for governmentaction is international aspects of intellectual property protection, a source ofgrowing concern as the information infrastructure becomes more global. thefederal government has recognized the need for stronger intellectual propertylaws worldwide and in recent years has promoted international standards in thisarea. for example, the united states joined the berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works9 and has bargained with other countriesthrough the general agreement on tariffs and trade and other regional andbilateral negotiations. since digital transmissions are increasingly global, andsince our evolving national information infrastructure is effectively part of aglobal information infrastructure, some mechanisms will be needed to handle theproblem of differences among countries as to what constitutes a copyright infringement. for example, the concept of a parody as a fair use does not exist inall countries.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles75box 4.4 highdefinition television: a case studythe united states was a late entry in the highdefinition television (hdtv) arena. research on hdtv was initiated in the 1960s in japan, where the first hdtvtransmissions and primetime programming were offered (coc, 1993). even inthe late 1980s, the conventional wisdom was that an analog hdtv standard wouldbe pursued, until general instrument corporation demonstrated the potential for adigital approach (general instrument unveiled the first alldigital system in 1990).that development encouraged constructive engagement by the federal communications commission (fcc),* which established an industryled and industryfunded advisory committee to evaluate competing hdtv standards (coc, 1993).the japanese standard was disadvantaged by the fccõs decision to try to gethdtv into 6mhz channels to make it easier for the established broadcasters,earlier lukewarm toward hdtv, to play.the fccõs standards advisory committee began evaluating hdtv systems in1991; in 1993, japanõs system, acknowledged as inferior to the digital systems,was pulled from the competition, and the european community indicated that itprobably would adopt the u.s standard (coc, 1993). the three remaining electronics teams in the contest announced they would collaborate to produce a standard system (coc, 1993).the saga of hdtv illustrates that government action may be perceived in different ways. the program on digital open high resolution systems at the massachusetts institute of technology has outlined two views of hdtv standards development.** the industry view is that the government refrained from eithersubsidizing or designing hdtv technology, acting merely as an arbitrator in industrial development. the alternate view is that the innovative u.s. proposals derivefrom a governmentindustry partnership, in which agencies such as the department of defense*** support academic and other private research on underlyingtechnologies, such as image compression, highspeed computing, communications, encryption, flat panel displays, and viewer requirements. relatively smallu.s. governmental research investments in fundamental computing and communications technologies have had large payoffs in the form of u.s. industry and competitive advantage (cstb, 1995).*for example, the fcc established the standards evaluation group, required thathdtv transmissions be compatible with existing television systems, and developed a timetable for the selection of a standard (without allocating new spectrum,thereby motivating video compression research). such actions stimulated the private sector to attain world leadership in underlying technologies, such as digitaltransmission (coc, 1993).**òamericaõs approach to hdtv: a governmentindustry success story,ó a paperprepared in may 1993 by the mit program on digital open high resolution systems (dohrs) for rep. george brown (dca), then chair of the house space,science, and technology committee.***over a fouryear period, the [defense] advanced research projects agencyfunded close to $300 million in research and development of highresolution videodisplay, digital signal processing, and data compression technologies (coc,1993).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivepublicprivate tensions andthe information infrastructurethe tension between cultivating an integrated approach and leveraging theunexpected fruits of competition and some degree of market chaos is epitomizedby policy debates relating to the evolving information infrastructure.an overview of the u.s. approach to managing digital convergence wasprovided by cowhey. the forces driving the domestic market are the pursuit ofprofit, political opportunity, longstanding industrial and technological structures,and cultural values, he said.essentially, the american bet has been to ride the back of the rise of distributedintelligence and processing power, to break apart the traditional hierarchicaltelecommunications networks, to distribute computing power, and to open upnew types of software avenues.that, in turn, led to a regulatory policy emphasis upon rewarding new entrantsin the market as a policy priority, emphasizing cost cuttingñnot just simplybecause lower costs and lower prices are nice, but because it encourages growing use of the communications network. because use is sensitive to price,lower prices have encouraged users to experiment with new ways to use newinformation services [and] new ways of getting interaction among these competing computer and communications technologies. much of the most important innovation comes from users, not producers, and this has proven a majorcompetitive advantage for the united states.regulatory policy has also emphasized the idea that weõll accept fragmentationamong the different pieces of the industry, although today weõre all trying totalk to each other across these market segments. what we have to recognize isthat one of the curses of americaõs experimentation is that fragmentation of theindustrial structure makes it very hard to get technical cooperation in a poolingof efforts.but foreign rivals have their own difficulties, cowhey said. europeans haveencouraged technical cooperation among producers to achieve early integrationof knowledge and effort. they have discouraged new entrants in the market andhave not encouraged price cutting. the growth of interactive information industries is constrained by the slow changes in pricing and service practices of thetelephone companies, and hardware development is sluggish because networksare providing the wrong types of incentives. japan, meanwhile, has introducedsome competition into its telecommunications industry, but the new telecommunications carriers are owned by equipment suppliers and, to some extent, by theirlarge corporate customers. moreover, public policy still tilts toward subsidizingequipment suppliers at the expense of users. and regulators have not allowed thedominant telephone companies to get into cable television.10 but even this barrier may fall, as bell atlantic corporationõs progress in pursuing judicial andkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles77regulatory authorization to offer commercial video programming over its telephone distribution system attests (landler, 1995; carnevale, 1994).òweõre living through a great moment of experimentation here, and part ofour problem in making public policy is that itõs not selfevident which bet isright,ó cowhey said. both the european union and japan decided in 1994 thattheir approaches had to change. the european union required the introduction ofcompetition in voice telephone services by 1998. japan reformulated manyregulations that had hindered competition and actively debated breaking up ntt,its dominant phone company.the united states also wrestled with changes in 1995. it was trying onceagain to legislate permission to allow the regional bell operating companies,cable systems, and longdistance carriers to enter each otherõs markets. it alsopromised (in a speech by vice president gore at the 1995 summit of the g7) toremove the 25 percent limit on foreign ownership of spectrum, a limit that theforeign firms cited as a bar on their market access to the united states. the vicepresident promised to achieve this goal by either legislation or regulation by theend of 1995. the one condition was that restrictions on foreign investment wouldbe removed only for countries that liberalize their own markets. in short, this wasan offer to liberalize on a bilateral basis with likeminded countries.the same speech by the vice president affirmed an even more sweepinggoal, that is, success in the general agreement on trade in services (gats)trade negotiations on liberalizing basic (i.e., voice) telecommunications servicesscheduled to conclude by april 1996. if successful the gats pact would maketrue competition in telecommunications services into a binding trade obligationfor major industrial and some developing countries. such a pact was consideredunthinkable even 10 years ago.the promise of information infrastructure clearly depends on considerableinvestment by private parties. at issue are not only competing technological andbusiness approaches, but also the degree to which facilities and services offeredby different parties can interoperate. technical featuresñincluding those relating to openness and symmetry in communications, equity in access to infrastructure, and who gets to enter what marketsñare among the key issues that informed colloquium discussions and more recent debates. these features havefigured in the development of regulatory reform legislation, and they are also atthe heart of initiatives relating to standard setting for voice, video, data, andmultimedia services as well as to the formatting and transfer of various kinds ofinformation and documents. for example, the cable act of 1992 provided formeasures to foster greater compatibility between consumer electronic devicesand cable television systems, resulting in digital convergencerelated standardsetting by the federal communications commission (fcc) and industry. also,the administration sponsored a mid1994 workshop to identify key issues andoptions for facilitating standards development. but it is an open question as tohow far the government can or should go in promoting the kinds of standardskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveneeded for digital convergence; its efforts are likely to focus on points at whichdifferent networks and other infrastructure come together.perspectives on regulationcolloquium participants suggested that government policies with respect todigital convergence should be guided by two general principles: first, that relaxation of traditional forms of regulation and increased market competition arebeneficial in general; and, second, that there will continue to be a need forgovernment intervention, but in different forms and areas than in the past. forexample, many referred to growing (perceived) needs to protect intellectual property rights and to ensure that those who control a conduit not have a monopoly onthe content that goes through it. behind such comments lies the recognition thata growing portion of the investment in and returns on information infrastructurerelate to information or content. although most of the policy discussion reflectedconditions in the telecommunications industry in particular (and within that thetelephony component), many comments were relevant to information industriesin general. on the other hand, there is little foundation in terms of regulation andother legal constraints affecting entertainment technology, and possibly even lessconstraining the computing industry.the first principle may be obvious, because the benefits of market competition are well known. noam and cowhey have documented, in separate papers(noam, 1995), the benefits derived specifically from the breakup of at&t.noam, in an analysis of the accuracy of various predictions concerning deregulation, has concluded that the doomsayers generally were wrongñthat few benefitsattributed to the monopoly system were lost. he found that proponents of deregulation were right more often than were proregulators, although liberalizationevoked new issues that have been addressed effectively by regulation. in addition, noam has concluded that the telecommunications sector is more dynamicand innovative as a result of deregulation.cowhey also has pointed to the benefits of liberalization, citing a number ofstatistics: since the breakup of at&t, longdistance service cost has declinedabout 50 percent, the average household has seen a reduction in service costs, andthe productivity of telephone companies has climbed an estimated 40 percent, allwhile these companies have introduced greater innovation in services and increased flexibility for users (cowhey, 1990).the second principleñconcerning the changes in policy needsñrequiresthorough exploration. the breakup of telecommunications monopolies and theemergence of new media are having two primary effects on the policymakinglandscape, noam explained. first, there is less need for regulation to balance thepower of small users facing giant, often monopolistic suppliers. second, priceand quality regulation also becomes less important as a systems integration industry emerges and begins to compete for consumers.11keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles79according to noam, government should not react to this transformation bypicking favoritesñthat is, by influencing or impeding change to favor any particular technology or carrier. expanded robert johnson in a late1994 interview,even the bestintended government intervention can distort the market, interfering with market demand and entrepreneurial creativity. noam and others generally agreed that policymakers may need to promote rules of the road for theònetwork of networks,ó such as in interconnection and common carriage.policymakers need to assure access to scarce facilities that could become òbottlenecksó in the marketplace, and they need to address international access asymmetries, he said.as noted earlier in this report, with the development of specialized networksand the evolving need for contentselection aids, the economics of basic carriagebecome less attractive. the real advantage to a network owner increasingly willaccrue from diversity in programming and services, and so there will be expanded opportunities for niche marketing; a network owner will become, ineffect, a manager of a shopping mall, housing many òboutiques.ó12in their quest to enter new markets, telephone companies have contendedthat substantial traffic must be generated to justify the building of fiber networks,that voice alone will not generate such volume. the ntia, in a 1993 report,maintained that freeing telephone companies to provide cable programmingwould stimulate competition in the video market and provide incentives for infrastructure development, and, furthermore, any resulting increased demand forvideo programming could stimulate international trade (ntia, 1993). wildmanhas argued that, given the substantial costs of desired network upgrades and thenationõs dependence on private investment to cover them, policy restrictions onthe business opportunities of information providers should be reduced.13 this isthe essence of the arguments advanced by telephone companies, although companies differ in their preferences for what restrictions are most critical to relax.14foreshadowing if not encouraging recent legislative and rulemaking debates, thentia had recommended relaxing restrictions on networks owning cable systems,15 common ownership of television stations and cable systems in the samemarket,16 national multiple ownership,17 and foreign ownership. its own interestsaffected, the cable television industry contends that restrictions on crossownership should be relaxed only if the congress acts to repeal state laws barring cablecompanies from providing telephone service.18greater freedom for telephone companies may involve unbundling or providing other service providers more direct access to basic network facilities andservice elements. to that end, some have submitted proposals to the fcc andstate regulatory authorities for unbundling their networks.19 the theory behindthese proposals is that, by giving up their monopolies, regional telephone companies become deserving of entry into other markets, such as longdistance services. however, the technology of open data networking makes unbundling botheasier to achieve and economically more compelling than it has been, althoughkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivemost telephone companies may continue to resist ceding the control and revenuestreams historically associated with bundled service provision (cstb, 1994b).that is, the nature of the new technologies threatens to make traditional approaches to assessing infrastructure investments obsolete.noted noam, òprivate carriers are now increasingly competing with common carriers, and conversely, common carriers will increase and compete withwhat private carriers do today. those [situations] require all kinds of new formsof legal arrangements for dealing with traditional problems.ó noam elaboratedon the underlying economics:. . . when [common and private contract carriers correctly] compete head tohead, one has to serve everybody indiscriminately in similar classes of customers at similar rates and the other one doesnõt. the one that has more flexibilityhas an inherent advantage with all other things being equal. you can pricepeople differently and, therefore, undercut for some customers, depending ontheir price elasticity. you can undercut the one that has to provide the sameprice for everybody, particularly when you cannot prevent arbitrage. whereone cannot prevent arbitrage, but the other one can, you cannot, even if youwanted to, have price discrimination because of the arbitrage issue. similarly,if one has access rights to the other, but the other doesnõt have access rights tothe first, then you have asymmetries of the kind that whenever a transmissionsegment on the common carrier is cheaper, the private carrier will use it. if itõsthe other way around, there is no access. you add those two up plus three orfour other factors and again, all other things being equal, the common carrierwill have a problem. so, either it goes out of business, which is unlikely, or thecommon carrier obligation is being whittled away at the margin under the guiseof meeting competition and so on. that is an effect thatõs already been happening in the longdistance field for large users where bargaining and negotiationsare taking place whatever the formal regulatory arrangement is. so the alternatives are to make private carriers common carriers, which is not realistic: itreally means making every corporate, private network, every valueadded service provider into a common carrier. you can also have some kind of a hybridarrangement of which you can think in terms of at least 8 or 10 different hybrids. that is likely to work for a while, but eventually, the same dynamics takeplace. the private is going to push out the common carrier here, too, so ahybrid arrangement is not going to be a stable solution. if that is the case, thenmaybe common carriage as an institution in the long term is on its way out.in speculating on the need to change common carriage arrangements, noamposited that most of òthe policy goals behind common carriage, which are freeflow of information, limited liability, reduction of transaction costs, and a wholebunch of other things . . . will be taken care of in a competitive system of privatecarriers. . . . the ones that are not necessarily going to be taken care of involvethe free flow of information aspect. that would then suggest not so much makingeverybody a common carrier, but rather making sure that no carrier can discrimikeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles81nate based on certain content criteria or some other longterm policy. this wouldbe better than hanging on to the notion of common carriage per se.óclearly, the debates over advancing the national information infrastructureunderscore that development of nationwide networks will be very expensive; byone estimate, the physical facilities alone could consume $422 billion over 20years.20 in addition, the nationõs reliance on the private sector for infrastructureinvestments demands that both public and private facilities be addressed in national policies (egan and wildman, 1992). although volatile cost estimatesreflect political considerations and business maneuvers, and although concernshave been raised about various risks, proponents argue that much of the investment would be made anyway,21 and that the payback to investors (let alone tosociety generally) will be worth it.22apart from its controversial pricecapping strategyña relatively new approach to the regulation of information industriesñthe cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 demonstrates to members of thecolloquium steering committee that congress is often more amenable to retrospective òpoliceó work than to forwardlooking action on communications issuesof the future. the chilling effect on cablerelated investments and alliancesascribed to recent rate rollbacks is a cause for concern. and yet, even the cableact contained within it provisions that may have forwardlooking impacts. forexample, provisions relating to compatibility between cable service delivery andconsumer electronics (tvs, vcrs) could serve to promote greater interoperability, notwithstanding industry concerns about specific mechanisms for doing so.noam elaborated on several points. the traditional telephone ratesubsidysystem23 will have to be restructured, he said, through some form of neutralsurcharge and a voucher mechanism as a replacement for the present myriadpools, funds, and transfers. through a principle of òthirdpartyneutral interconnection,ó a carrier could pick and choose its own customers, but it could not pickits customerõs customers. this change will be brought on by increasing competition; providers will tend to compete for users who pay, and lowerrevenue usergroups will be left with fewer options and, as a result, with increasing prices.òthese transitions will be painful. youõll hear from the losers, and [the transition] would require, therefore, leaders,ó noam said. competition will increaseefficiency and hence reduce the magnitude of any subsidy, but it is not likely todecline to zero. hence, we must reform the way it is being paid for, and reconcileit with competition. one idea, for example, is for every company providingtelephone service to contribute in proportion to its customer base.24gilder, on the other hand, argued that the need for subsidies will disappearaltogether, because digital wireless technology will reduce cost disparities between rural and urban services. this view is not universally accepted, given thebandwidth limitations of wireless technology. but gilderõs optimism about available bandwidth leads him to anticipate the obsolescence of the entire regulatoryand legislative structure that controls information services (kelly, 1993). in itskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveauctions of spectrum for personal communications services (pcs), the fcc designed the auction so that even rural regions will have at least five major cellularand pcs providers. this approach should speed investment and lower prices.the issue of how to assure universal service in a competitive marketplacealso requires attention. as the information infrastructure evolves, people havebegun to ask whether it will close or widen the gap between the rich and the poor.the clinton administration has said it is òcommitted to developing a broad,modern concept of universal serviceñone that would emphasize giving all americans who desire it easy, affordable access to advanced communications andinformation services, regardless of income, disability, or locationó (iitf, 1993, p.8). the progress during 19931994 of various new service trials, administrationpolicy statements and explorations through the information infrastructure taskforce and the national information infrastructure advisory committee,25 andlegislative debates point to the difficulty of defining what it is that should beuniversally available. mused robert johnson when interviewed,clearly there should be a level at which everybody should have access to theservice. now, access is different from ability to use. everybody can haveaccess to cable television, but should it be payperview cable television, shouldit be 50 channels, or 100 channels, or should it be all the other things that goalong with it? should everyone have the shopping channel? should everyoneget a remote for each room? you know, all of these things come into play whenyou start talking about an entitlement. i think the government should decidethat there should be an entitlement for a certain level of access, but beyond thati think you get into trouble in deciding how much.it is difficult, for example, to identify what kinds of information may relate todifferent kinds of gaps in socioeconomic status; it is difficult to build a case formandating simultaneous access to a broad range of new services when experimentation and exploration of what kinds of services will be most popular andhow costs can be optimized are still at early stages.26borrus, more optimistic than noam about the future of common carriage,suggested that different types of carriers be assigned different responsibilities:maybe what weõre talking about is different levels of obligation, different levels of performance requirements, privacy requirements and other things including access to intellectual property based on the kind of network and service thatyouõre providingñproviders of physical networks being held to one standard,providers of virtual networks over physical networks to another standard. atthe margins that runs into all the problems eli talks about, but there are compensations for owning versus not owning, for managing and controlling a virtual [infrastructure] versus actually owning physical infrastructure. this debatehas just begun.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles83 other useful roles for governmentregardless of how policymakers seek to guide or control information industries, the federal government can play a valuable role in promoting technologicalprogress in other ways. in particular, colloquium participants stressed the effectiveness of procurement policies in improving government efficiency and diffusing new technologies throughout the economy.noting that the federal government is a major force in technology development,27 gilder suggested that governmentõs role in the digital convergence shouldbe that of an òaggressive, forwardlooking consumer,ó purchasing the best possible technologies for interconnecting its supercomputer centers and other facilities. such connections would maximize efficiency, according to gilder, who hascontended that the government typically òdiscovers a technology after its moment is passingó (kelly, 1993). gilderõs comments echo other discussions abouthow the effectiveness of the federal investment in the internet, whose backboneinitially connected a variety of research and education facilities, contrasts withother federal efforts to promote specific technologies for government use, such asthe open systems interconnection protocol suite through the gosip federalinformation processing standard.borrus also has pointed to the influence of procurement policies. in assessing federal research and development (r&d) sponsorship in general, borrus hascontended that direct federal support historically has been less important to thesuccess of commercial technology than have federal procurement and indirectsupport, because the latter approaches have tended to diffuse new technologiesinto widespread use.28 on the other hand, the administrationõs national performance review (clinton and gore, 1993) and perennial efforts by adminstrationsand the congress to improve procurement policy and practice attest to the factthat procurement can be at best a blunt instrument. also, the blossoming of theu.s. computer and communications enterprise provides evidence of the longterm fruits of federal r&d support overall (cstb, 1995).to further foster growth of the information infrastructure, borrus suggestedthat policymakers consider how to stimulate experiments involving new technologies, configurations, and services, so that new applications and demand canemerge to support further evolution of the network portfolio. similarly, noamsuggested that the government provide seed money for demonstration projects, asthe national science foundation (nsf), the advanced research projects agency(arpa), and other agencies have done. for example, nsf and arpa contributed $15.8 million to the gigabit testbed program, which involved researchersfrom universities, national laboratories, supercomputer centers, and telephoneand computer companies (cnri, 1992). more generally, several colloquiumparticipants identified the internet as a working model for the type of experimentthe federal government could support.29 experiments and demonstrations canhelp overcome a basic obstacle to network development: until a network iskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitiveestablished, its usefulness is difficult to prove, but a sponsor must pay for theproject first. òso you run into the catch22 where you canõt develop demand untilyouõre willing to pay for the network, but no one is willing to pay for the networkuntil youõve got some demand developed,ó borrus explained.at the same time, borrus noted, oversight is needed to òpermit a kind of alogical infrastructure to emerge which would emphasize standards for accessinteroperability between these various pieces of the network portfolioñlevels ofprivacy, reliability, performance standards, and the likeñbut which wouldnõtdetermine the actual implementation of any of the networks themselves.ó thenational cable television association (ncta) has provided specific suggestions along those lines, arguing that local telephone companies should be required to òinterconnect their facilities with those of more specialized providers onreasonable and nondiscriminatory termsó (ncta, 1993a). ncta also supportsa federal role in standards setting for networks and customer equipment, to ensure, for example, that computers and telephones can send and receive cablesignals and programming, as well as tax incentives to stimulate investment(ncta, 1993a). the current fiscal climate makes it relative unlikely that taxincentives will be initiated. moreover, whether and what kind of oversight ispossible to achieve logical connectivity and so on is a challenge at the heart ofpublic policy for advancing the information infrastructure: it is a challenge thatmany recognize but few can resolve to the satisfaction of the majority.commercial activities in the internet arena have built on contributions to thetechnology base through federal research programs (such as the high performance computing and communications initiative) as well as development byprivate enterprise. however, competition, deregulation, and industry consolidation appear to have reduced telecommunications industry r&d from what it wasin the heyday of at&tõs bell laboratories and in the early years of bellcore.thus wildman has noted that u.s. telephone companies lag their foreign counterparts in r&d spending and patent activity (egan and wildman, 1992).30 thecombined forces of deficitreduction pressures and a policy shift toward applications may constrain federally funded research in related technologies. any slowdown in research would be particularly troubling now, because integrating diverse systems to evolve the nationõs information infrastructure poses newtechnical challenges, some associated with lowering the costs of providing moregeneral and flexible technology as compared to more specialized technology thatis optimized for the delivery of a single service (cstb, 1994b).as noted in earlier chapters, a valuable part of the infrastructure is the contentñthe software and the programming. thus, it is important for the government to support experiments focusing not only on networking hardware, but alsoon applications. part of the appeal of the internet, it should be noted, is that usersdevelop their own òprogrammingó and other information resources, from articlesto databases, resources that can be located and interconnected increasingly easilykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles85through the search and navigation tools (e.g., gopher, world wide web) that arethemselves being developed by users (bernerslee et al., 1994).notes1.the administration envisions national highspeed networks capable of transmitting billions of bits (gigabits) of informationñsuch as the entire textual portion of theencyclopedia britannicañin one second. these networks would link computers, databanks, fax machines, telephones, and video displays. in its national information infrastructure (nii) policy statements, the administration has articulated a highlevel vision for a ònetwork of networksó funded primarily bythe private sector. the statements outline numerous broad goals but provide few details;the information infrastructure task force is laying the groundwork to develop proposalsin a number of areas, and proposed legislation is proceeding through the congress as thisreport is written. the organization of several budget elements under the nii umbrella inthe fy 1995 budget request added to the emphasis on this area, as do the new emphasison information infrastructure technology and applications within the high performancecomputing and communications initiative and the expansion of the new telecommunications and information infrastructure assistance program for developing access byschools, libraries, hospitals, and clinics.2.common carriers provide neutral, nondiscriminatory service. they are subjectto public utility regulations described by kahn (1970, p. 3) as òcontrol of entry, pricefixing, prescription of quality and conditions of service, and the imposition of an obligation to serve all applicants under reasonable conditions.ó3.lobbying activity is so intense that it itself has become a news item. see, forexample, andrews (1995).4.section 310(b) of the communications act limits foreign investment in u.s.broadcasting companies to 25 percent.5.for example, several measures show that japan lags the united states in use ofcommunications and information technology, even accounting for population difference:pcs used in business per 100 workers (u.s. 41.7, japan 9.9); domestic commercial databases (u.s. 3,900, japan 900); internet nodes (u.s. 1.18 million, japan 39,000); lanconnections per 100 pcs used in business (u.s. 55.7, japan 13.4); cellular phones per 100people (u.s. 4.4, japan 1.4); and cable (nonbasic service) subscribers as percent ofhouseholds with tv (u.s. 60 percent, japan 2.7 percent). regulationsupported high prices and market structure factors lie behind some ofthese conditions (pollack, 1993).6.principles quoted from òthe g7 theme paper,ó a document found on the worldwide web at http://www.ispo.cec.be (ec information society project office webserver)under g7 information society conference category and key documents subcategory.7.foreign investors have taken advantage of the opportunity to invest in u.s.companies, notably in the entertainment industry. for example, news corp. of australiaowns (20th century) fox inc., sony corp. owns sony pictures entertainment (formerlycolumbia pictures), and matsushita electric industrial co. owns mca inc. (parent company of universal pictures). see turner (1994a).8.an extensive analysis of the keiretsu system may be found in gerlach (1992).keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive9.virtually every major nation has signed the convention, which is administeredby the world intellectual property organization.10.further analysis of these national differences may be found in cowhey (1993).11.see cstb (1992) for a discussion of the business of systems integration.12.colloquium steering committee member janice obuchowski noted that, at thetime of the consent decree, at&t indicated no objection to the bell companies enteringthe information content business, and the court concluded they would not abuse anyresidual bottleneck power in information services. in addition, the court observed that thefcc had established safeguards that would help protect against such abuse.13.if these types of incentives prove inadequate, then policymakers could considerother measures, such as a valueadded tax (vat) on public network services, with theproceeds to be invested in the public infrastructure, wildman suggested. an advantage ofthe vat approach, he noted, is that the major beneficiariesñend users and suppliersñwould pay (egan and wildman, 1992).14.the regional bell holding companies have promised, if the restrictions on cableprogramming and longdistance service are relaxed, to invest an additional $100 billion inadvanced technology in the next decadeñprecisely the sort of private investment neededto advance a national information infrastructure.15.in 1992, the fcc modified its 1970 rule that prevented networks from owningcable systems (47 cfr 76.501[a][1991]) to allow crossownership so long as the numberof cable homes affected was limited. networks have been barred by the cable act of1984 (47 usc section 533) from owning cable systems in their own markets where theyown and operate stations (ntia, 1993). progress through judicial and regulatory hurdlestoward video dialtone service is reflected in bell atlanticõs moves toward offering cablelike programming in its service areas (landler, 1995; carnevale, 1994).16.in 1970, the fcc adopted a rule barring common ownership of a televisionbroadcast station and a cable system in the same market (47 cfr section 76.501[a][2]).congress codified that rule in the cable act of 1984 (ntia, 1993).17.the fcc adopted a 12station limit for all broadcast services in 1984.18.david nicoll, national cable television association, personal communication,december 13, 1993.19.ameritech, for example, proposed a new regulatory model (the customers firstplan) under which the corporation would guarantee its competitors physical access to thetelephone network and fair pricing; all that a competitor would have to do is buy a switch(costing several million dollars new). ameritech also pledged to upgrade its network tosupport digital switching and fiber optics. in return, ameritech asked for òthe freedom tofully compete, including the ability to deaverage all access rates, to respond to competitive proposals, and to enter into contracts with customersó (ameritech, 1993c). localtelephone service would remain affordable, the company said, due to increased usage oftelecommunications services.20.carol weinhaus, project director for the center for telecommunications management at the university of southern california, cited in andrews (1994a).21.local telephone and cable companies already spend about $25 billion a year onnew equipment and modernization (federal communications commission estimates, citedin andrews (1994a)). a number of telephone companies announced ambitious infrastructure improvement plans in 1993.22.the clinton administration, in its national information infrastructure (nii) policystatement, noted that an estimated twothirds of u.s. workers hold informationrelatedkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promoting competitiveness: policy issues and obstacles87jobs, while the rest work in industries that rely heavily on information. according to theadministration, the nii òwill help create highwage jobs, stimulate economic growth,enable new products and services, and strengthen americaõs technological leadership.whole new industries will be created, and the infrastructure will be used in ways we canonly begin to imagineó (iitf, 1993, p. 13). a number of statistics were cited to bolsterthis contention. for example, the computer systems policy project estimates that the niiwill produce as much as $300 billion annually in new sales across multiple industries.and the personal communications services industry, a new family of wireless services, isexpected to create as many as 300,000 jobs in the next 10 to 15 years.23.according to the united states telephone association (usta), regulatorypolicy promoting universal service has resulted in up to $20 billion in internal subsidiesthat benefit rural and residential customers. usta (1993) has claimed that, as competition in the marketplace increases, the price of local telephone service would move to costand could double.24.david nicoll, national cable television association, personal communication,december 13, 1993.25.several public meetings (e.g., the 20/20 vision and public interest conferences)were held and documents issued for public discussion and comment in 1994.26.for example, ntia estimates that the biggest problems in regard to universalservice pertain to the urban poor, even though infrastructure is cheap and ubiquitous, notrural areas.27.the federal government finances some $70 billion in research and developmentannually and creates early markets for highrisk technologies such as computer hardwareand semiconductors (clinton and gore, 1993).28.in this paper (borrus, 1992), echoing a decadeold recommendation made bythe economist richard nelson and his colleagues (nelson, 1982), borrus suggested thatthe government associate research and development (r&d) support with procurement orother welldefined public objectives; define and fund arenas of nonproprietary researchand allow the scientific community to guide r&d allocation; and develop mechanismswhereby potential users guide the allocation of applied r&d funds. borrus made severaladditional points, specifying conditions that should exist for applied research and theimportance of pursuing widespread diffusion of new technologies within the domesticeconomy. he also stressed the importance of ensuring that the development processproduces technology that meets commercial market requirements.29.over the years, the governmentõs role in running the internet has been reduced.the initial goal was to link military users and contractors with remote computer centersso they could share software and hardware; today, more than half the hosts are commercial, while many others are in education and nonmilitary research. the national sciencefoundation has provided the fixedcost network òbackbone,ó but by early 1994 the directfederal subsidy had shrunk to an estimated 3 percent of total internet costs, and even thatsmall share is to be eliminated. meanwhile, standards for transmission, user interfaces,management, and other aspects of internet use are set through a ògrassrootsó process ledby the internet engineering task force, whose meetings are open to anyone with a demonstrated working protocol. howard funk, the internet society, personal communication, november 10, 1993.30.egan and wildman (1992) citing ntia (1991). the seven nations evaluatedincluded the united states, the united kingdom, germany, france, italy, japan, andcanada.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive88bibliographyameritech. 1992. superschools: education in the information age and beyond. ameritech,chicago, ill.ameritech. 1993a. evaluation of thinklink: january through june, 1993. july 28. evaluatorsjune cline, richard omanson, and project manager nancy sisung. ameritech, chicago, ill.ameritech. 1993b. ònationõs public phone network can be the right medicine to trim u.s.health care costs and improve delivery.ó news release dated august 5.ameritech. 1993c. òpetition for declaratory ruling and related waivers to establish a new regulatory model for the ameritech region,ó petition before the federal communications commission, march 1.ameritech. 1993d. project thinklink: educational applications for fitl. ameritech, chicago,ill., november.ameritech. 1993e. quality of life in the information age and beyond. ameritech, chicago, ill.,march.ameritech. 1993f. òsuperschoolñamericaõs link to a better educationñcomes to washington,d.c., march 2431.ó news release dated march 11.andrews, edmund l. 1993. òwhen we build it, will they come?,ó new york times, october 17,p. f5.andrews, edmund l. 1994a. òbig risk and cost seen in creating data superhighway,ó new yorktimes, january 3, p. c17.andrews, edmund l. 1994b. òwith mergerõs failure, an industry seeks a leader,ó new yorktimes, february 26, p. a39.andrews, edmund l. 1995. òphonebill lobbyists wear out welcome,ó new york times, march20, pp. d1 and d6.associated press. 1994. òpackard bell to offer pc cum tv/phone/radio,ó new york times, june14, p. d5.bangemann, martin (chair), and the highlevel group on the information society. 1994. europeand the global information society: recommendations to the european council. europeancouncil, brussels, may 26.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography89barron, james. 1994. òa new species of couch potato takes root,ó new york times, november 6,pp. h1 and h28.bermant, charles. 1994. òwhen listener and artist can make music together,ó new york times,may 8, p. f9.bermant, charles. 1995. òletting moviegoers play auteur, with a clicker,ó new york times,february 12, p. f10.bernerslee, tim, robert cailliau, ari luotonen, henrik frystyk nielsen, and arthur secret. 1994.òthe worldwide web,ó communications of the acm 37(8):7682.booker, ellis. 1994. òthrowing users an mbone,ó computerworld, november 7, pp. 63 and 68.borrus, michael. 1992. òinvesting on the frontier: how the u.s. can reclaim hightech leadership,ó american prospect, fall issue, pp. 7987.borrus, michael 1993. òthe regional architecture of global electronics: trajectories, linkagesand access to technology,ó pp. 4180 in new challenges to international cooperation: adjustment of firms, policies, and organizations to global competition, peter gourevitch andpaolo guerrieri, eds. international relations and pacific studies, university of california, sandiego.bowles, scott. 1994. òcyberspace rescue prevents a suicide,ó washington post, october 24, pp.d1 and d5.bulkeley, william m. 1995. òuntested treatments, cures find stronghold on online services,ówall street journal, february 27, pp. a1 and a9.bulkeley, william m., and john r. wilke. 1993. òcan the exalted vision become reality?: earlyattempts show buyers may be leery,ó wall street journal, october 14, pp. b1 and b12.burgess, john. 1994. òcomputers get a blockbuster role,ó washington post, january 19, pp. f1and f4.carlton, jim. 1994a. òas electronics lag, computers step into breach,ó wall street journal,january 5, p. b1.carlton, jim. 1994b. òcdroms: buggy, boring, slow, frustrating,ó wall street journal, july 6,pp. b1 and b4.carlton, jim. 1994c. òelectronic arts shifts focus to cdrom video games,ó wall street journal, september 7, p. b4.carlton, jim. 1994d. ò3do faces revolt by game developers over fee to cut manufacturersõlosses,ó wall street journal, october 24, p. b3.carlton, jim, and thomas r. king. 1994. òsegamgm pact will prompt question: which camefirst, movie or video game?,ó wall street journal, april 27, p. b8.carnevale, mary lu. 1994. òbell atlantic becomes first phone firm allowed to compete withcable tv,ó wall street journal, july 7, pp. a3 and a5.cauley, leslie. 1993. ògoal: no missing link,ó usa today, june 9, p. 2b.chartrand, sabra. 1994. òpatents: the promise of a multimedia revolution is creating a giantcopyright headache for some companies,ó new york times, march 28, p. d2.chiddix, james a. 1991. òthe evolution of cable tvña personal perspective,ó lecture at pennsylvania state university, october 29.churbuck, david c. 1994. òdialacatalog,ó forbes 154(8):126130.clinton, william j., and albert gore, jr. 1993. technology for americaõs strength: a new direction to build economic strength. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1992. keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integration. national academy press,washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994a.information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever. national academy press, washington, d.c.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivecomputer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994b.realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994c.rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities. national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995.evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support thenationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.corcoran, cate. 1993. òspectrum envoy card gives pcphone link for faxes, voice mail,óinfoworld, november 8, p. 34.corcoran, elizabeth. 1994. òa ôbattle of the boxõ is brewing,ó washington post, october 15, pp.d1d2.corporation for national research initiatives (cnri). 1992. òa brief description of the cnrigigabit testbed initiative.ó corporation for national research initiatives, reston, va., january.council on competitiveness (coc). 1993. roadmap for results: trade policy, technology, andamerican competitiveness. council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., july.cowhey, peter f. 1990. òthe international telecommunications regime: the political roots ofregimes for high technology,ó international organization 44(2):169199.cowhey, peter f. 1993. òtelecommunications: market access regimes in services and equipment,ó pp. 133170 in new challenges to international cooperation: adjustment of firms,policies, and organizations to global competition, peter gourevitch and paolo guerrieri, eds.international relations and pacific studies, university of california, san diego.cowhey, peter f., and jonathan d. aronson. 1993. managing the world economy: the consequences of corporate alliances. council on foreign relations press, new york.david, fred. 1993. òi want my desktop mtv,ó wired 3(1):84.dreier, thomas. 1993. òcopyright digitized: philosophical impacts and practical implications forinformation exchange in digital networks,ó paper presented at òworld intellectual propertyorganization symposium on the impact of digital technology on copyright and neighboringrights,ó harvard university, march 31april 2.dukes, s.d. n.d. next generation cable network architecture. cable television laboratories inc.,boulder, colo. (unpublished).dutton, william h., jay g. blumler, and kenneth l. kraemer. 1987. wired cities: shaping thefuture of communications. g.k. hall, boston.the economist. 1993a. òa survey of telecommunications,ó 329(7834):a special supplement following p. 68.the economist. 1993b. òwhat 3do might do: home entertainment, tripping,ó 327(7815):80.egan, bruce l., and steven s. wildman. 1992. òinvesting in the telecommunications infrastructure: economics and policy considerations,ó pp. 1954 in a national information network:changing our lives in the 21st century. annual review of the institute for informationstudies (northern telecom inc. and the aspen institute), queenstown, md.elmerdewitt, philip. 1993. òtake a trip into the future on the electronic superhighway,ó time141(15):5055.eriksson, hans. 1994. òmbone: the multicast backbone,ó communications of the acm 37(8):5460.fabrikant, geraldine. 1993. òbell atlanticõs acquisition presented as a quantum leap,ó new yorktimes, october 14, p. d11.fantel, hans. 1994. òcinema sound gets a digital lift,ó new york times, june 12, p. f9.farhi, paul. 1994. òa waiting game for rating games,ó washington post, december 24, p. d1.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography91farhi, paul, and sandra sugawara. 1994. òhurdles slow information ôsuperhypeway,õó washington post, april 7, pp. a1 and a15.farley, christopher john. 1994. òpatriot games,ó time magazine, december 19, p. 48.fisher, lawrence m. 1994. òdisney licenses characters for multimedia,ó new york times, june24, p. d6.fitzgerald, michael. 1994. òmultimedia is growing by leaps and bounds,ó computerworld, february 21, p. 42.flaherty, joseph a. 1993. òhdtv: how, why, and when,ó the schoenberg lecture presented forthe royal television society at the royal institution, london, england, november 4.flaherty, joseph a. 1994. òatv: how to do it, whatever it is,ó paper presented at the advancedtelevision seminar òbit by bit into the future,ó hilton head, south carolina, september 27.fleischmann, mark. 1995. òsecond sight,ó premiere 8(5):90.flynn, laurie. 1994. òcdromõs: theyõre not just for entertainment,ó new york times, april 24,p. f10.foderaro, lisa w. 1995. òselfhelp today: iõm ok. youõre ok. weõre on line,ó new yorktimes, march 22, pp. b1 and b6.garreau, joel. 1993. òbawdy bytes: the growing world of cybersex,ó washington post, november 29, p. a1.gerlach, michael l. 1992. alliance capitalism: the social organization of japanese business.university of california press, berkeley, calif.goldberg, michael. 1993. òattack of the cyberrockers: new computer rocker jocks get theirmodems working,ó rolling stone, november 25, no. 670, p. 27.harmon, amy. 1993. òthe ôseedyõ side of cdroms,ó los angeles times, november 29, pp. a1and a26a28.herschman, n. 1993. òcd sound gets better,ó pulse, august, no. 117, p. 20.hill, g. christian, and ken yamada. 1993. òfive electronics giants hope general magic will turnthe trick,ó wall street journal, february 8, p. a1.hodge, winston william. 1995. interactive television: a comprehensive guide for multimediatechnologists. mcgrawhill inc., new york.hudson, richard l. 1994. òeurope begins liberalizing phone sector,ó wall street journal, december 5, p. a9a.hudson, richard l. 1995. òlicense needed to do art deals in digital age,ó wall street journal,january 23, pp. b1b2.hudson, richard l., and james pressley. 1995. òg7 nations make gains in facilitating access toinformation superhighway,ó wall street journal, february 27, p. a7a.huizinga, johan. 1950. homo ludens: a study of the play element in culture. beacon press,boston.information & interactive services report (iisr). 1995. òworldwide internet creates potential forlegal problems,ó brp publications inc., washington, d.c., march 24, p. 18.information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993. the national information infrastructure:agenda for action. information infrastructure task force, washington, d.c., september 15.institute for information studies. 1995. crossroads on the information highway: convergence anddiversity in communications technologies. annual review of the institute for informationstudies (northern telecom inc. and the aspen institute), queenstown, md.jensen, elizabeth. 1994. ònetworks pick ucla to study violence, hoping to preempt government action,ó wall street journal, june 30, p. b9.johnson, bradley. 1993. òmultimedia pc biz picking up speed,ó advertising age 64(23):6.kahn, alfred e. 1970. the economics of regulation: principles and institutions, volume 1. johnwiley & sons inc., new york.kapor, mitchell. 1993. òwhere is the digital highway really heading?,ó wired 1(3):53.karlgaard, rich. 1994. òmore (moore) fights to come,ó forbes, february 28 (supplemental), p. 9.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivekatz, michael l., and carl shapiro. 1994. òsystems competition and network effects,ó journal ofeconomic perspectives 8(2):93115.keller, john j. 1994. òat&t scraps plan to sell gear for video game,ó wall street journal,september 1, p. b8.kelly, kevin. 1993. òwhen bandwidth is free: the dark fiber interview with george gilder,ówired 1(4):3841.kelly, kevin, and rheingold, howard. 1993. òthe dragon ate my homework,ó wired 1(3):69.kim, james, and chris wloszczyna. 1993. òhitting the information highway,ó usa today,august 26, p. 4b.king, jr., ralph t. 1994. ò3do faces struggle to keep videogame player alive,ó wall streetjournal, may 19, p. b4.klein, stanley, and robert aston. 1993. òmultimedia defined: market sectors, dimensions, anddirections,ó pp. 735 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts,and future trends, m.l. de sonne, ed. national association of broadcasters, washington,d.c.kolbert, elizabeth. 1994. òtelevision gets closer look as a factor in real violence,ó new yorktimes, december 14, pp. a1 and d20.kristol, irving. 1994. òsex, violence and videotape,ó wall street journal, may 31, p. a16.kruger, pamela. 1994. òthe multimedia job mirage,ó new york times, january 9, p. f9.laderman, jeffrey m., mark landler, and ronald grover. 1993. òmedia mania,ó business week,july 12, no. 3327, pp. 110119.landis, david. 1993. ònew wave of interactive entertainment,ó usa today, may 27, p. 1d.landler, mark. 1995. òphone companies clear tv hurdle,ó new york times, march 18, pp. 1 and41.lanham, richard a. 1993. the electronic word: democracy, technology, and the arts. university of chicago press, chicago, ill.lashinsky, adam. 1993. òamanda and ameritech: 10yearolds serve as the ultimate focusgroup,ó crainõs detroit business, september 6, p. 13.lavin, douglas. 1995. òsurvey sees cost of telephone calls for business dropping in mostnations,ó wall street journal, march 3, p. a5c.lewis, peter h. 1993a. òmultimedia (especially the xrated) stars at comdex,ó new york times,november 23, p. f12.lewis, peter h. 1993b. òthe new patent that is infuriating the multimedia industry: the battleover a popular way of searching data bases,ó new york times, november 28, p. f10.lewis, peter h. 1994a. òa boom for online services,ó new york times, july 12, pp. d1 and d14.lewis, peter h. 1994b. òprodigy cuts work force as part of broad revamping,ó new york times,december 6, p. d5.lippman, john. 1993. ògamblingñliterallyñon the media superhighway,ó los angeles times,december 24, pp. d1 and d4.lippman, john, and amy harmon. 1994. ògore presides at l.a. summit on info age,ó los angelestimes, january 12, pp. a1 and a19.lohr, steve. 1994. òthe silver disk may soon eclipse the silver screen,ó new york times, march1, pp. a1 and d6.lubove, seth, and neil weinberg. 1993. òcreating a seamless company,ó forbes 152(14):152157.maney, kevin. 1993. òruling opens door to union of telephone, cable, video: consumerslikely to see more choices,ó usa today, august 25, p. 1b.markoff, john. 1993. òcable concerns in venture to rival phone companies,ó new york times,december 2, p. d1.markoff, john. 1994. òfor 3do, a makeorbreak season,ó new york times, december 11, pp. f1and f6.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography93markoff, john. 1995a. òanother format war looms in video recording industry,ó new yorktimes, february 23, pp. d1 and d17.markoff, john. 1995b. òwill video game machines turn into pc killers?,ó new york times,january 8, p. f7.marsh, barbara. 1994. òmusicians adopt technology to market their skills,ó wall street journal,october 14, p. b2.mccartney, scott. 1995. òhollywood, silicon valley team upñand clash,ó wall street journal,march 14, pp. b1b2.mccoy, charles. 1994. òhewlett, cbs to unveil pact for digital tv,ó wall street journal, august30, p. b10.mcmurray, scott. 1994. òtelevision shopping is stepping up in class,ó new york times, march 6,p. f5.memmott, mark, and kevin maney. 1993. òusa poised to be multimedia superpower,ó usatoday, october 15, p. b1.millison, doug, and craig lagrow. 1993. òmultimedia ôblack boxes:õ advent of the digital mediahome,ó pp. 103120 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts, andfuture trends, m.l. de sonne, ed. national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c.mohan, suruchi. 1994. òmultimedia to run on chip,ó computerworld, october 3, p. 12.mohan, suruchi, and jean s. bozman. 1994. òrace for multimedia crown speeding up: companies team to get jump on interactive services,ó computerworld, june 27, p. 12.national cable television association (ncta). 1993a. cable television and americaõs telecommunications infrastructure. national cable television association, washington, d.c.national cable television association (ncta). 1993b. interactive surgery demonstration; linking: an idea exchange for cable professionals. national cable television association,washington, d.c., july.national cable television association (ncta). 1993c. twenty first century television: cabletelevision in the information age. national cable television association, washington, d.c.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1991. the ntia infrastructure report: telecommunications in the age of information. u.s. department of commerce,washington, d.c., october.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia), u.s. department of commerce. 1993. globalization of the mass media. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.nelson, richard r. 1982. government and technical progress: a crossindustry analysis.pergamon press, new york.newman, melinda. 1994. òcds push music sales past $10 bil mark,ó billboard, march 5, p. 6.new york times. 1994. òsony and phillips design cds for movies,ó december 17, p. 41.noam, eli. 1995. òbeyond telecommunications liberalization: past performance, present hype,and future direction,ó the new information infrastructure: strategies for u.s. policy, william j. drake, ed. twentieth century fund press, new york, forthcoming.oettinger, anthony g. 1993. òinformation age choices: the ecstasy and the agony,ó paperpresented at the 1993 asiapacific conference on communications, òintegrated communications for information society,ó taejon, korea, august 25.oõneill, molly. 1995. òthe lure and addiction of life on line,ó new york times, march 8, pp. c1and c6.parkes, walter. 1994. òrandom access, remote control: the evolution of storytelling,ó omni16(4):4854.pereira, joseph. 1994. òpc games could capture sega, nintendo customers,ó wall street journal,april 27, pp. b1 and b8.perelman, lewis j. 1993. òhow hypermation leaps the learning curve,ó forbes, october 25(supplemental), pp. 7690.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitivepitta, julie. 1993. òhyperinteractive,ó forbes 152(6):228230.pollack, andrew. 1993. ònow itõs japanõs turn to play catchup,ó new york times, november 21,p. f1.radcliffe, mark f. 1993. òintellectual property and multimedia: legal issues in the new mediaworld,ó pp. 121148 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts, andfuture trends, m.l. de sonne, ed. national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c.radiological society of north america (rsna). 1994. ònational library of medicine unveils ôthevisible manõ: computerized cadaver released onto the internet.ó press release dated november 28.ramirez, anthony. 1993. ò2 groups plan projects on computer standards,ó new york times,december 14, p. d5.reilly, patrick m. 1994. òhome shoppers to be given yet another service,ó wall street journal,january 14, p. b1.rheingold, howard. 1993. the virtual community: homesteading on the electronic frontier.addisonwesley publishing company, new york.rickard, jack. 1993. òhomegrown bbs,ó wired 1(4):4245.rifkin, glenn. 1993. òat age 9, online service reboots,ó new york times, november 8, p. d1.robichaux, mark, and don clark. 1994. òtime warner delays launch of tv service: trialinteractive network in orlando is set back by problems at 2 firms,ó wall street journal,march 2, pp. a34.rosen, david. 1993. òmultimedia and future media: 2000 and beyond,ó pp. 207228 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts, and future trends, m.l. de sonne,ed. national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c.rothstein, edward. 1994. òa new art form may arise from the ômyst,õó new york times,december 4, pp. h1 and h2425.samuels, gary. 1994a. òcdromõs first big victim,ó forbes 153(5):4244.samuels, gary. 1994b. òpartner or die,ó forbes 154(6):128130.samuels, gary. 1994c. òwhat profits?,ó forbes 154(10):7478.schwartz, john. 1993. òcaution: children at play on information highway,ó washington post,november 28, p. a1.schwartz, john. 1994. òa terminal obsession: nathaniel davenport lost himself in computergames. and then he lost his life. a modern cyberdrama,ó washington post, march 27,pp. f1 and f4.schwarz, joyce. 1993. òreinventing hollywood: creative approaches to new media production,ópp. 3764 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts, and futuretrends, m.l. de sonne, ed. national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c.seigel, jessica. 1994. òcomputer games? thatõs hollywood!,ó washington business, july 25, pp.15 and 19.shapiro, eben. 1994. òtime warnerõs orlando test to startñfinally,ó wall street journal, december 7, pp. b1 and b4.shrage, michael. 1994. òeast is east, and west is west, but neither may rule over new media,ówashington post, june 26, p. f3.sims, calvin. 1993. òpactel is granted approval to spin off its wireless unit,ó new york times,november 3, p. d1.sims, calvin. 1994. òfor consumers, multimedia shines,ó new york times, january 10, p. d1.solomon, jolie. 1993. òa risky revolution,ó newsweek 121(17):4445.sugawara, sandra, and paul farhi. 1993. òmerger to create a media giant,ó washington post,october 14, p. a1.tetzeli, rick. 1993. òvideogames: serious fun,ó fortune 128(16):110116.turner, richard. 1993a. òhollywood is seeing the future, and it is interactive show biz,ó wallstreet journal, may 19, p. a1.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography95turner, richard. 1993b. òvideogame innovator lures corporate giants to ôinteractiveõ media,ówall street journal, february 7, p. a1.turner, richard. 1994a. òhollywired,ó wall street journal, march 21, pp. r1 and r6.turner, richard. 1994b. òwalt disney will announce its plans to produce and market videogames,ó wall street journal, december 5, p. b4b.turner, richard, and thomas r. king. 1993. òdisney stands aside as rivals stampede to digitalalliances,ó wall street journal, september 24, p. a1.united states telephone association (usta). 1993. òusta calls for responsible transition tocompetition in local telephone markets.ó press release dated july 28.u.s. department of commerce (doc). 1993. u.s. industrial outlook 1993. u.s. governmentprinting office, washington, d.c.washington post. 1993. ópacific bell revamping network: big multimedia system planned,ònovember 12, pp. g1 and g3.washington post. 1995. òamerica online reports a loss,ó february 9, p. d11.weber, thomas e. 1994. ògeõs genie hopes ads can work magic to boost membership of online service,ó wall street journal, february 14, p. b4.wildman, steven s., and stephen e. siwek. 1988. international trade in films and televisionprograms. ballinger, cambridge, mass.womenõsweardaily (wwd). 1994. òbear bullish on tv shopping,ó may 10, p. 19.woo, junda. 1993. òpublisher sues compuserve over a song,ó wall street journal, december 16,pp. b1 and b16.yadon, robert e. 1993. òbroadcasting and multimedia: operations, applications, opportunities,ópp. 149171 in multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts, and futuretrends, m.l. de sonne, ed. national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c.zachary, g. pascal. 1994. òmicrosoft sets stock purchase of softimage,ó wall street journal,february 15, p. b5.ziegler, bart. 1994a. òfive technology concerns to cooperate on interactivevideo system standards,ó wall street journal, april 21, p. b8.ziegler, bart. 1994b. òlayoffs and overhaul at unprodigious prodigy,ó wall street journal, december 6, pp. b1 and b4.ziegler, bart. 1994c. òmutual attraction of phone and cable giants fades fast,ó wall streetjournal, april 7, pp. b1 and b8.ziegler, bart, and mark robichaux. 1994. òmutual attraction of phone and cable giants fadesfast,ó wall street journal, april 7, pp. b1 and b8.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixeskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.99acolloquium participantsnote: affiliations listed are those current at the time of the colloquium in june 1993.john blairraytheon research divisionmichael borrusberkeley roundtable on theinternational economycharles n. brownsteinnational science foundationdaniel f. burtoncouncil on competitivenesslinda cashdanvoice of americabill caswellapple computer inc.john s. cavalliniu.s. department of energyrandall colemanfederal communications commissionalden f. abbottnational telecommunications andinformation administrationu.s. department of commercejohn adamieee spectrumalfred v. ahobell communications researchjonathan d. aronsonuniversity of southern californiajordan baruchjordan baruch consultingaudrey bashkingovernment operations committeeu.s. house of representativesgwen bellassociation of computing machinerykeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100appendix apeter f. cowheyuniversity of california at san diegoroger dannenbergcarnegie mellon universityjohn g. dardisu.s. department of statepaul davidstanford universitygary demosdemografxmarvin denicoffthinking machines corporationdiane desimoneinstitute for information studiesnorthern telecommarcia de sonnenational association of broadcastersrick duceynational association of broadcastersyona ettingerembassy of israeldavid j. farberuniversity of pennsylvaniacharles fergusonmassachusetts institute of technologycharles firestonethe aspen institutefrancis dummer fisheruniversity of texas at austinmichael t.n. fitchu.s. department of statethomas forbordoffice of the honorable john j.rockefeller ivu.s. senatelaura fordus west inc.samuel h. fullerdigital equipment corporationhenry gellerwashington center for public policyresearchgeorge gilderdiscovery institutesamuel ginnpacific telesis groupstephen gouldcongressional research servicewilliam griffingte laboratoriesedward heresniakmcgrawhillanita k. jonesu.s. department of defenseanne jonessutherland, asbill, & brennanbrian kahininteractive multimedia associationkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a101sidney karinsan diego supercomputer centerken kaycomputer systems policy projectstephen t. kentbbn communicationsdavid a. kettlerbellsouth corporationsusan kollinsinternational trade commissionrichard a. lanhamuniversity of california at los angeles and rhetorica inc.alfred m. leenational telecommunications andinformation administrationu.s. department of commercebruce a. lehmanu.s. patent and trademark officelois levineelmanbiotechnology law reporttalbot s. lindstromfederal trade commissionandrew lippmanmassachusetts institute of technologyrobert w. luckybell communications researchwilliam mahernational telecommunications andinformation administrationu.s. department of commercenancy masonus west inc.sylvia mcdonoughinternational trade commissionbernadette mcguireassociation of public tv stationsjohn e. mcpheeu.s. department of commercesteven j. metalitzinformation industry associationbrady methenywashington faxdavid c. nagelapplesoft inc.david b. nelsonu.s. department of energymichael r. nelsonoffice of science and technologypolicyexecutive office of the presidenteli m. noamcolumbia universitytoshiyuki noguchinomura researchdonald a. normanapple computer inc.richard c. notebaertameritechjanice obuchowskifreedom technologies inc.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102appendix aeric pamercommerce clearing houseruth s. raubitscheku.s. department of justicehoward rauschcapital gainsjohn j. reaganwalt disney pictures and televisionmargaret ryanelectronic engineering timesgabi schindlerapple computer inc.mary shawcarnegie mellon universityjohn f. shochasset management companywendy silbermanoffice of the u.s. traderepresentativealexander singerfilm directorjames k. smithameritechphilip m. smithnational research councilrobert spinradxerox corporationrobert steinvoyager companyscott stevenscarnegie mellon universityglenn straitthe world and isteve tanseyamerican chemical societyminna taylorfox broadcasting companymichael telsonbudget committeeu.s. house of representativessherry turklemassachusetts institute of technologyandrew j. viterbiqualcomm inc.david waldenbbn communicationsbill warlickinternational trade commissionsteven s. wildmannorthwestern universitydale williamssprint communicationsrobert winteruniversity of california at losangeleswilliam wulfuniversity of virginiakeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.103bcolloquium agendajune 8, 1993 7:30  8:30 a.m.registration and continental breakfast(lecture room) 8:30  8:45welcome and colloquium introduction¥william wulf, cstb chair¥david nagel, colloquium chair 8:45  11:00convergence vision: beyondentertainmentñand getting thererobert lucky, panel chair¥john sculley, apple computer¥samuel ginn, pacific telesis¥robert stein, voyager¥richard notebaert, ameritech¥alexander singer, film director¥paul david, stanford university11:00  11:45convergence realized: a musical illustration¥robert winter, university of california atlos angeleskeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104appendix b11:45  12:30 p.m.lunch (refectory)12:30  2:15economics and policy: supply, demand,and intervention issuespeter cowhey, panel chair¥michael borrus, berkeley roundtable onthe international economy¥peter cowhey, university of california atsan diego¥eli noam, columbia university¥steven wildman, northwestern university 2:15  2:30break 2:30  4:00technopork, technoporn, andtechnopop: legal and social issuesjanice obuchowski, panel chair¥george gilder¥richard lanham, university of californiaat los angeles¥donald norman, apple computer¥sherry turkle, massachusetts institute oftechnology 4:00  4:30summary and concluding remarkscolloquium steering committee 4:30adjournkeeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, and...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105stephen m. caseamerica onlinepeter f. cowheyfederal communications commissionesther dysonedventure holdings inc.samuel h. fullerdigital equipment corporationrobert l. johnsonblack entertainment televisionrobert w. luckybell communications researchdavid c. nagelapplesoft inc.cfollowup interviewsrichard c. notebaertameritechjanice obuchowskifreedom technologies inc.alexander singerfilm directorrobert steinvoyager companynancy stoveryourchoice tv/discovery networksinc.steven s. wildmannorthwestern university