detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4814rights and responsibilities of participants in networkedcommunities172 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309050906 | doi 10.17226/4814dorothy e. denning and herbert s. lin, editors; steering committee on rights andresponsibilities of participants in networked communities, national researchcouncilrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rights andresponsibilities ofparticipants innetworkedcommunitiesdorothy e. denning and herbert s. lin, editorssteering committee on rights and responsibilitiesof participants in networked communitiescomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1994irights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by core funds of the computer science and telecommunications board. core support for the cstb is provided by its public and private sponsors: the airforce office of scientific research, apple computer, the advanced research projects agency, digital equipment corporation, the department of energy, ibm corporation, intel corporation, thenational aeronautics and space administration, the national science foundation, and the office ofnaval research.library of congress catalog card number 9466575international standard book number 0309050901additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285 washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)b456copyright 1994 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steering committee on rights andresponsibilities of participants in networkedcommunitiesdorothy e. denning, georgetown university, chairanne wells branscomb, harvard universitymitchell d. kapor, electronic frontier foundationstephen t. kent, bolt, beranek, and newman inc.george m. perry, prodigy services companymarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerlaura ost, consultantleslie wade, project assistantgloria bemah, administrative assistantiiirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunicationsboardwilliam a. wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems inc.james gray, san francisco, californiabarbara grosz, harvard universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorolarobert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.edward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise arnheim, senior staff officerherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames mallory, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria bemah, administrative assistantkimberly striker, project assistantleslie wade, project assistantivrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofscience, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studyjohn a. armstrong, ibm corporation (retired)sylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyavner friedman, university of minnesotasusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationhans mark, university of texas at austinclaire e. max, lawrence livermore national laboratorychristopher f. mckee, university of california at berkeleyjames w. mitchell, at&t bell laboratoriesjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratorynorman metzger, executive directorvrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vithe national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences. the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering. the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine. the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered ointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council. www.nationalacademies.orgrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein 1990, the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb)decided to conduct a strategic forum on the rights and responsibilities ofparticipants in networked communities. the board was motivated by theobservation that participation in electronically networked communities was, eventhen, growing by leaps and bounds, in environments including the internet,commercial network service providers, local bulletin boards, and company and/or officebased networks.in november 1992, a small invitationonly workshop was held inwashington, d.c., for prominent researchers and policy analysts to explore someof the issues that have arisen in this area; much of the background information inthis report is drawn from that workshop. participants in the workshop examineduser, provider, and other perspectives on different types of networkedcommunities, including those on the internet, on commercial information servicessuch as prodigy and america online, and on grassroots networks (e.g., thosebased on home electronic bulletin boards). addressed were such questions as: what policies, laws, regulations, or ethical standards apply to the use ofthese services; who sets them; how are they developed; and how are theyenforced?prefaceviirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. what are users' expectations regarding privacy and protection of otherproprietary interests? what are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of providers oroperators of these services? what are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of users of theseservices? what problems arise from connecting systems offering these services tosystems that operate under different policies?the forum, held in february 1993, had a somewhat different structure andaim. although many of these same issues were addressed, the forum wasorganized around a set of hypothetical scenarios designed to illuminate howissues related to and associated with free speech, electronic vandalism, theprotection of intellectual property interests, and privacy might emerge. the intentwas to focus primarily on the concerns that policymakers in government and theprivate sector might have. as a result, much of the forum discussion involvedquestions of law and how the current legal regime helps to define the boundariesof what is or is not acceptable conduct on electronic networks.the themes of the forum were heralded in a keynote speech by congressmanedward markey, chairman of the house subcommittee on telecommunicationsand finance of the house committee on energy and commerce. he noted thetechnological convergence of computer, communications, and entertainmenttechnologies and pointed out that historical approaches based on differentiatingthese technologies may create problems for policymakers in the future. heunderscored the importance of fundamental human values even in the newelectronic medium of networks, and he argued strongly that policymakers have toaddress the negative as well as the positive aspects of the new medium.this report is based on material drawn from the november 1992 workshop,the february 1993 forum, deliberations of the steering committee, and othermaterial and events that have appeared in the interim. the workshop of theamerican association for the advancement of science and the american barassociation, "legal, ethical, and technological aspects of computer andnetwork use and abuse," held on december 1719, 1993, was particularlygermane. the 1993 forum provided some background material on technology,legal underpinnings, and the thencurrent policy environment, much of which isincorporated into chapters 1 through 3. chapters 4 through 7 are devotedprimarily to discussions of the scenarios. chapter 8 focuses on the deliberationsof the steering committee, although comments from other speakers andparticipants are liberally included. the fiveprefaceviiirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes provide information about network technology (appendix a), theagendas for the workshop and forum (appendixes b and c), mr. markey'skeynote speech (appendix d), and biographies of the steering committee(appendix e).as the report of a workshop/forum event, this report does not attempt to drawconclusions, find definitive answers, or make specific recommendations; rather,its purpose is to illuminate, to question, and to articulate thorny and problematicissues that arise in this domain, thus helping to lay a foundation for moreinformed public debate and discussion. where possible, cstb has checked withindividuals quoted in this report to ensure that their quotes are used in context.the steering committee and editors are responsible for the synthesis and analysiscontained in this report. in addition, chapter 1 and appendix a are based in parton remarks made by mitchell kapor at the february forum, while chapter 3draws heavily on anne branscomb's presentation to the forum and hersubsequent work. finally, laura ost, an independent writer, developed the initialdrafts of chapters 4 through 7, and james mallory of the cstb staff contributedto appendix a. the comments and criticisms of reviewers of early drafts of thisreport and of its anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.the cstb will be glad to receive comments on this report as well as anysuggestions for further work in this area. please send them via email tocstb@nas.edu, or via regular mail to cstb, national research council,2101 constitution avenue nw, washington, dc 20418.prefaceixrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 the nature of electronic networks 62 networks and society 173 legal considerations for electronic networks 314 free speech 555 electronic vandalism 696 intellectual property interests 857 privacy 998 common themes 113 appendixes a network technology 123b workshop schedule and session descriptions 137c forum statement of purpose and agenda 142d keynote speech: networked communities and the laws ofcyberspace, byedward markey 146e biographical sketches 158contents xirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents xiirights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summaryelectronic networks are a new communication medium that allows people tointeract, coordinate action, and access and exchange information, all from theirdesktop computers. the networks have spawned a growing set of services thatnow include electronic mail, electronic publications and bulletin boards,conferencing, online information services and digital libraries, electronictransactions, and computer playgrounds.computer and communications technology can, with a high degree ofassurance, be assumed to be increasingly capable for a long time to come. butsuch technology is an enabler for a variety of social phenomena that are moredifficult to predict or understand, and the true intellectual challenges are muchmore likely to arise from people's use of networks for communication andinformation exchange than from the development of the technology to move largeamounts of electronic information rapidly from one place to another. at aworkshop held in november 1992 and a public forum in february 1993,technologists, service providers, policy analysts, lawyers, and social scientistsfrom academia, industry, and government met to discuss some of the social issuesraised by the emergence of electronic communities. this report is based on thediscussions of the workshop and forum, as well as deliberations of the steeringcommittee and material that has appeared in the interim. its purpose is not to drawconclusions, find definitive answers, or make specific recommendations;executive summary1rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rather, its purpose is to illuminate, to question, and to articulate thorny andproblematic issues that arise in this domain, thus helping to lay a foundation formore informed public debate and discussion.the communication and informationinterchange aspects of electronicnetworks that provide benefits to our communities give rise to questions related tothe rights and responsibilities of participants in those communities: who is liablewhen someone posts a defamatory message, child pornography, or copyrightedmaterial on a public bulletin board? what are the legal and ethical obligations of aservice provider to screen public postings? what is the provider's obligation toprotect the privacy of users of its services? does responsibility flow fromwhether the provider has the technical ability to exercise control or from whetherthe provider chooses to exercise control? what is the role of regulation and thelaw versus that of ethics, informal community behavior, and the marketplace?what constitutes fair use of copyrighted information? what is the nature ofinformed consent relative to providing information?the workshop provided a variety of background perspectives on issues suchas free speech and privacy. the forum itself began with presentations on thenature of electronic networks and on the relevant legal perspectives. within thecurrent legal regime, creators of information are provided legal protection (andrestraints) through copyright and patent laws. publishers are protected primarilyunder the first amendment, although they, too, must abide by relevantintellectual property law. distributors govern their relationships with theirsources through contract and with their customers through both contract and moreinformal business practices and codes of conduct. carriers are subject to anelaborate regulatory system established by law and administered by the federalcommunications commission and state regulatory agencies. users are governedby social customs (commonly called ''netiquette"), by contract with the providersof the services they use, by federal and state statutes, and by common law if theywant to litigate about some harm that has occurred.to explore the concepts of rights and responsibilities more fully, panels ofexperts at the february forum considered four areas: free speech, electronicvandalism, intellectual property interests, and privacy. for each area, twoscenarios were presented and the panelists were asked to address relevant issuesin the context of the scenarios; audience reaction to each of these paneldiscussions was also sought. after all four panels had finished, the steeringcommittee attempted to identify and synthesize key themes. certain importantpoints emerged from discussions in these areas, as described below.executive summary2rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. free speech. providers of information services, such as commercialnetworks, have some leeway in defining the services they provide andthus their legal obligations, although their latitude may not be entirelyunlimited. (for example, under certain circumstances, it is conceivablethat even a private information service would have responsibilities foraccess that are more traditionally associated with public forums.)providers that assert the right to control the content of public traffic maybe subject to a more stringent liability (e.g., for defamation) for thattraffic than those that do not assert such a right. at the same time,economic considerations may influence commercial networks to assert ahigher degree of control. information services supported by publicfunds, operated by government, or otherwise deemed public cannotdiscriminate among users on the basis of their electroniccommunications for first amendment reasons; common carriers cannotrefuse to carry traffic arbitrarily. service providers of all types are welladvised to establish the rules under which they provide their services,preferably in advance and perhaps in consultation with their users. electronic vandalism. current federal computer crime statutes arelimited in that they focus on a class of acts whose elements can bedifficult to define (e.g., what should be the definition of an"unauthorized" user in a world of highly interconnected computers?) andleave unaddressed a range of other acts that society may well wish tocriminalize or limit (e.g., harmful acts not now criminalized that aredeliberately committed by insiders who have legal access). ancillaryissues such as determining the level of damage may also be problematicin any given case. the relative newness of electronic networks as amedium for human communication and behavior means that we as asociety collectively lack a great deal of shared experience about what isand is not (or should not be considered) a crime. legal precedents andethical standards applied to this new medium are ultimately the basis forcriminalizing behavior. intellectual property. although intellectual property is traditionally thedomain of copyright, patents, and trade secrets, most of the discussion ofintellectual property matters in a networked environment is related tocopyright, and discussions at the february 1993 forum reflected thisweighting. copyrighted electronic materials are covered by fairuseprovisions in copyright law, although the nature of the electronicmedium with respect to the reproduction and/or alteration of informationamplifies concerns that have been addressed in other venues (e.g., in thedomain of photocopiers). the use of intellectual property can also becontrolled through licenses that have essentially unlimited freedom tospecify contractually the conditionsexecutive summary3rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of use. nevertheless, many people see electronic networks as a threatthat will dilute the value of their intellectual work. privacy. privacy rights are never absolute but rather are rights thatsociety balances with the need or desirability for disclosure undervarious circumstances. in many cases, individuals can make their owndecisions and choices regarding their privacy (e.g., by using electronicmail (email) systems that conceal the identity of the mail sender or byencrypting their communications); however, that privacy may beillusory. for example, a network that transmits email may require itsusers to acknowledge that all traffic is public, but its regular users maybecome habituated to those warnings and may not internalize them.thus, what counts as a "reasonable expectation of privacy" on electronicnetworks may not be clear in any given instance, even if policies aremade explicit in advance.why are these areas contentious? analysis reveals substantivedisagreements rooted in value judgments. for example, forum participantsdisagreed on the extent to which continuity with past precedents is desirable.lawyers and policymakers (mostly but not entirely) tended to argue that rightsand responsibilities in a new domain are inherently rooted in existing rules. thelaws, norms, policies, and practices governing any technology or behavior areformed from precedents, often in response to conflicts that arise from customer ormarket demands, criminal charges, and civil lawsuits. this is particularly obviouswith common law, since the resolution of court cases depends heavily on legalprecedents. but the same is true of other types of rules. in addition, rules tend tooriginate in informal sources and then, over time, become codified, first throughcommon law litigation and later by legislation. for electronic networks, othermedia including print, telephones, radio, and television have provided a rich setof precedents to draw on. at the same time, precedents do not always provideeasy answers, in part because they are never identical to the case at hand and inpart because multiple precedents, with conflicting rules, may apply in a givencase.by contrast, many technologists who have extensive experience in usingelectronic networks assert that with a new medium and a new form of humanexpression should also come new rules of social intercourse specially adapted tothat new medium. for example, many providers of network services haveestablished policies and rules for the use of their services, and a body of case lawand legislative statutes is emerging specifically for electronic services. thus, forthese people, questions about rights and responsibilities are not just philosophicalor even open to being weighed according to the rulesexecutive summary4rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.developed for other media, but rather must be addressed in rules specificallyformulated for electronic networks.other topics on which workshop and forum participants expressed differingvalue judgments included the following: the extent to which the government should regulate behavior onelectronic networks, the role of the marketplace in influencing behavior, the value of sharing information freely versus keeping informationproprietary or private, the need for law that specifically relates to behavior on electronicnetworks, the nature of informed consent relevant to providing information, and the disposition of individuals who express no preference or inclinationregarding their putative rights on electronic networks.these disagreements, and others not mentioned above, are heightened as theconcerns they raise (and have raised in the past) are magnified through the use ofnetworking technology. in the past, any apparent resolution of such concerns hascome about not because the concerns have disappeared or various stakeholdershave changed their minds, but because political compromises and the need tomove forward have driven decision making. thus, resolution very much dependson the circumstances of the moment, and solutions or approaches to thesedisagreements will inevitably be a blend of past traditions, present realities, andpossible future directions. networking technology reopens traditional debateslargely because it threatens the relevant status quo; with new circumstances, newcompromises become necessary, and thus the same fundamental questions need tobe reexamined.if this is true, the debate over social norms on electronic networks will notdiffer substantively from the debate over any other controversial social issue,although the sophistication of the technological understanding required may wellmake the debate a less informed one. this is not to say that the debates shouldnot be taking place, but only that our hopes about what such debates canaccomplish should be moderated. these debates will not resolve fundamentalissues or even result in consensus, but they can serve an educational role,illuminating and illustrating issues and providing alternative visions of the futurefor the concerned public.executive summary5rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1the nature of electronic networksa new medium for communicationelectronic networks, which are webs of electronically connected computers,are a new medium for communication (see appendix a for a description ofnetwork technology). consider: they offer new tools for interacting, coordinating action, and conductingtransactions. they enable new ways of accessing, distributing, and sharing andexchanging information. they provide new ways of learning, working, and playing. they give rise to new communities of people with shared interests andconcerns, and they generate new interest areas and new concerns.although electronic networks share many of the properties of othercommunications media (e.g., postal mail, telephones, radio, and television), theyprovide individuals and organizations with communication tools that are fasterand more efficient than postal mail, lessnote: in this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originatedwith the individual noted, speaking at the november 1992 workshop.the nature of electronic networks6rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.controlled than radio and television, and more capable than the telephone orstandalone fax machine of supporting large distributions. at the same time,networking (especially with networks tied to other networks) quite often involvesmultiple entities that may have different operating policies and procedures; in thisregard, networking is unlike using more traditional media that tend to operateunder more uniform and centrally formulated policy guidelines.using electronic networks, people share experiences and activities that bindthem together (box 1.1). although longdistance transportation systems,telephones, and broadcast media have led to the formation of manygeographically dispersed communities that are defined more by shared intereststhan geographical location (e.g., professional societies and nationwide clubs),networks provide a medium that transcends distance and further enriches thepossibilitiesbox 1.1 some of what people can do with networksł write an electronic message and send it through an electronic mailsystem. receive and reply to an electronic message, forward copies to otherpeople who are connected to the network, and clip out parts of themessage for inclusion in a report. browse the catalogue of a digital library and scan the contents ofabstracts or full documents, and transmit selected documents to one'scomputer for later reading or for incorporating into other documents. locate, download, install, and run software in networkaccessiblesoftware libraries.compose an article or newsletter and send it out to thousands of peopleon an electronic distribution list. join online discussion groups that bring together people with sharedinterests, composing and reading messages that form a continuingconversation among potentially tens of thousands of "fellow travelers." "telecommute" to work from a personal computer and engage inbusiness with fellow coworkers, customers, and suppliers. enroll in a program of study at a remote school, and then receiveassignments, submit work, and interact with faculty through the network. and order goods and services. connect to online entertainment centers and join other people in anelectronic fantasy game.the nature of electronic networks7rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for global communities. the total number of network users in the world isimpossible to determine, but it would not be unreasonable to expect that tens ofmillions of people have some direct contact with networked connections.the concept of a community whose existence is enabled by electronicnetworks is a useful departure point for the main topic of discussion of thisreport: the rights and responsibilities of the members of networked communities.such matters inhere in how various communities of people use networktechnologies, and not in the particular technologies themselves, a point that is alltoo often lost in such discussions. the purpose of this report is to identify andaddress important questions related to free speech, privacy, intellectual property,and electronic vandalism as they arise in the context of networked communities;these four areas are not the only dimensions of the rights and responsibilities ofnetwork users, but they are important ones. this chapter and the next attempt toidentify the characteristics of the new communications medium and of thecommunities that have formed around it.the network scenethe phenomenal increase in the number of network users in the past fewyears has been driven by two technologies: personal computers (introduced in theearly 1980s) and networking technology (e.g., local area network technologyintroduced in the mid1980s and further development of wide area networktechnology, including that deployed on the internet and on various private andpublic data networks). in particular, internet use has increased exponentiallysince 1983. by early 1994, estimates of the number of internet users ranged from 2million to 20 million (the upper end refers to electronic mail (email) users), andby mid1994 at least 3 million host computers were linked by the internet.1 theinternet is of particular interest because of its openness, the diversity of its users,and its characteristic use as a vehicle for experimentation with new informationand communications services.two fundamental aspects of the internet are decentralized: its technologyand its governance. the internet is based on packetswitching technology thattransmits a message between two points by breaking the message into packetsthat travel independently and1 press release of the internet society, august 4, 1994. the internet society is theinternational organization for the internet, its technologies, and applications.the nature of electronic networks8rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.often through different routes between sender and receiver. as with telephonetraffic, the path taken by data sent through the internet is often not known inadvance.the governance of the internet is also decentralized. that is, each site on theinternet operates under its own locally formulated code of behavior or conduct,though each site communicates with other sites. this is especially relevant giventhat the internet accommodates host sites of different types (academic,commercial, government) and host sites located in different regions of the countryor in different countries. since message traffic from point a to point b maytraverse sites with codes of behavior or conduct that are very different from thosethat govern point a or point b, the retransmission of certain types of messagetraffic along intermediate sites may be regarded as a violation of the code of thoseintermediate sites. as david j. farber, a university of pennsylvania professor ofcomputer and information science, put it, "i don't know what they are doing withmy traffic. i don't know what laws i'm violating. – [w]e don't seem to haveeither international agreements or case law [that are known to the generalcommunity] that apply to the electronic communications area, and that is going tobe more and more a serious problem." international implications may also differdepending on whether the network(s) in use is public or private.future developments may make today's internet pale by comparison.present expansion of the internet community has been fueled by an increasingnumber of computerliterate individuals. a much larger pool of potentialnetworkers is represented by the canonical person on the street, who will resistthe use of computers until they are as easy to operate as telephones or televisions.this is a market that telephone companies and cable television companies hope totap. startup companies, with backing from major consumer electronicscompanies, are trying to bring messaging and information services to the generalpublic, as are a number of larger, moreestablished companies such as the prodigyservices company and compuserve. the promise is sophisticated, easytouse,userfriendly information services, not for 10 million people but for hundreds ofmillions of people.2an important political development is the clinton administration's2 the issue of access to electronic resources by those in lowincome, rural, and innercityareas is an important question that many commentators and analysts are addressing underthe question of what "universal access" means in a networked environment. for reasons oftime and resources, the steering committee chose not to address this point in detail.the nature of electronic networks9rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.support of a comprehensive network complex referred to as the nationalinformation infrastructure (nii). the administration's view of the nii is sweepingand grand and promises significant benefits for all in u.s. society.3 but if the niiis indeed to contribute to the betterment of society, it behooves the nation toaddress issues related to the behavior of users and providers, as well as questionsof the nii's extent and reach, capability, quality, timing of service availability,and cost.the broadening base of users of information services, the contemplation ofnew uses in inherently personal arenas (e.g., the delivery of social services), andthe growth of information services for businesses and consumers have beenbringing the issues of rights and responsibilities to the attention of policymakersat state and federal levels. typically, the motivation for policy discussion is somekind of a problem: a security breach in a private or public network, theharassment of an individual via electronic mail, the controversy over whethermaterial available over a given service is pornographic and whether access tosuch material can or should be controlled. enough perceived problems andcontroversy have been generated that private guidelines (codes of conduct) arebeing developed, tried, and revised, and public guidelines (including regulations,advisories from the office of management and budget, or laws) are beingdiscussed.3 the following quotes are taken from the administration document the nationalinformation infrastructure: agenda for action:all americans have a stake in the construction of an advanced national informationinfrastructure (nii), a seamless web of communications networks, computers, databases,and consumer electronics that will put vast amounts of information at users' fingertips.development of the nii can help unleash an information revolution that will changeforever the way people live, work, and interact with each other: people could live almost anywhere they wanted, without foregoing opportunities foruseful and fulfilling employment, by "telecommuting" to their offices through anelectronic highway. the best schools, teachers, and courses would be available to all students, withoutregard to geography, distance, resources, or disability. services that improve the u.s. health care system and respond to other importantsocial needs could be available online, without waiting in line, when and where they areneeded.see information infrastructure task force, the national information infrastructure:agenda for action, washington, d.c., 1993.the nature of electronic networks10rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the clinton administration the focal point for policy consideration in thisarea has been the information infrastructure task force (iitf), a crosscuttinginteragency group whose role is to explore areas where policy may need to beformulated or changed and to gather inputs from within and outside thegovernment. a major component of that task force is the information policycommittee, which is examining policy issues in the area of privacy, security, andintellectual property protection. activities of that committee through mid1994included outreach, input gathering, deliberation (resulting in a draft of a set ofprivacy principles that was circulated for public comment in may 1994), theplanning of a public forum to obtain input on security issues (held in july 1994),the release in july 1994 of a report on how copyright law should be updated inthe age of ubiquitous electronic networks, and the planning of a conference toaddress how fairuse provisions of copyright law may be applied to the electronicrealm. although some of the administration activities are intended to driveproposals for legislation, the congress itself has addressed related issues (e.g.,senator paul simon introduced s. 1735, the privacy protection act of 1994, abill that would establish a u.s. data protection commission to advise the u.s.government on, among other things, matters related to protecting data stored inelectronic form), and telecommunications reform legislation may eventuallyaddress relevant issues. meanwhile, these issues are also being addressedšthrough reports, polemics, meetings, and exploratory committeesšby anassortment of private entities, including trade, professional, and advocacygroups, such as the telecommunications policy roundtable, the coalition fornetworked information, educom, the electronic frontier foundation,computer professionals for social responsibility, the internet society, thecomputer ethics institute, the information industries association, and so on, aswell as direct representation from the entertainment, cable, telephone andtelecommunications, and informationproviding and publishing industries.4this large and growing set of actors on the policy stage suggests that thefuture may be only dimly visible today. what is clear is that the nation is on thethreshold of an era in which the networking4 several groups have issued reports in the past year with the intention of influencingpublic policy and attitudes regarding the nii. see, for example, computer professionalsfor social responsibility (cpsr), serving the community: a public interest vision of thenational information infrastructure, cpsr, palo alto, calif., 1994; and council oncompetitiveness, competition policy: unlocking the national information infrastructure,washington, d.c., december 1993.the nature of electronic networks11rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environment will be highly open and commercial, very heterogeneous, and withrules that may look quite different from those to which ''old hands" at networkingare accustomed. the ultimate social impact of electronic networks may be aboutas well understood today as that of the telephone in 1876. many of those whofirst supported the deployment of the telephone argued that it would enable musicto be brought from the performance hall to the home; many fewer imagined thatit would become the center of personal and business communications.network metaphorselectronic networks offer new communication tools for interacting and forcoordinating action. three metaphors have emerged for characterizing the newmedium and the functions it enables: cyberspace, the information superhighway,and the electronic marketplace. each of these metaphors emphasizes a particularuse of electronic networks and, in so doing, facilitates our understanding of thenew medium by illuminating its salient features and the social and legal issuesthey raise. as with most metaphors, however, the interpretations that emerge arelimiting and can be misleadingša point often overlooked by their users. thus,this report does not systematically favor the use of one metaphor over another.cyberspacethe term "cyberspace" originated with the science fiction writer williamgibson, who characterized it as a "consensual hallucination of visually realizeddata achieved through plugging in to a global computer network."5 it could beexperienced by making a direct, physical link between an individual's brain andthe semiotic data available on a global computer network. the use of the word"space" within the term suggests that cyberspace has some similarities tophysical space.current usage focuses on this notion of electronic networks constituting avirtual place that transcends physical space and national boundaries.6 people go tocyberspace, travel on its electronic roads5 william gibson, neuromancer, ace science fiction, berkeley publishing group, newyork, 1984. note that cyberspace need not be limited to visually realized data; simulatedsounds and touch are also included.6 although the idea of nonphysical space may sound metaphysical, john perry barlowhas observed that most individuals have already had some experience with cyberspacethe nature of electronic networks12rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and highways, and settle into virtual communitiesšall from their office orhome. they visit "electronic pubs" and "town squares" by participating indiscussion groups on bulletin boards and "newsgroups." they join virtualcommunities that form around shared interests. they socialize with people allover the world.the metaphor is used to suggest a new frontierša place that is not yetsettled, where anarchy often prevails. issues related to rights and responsibilitiesare often framed in the context of how to civilize or establish law and order in thenew frontier. inhabitants believe they should be free to create their own rules andlaws. the metaphor also draws attention to issues relating to freedom, particularlyfree speech and free press, and raises issues of privacy and of search and seizurewithin the virtual space.a potential limitation of the cyberspace metaphor is that it mayoveremphasize a new virtual space at the expense of the broader and historicalcontext in which networking technology is embedded. other communicationstechnologies (e.g., mail, telephones, television) enable people to transcend thelimitations of space and time as well, and considerable human effort has beenexpended to establish rules and practices for using these technologies. the focuson a new frontier overlooks the societies that developed and deployed the newtechnologies and the laws, practices, and traditions these societies have alreadyestablished governing behavior performed by someone within their jurisdiction.the metaphor suggests that we are engaging in some wholly new set of actionswhen in fact we are merely using new tools to engage in very basic human acts ofcommunication and coordination of action.the information superhighwaythe "information superhighway" metaphor emphasizes the use of electronicnetworks to access and distribute information. it suggests that the primarypurpose of the networks is to carry information and that that information travelsover the information highway much as cars and trucks travel over physicalhighways. the information highway links information providers (e.g., digitallibraries) to users. on/off ramps connect a highbandwidth superhighway toas a practical reality: cyberspace is the location of the conversation when two or morepeople talk on the telephone. any money that you do not currently have in your wallet orpurse or bank vault, if it exists anywhere, exists in the cyberspace of the modern electronicbanking system.the nature of electronic networks13rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lesser highways, and lesser highways to organizations and individuals. themetaphor is embodied in the administration's plans for the nii.the focus on information leads to the issue of who has access and whetherthe new technology will lead to a widening gap between information "haves" and"have nots." the metaphor also raises issues relating to intellectual property andto privacy and security (information protection). publication and distribution ofinformation raise issues of free speech and free press, and the possession ofinformation raises issues related to search and seizure.a particularly controversial implication of the metaphor is that it suggests akey role for government in promoting its development: just as the governmentwas a major force behind the construction of the federal highway system, so alsowill the government be a major force driving the deployment of the informationsuperhighway. the controversy has several important aspects. the first is that itsuggests a major government role in funding deployment, in spite of the fact thatthe administration has made it clear that its vision for the nii depends on theprivate sector making most of the investments for the physical infrastructure andfor the services and information to be provided over that infrastructure. in theadministration's view, the role of government will be to provide leadership andguidance for the nii. a second important aspect is that many proponents of theinformation superhighway argue for a bottomup, grassroots character to itsdevelopment and deployment, while the construction of the interstate highwaysystem was undertaken topdown with intimate government direction. a thirdaspect is that major government involvement suggests the possibility that federal,state, and local governments will be working together to provide the network ofconnecting streets, onramps, offramps, and the like to every community on themain "superhighway." whether such partnerships will in fact be feasible remainsto be seen, and the nature of appropriate government involvement in the nationalinformation infrastructure remains the subject of considerable argument anddebate.finally, a potential limitation of the metaphor is that it may overemphasizeinformation at the expense of the use of the technology to coordinate action, toconduct transactions, and to communicate informally. for example, many of theexamples offered by proponents of the information superhighway involve thetransmittal of large volumes of information, information that is traditionallyunderstood as something related to knowledge and data or something that can belearned from a book or a lecture. many fewer examples deal with the use of theinformation infrastructure for coordination and the like,the nature of electronic networks14rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.despite the models offered by many service and manufacturing enterprises inusing private networks (perhaps operating over leased public lines) for thesepurposes.7the electronic marketplacefor many people, the "electronic marketplace" metaphor emphasizes thegrowing use of electronic networks to engage in transactions, both formally andinformally, to acquire goods (often information) and services such as education.it resembles the physical marketplace and is a part of the global marketplace.because information is an important good in the electronic marketplace, themarketplace metaphor raises the same issues as the information superhighwaymetaphor. however, it does so more powerfully by showing that the issues arisein the context of transactions. for example, the information superhighwaymetaphor suggests that it is sufficient to give everyone access to the electronichighway in order to close the gap between the information "haves" and "havenots." the marketplace metaphor shows that simple access may not make muchdifference if the information available through the technology must bepurchased. the marketplace metaphor also shows that information privacy relatesto the use of information in transactions (e.g., selling mailing lists) and not just tothe information independent of its use. in addition, the marketplace metaphorraises new questions about concerns such as accountability and fraud,racketeering, and other criminal acts associated with transactions. finally, it callsattention to the idea that while individuals may have the right to marketinformation goods and services, the costs of selling their wares on networks maybe prohibitive.the marketplace metaphor is sometimes referred to as the "electronic agora"in analogy with the public square in ancient greece that served as the marketplaceand center of civic life. this usage brings to life the community aspects of thecyberspace metaphor, but does so more powerfully by including the transactionsthat take place within those communities.the use of the marketplace metaphor is likely to increase as more7 see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council, information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst centurylever, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1994; computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, information technology andmanufacturing: an agenda for research, national academy press, washington, d.c.,forthcoming.the nature of electronic networks15rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goods and services become available over networks and methods of making andreceiving electronic payments securely are implemented. this metaphoremphasizes the actions that people take using the new communications medium,and not just the inert information that flows through the networks or thecommunities that form around common interests. rights and responsibilitiesrelate to actions and define which actions are encouraged, allowed, discouraged,or forbidden.however, despite its strengths, the metaphor also has potential limitations.one is that it is easily interpreted to emphasize commercial transactions at theexpense of noncommercial interactions. thus, notforprofit ventures andactivities (e.g., education, government) may feel less than comfortable with it. asecond is that with its economic connotations, it suggests that a kind of laissezfaire philosophy governs operations in the electronic marketplace, when theextent and nature of government regulation are policy issues that have not yetbeen settled (and are unlikely to be settled for a long time to come). a third isthat some commentators use "electronic marketplace" with closer attention to itspolitical origins and in the same sense that the term "marketplace of ideas" isusedšas a description of an arena in which ideas and/or information are freelycirculated to all without regard to size or political power, are exposed to publicscrutiny or use, and survive or disappear according to their quality and value.the nature of electronic networks16rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2networks and societythe glamour of network technologies is impressive, but it should not blindus to the social and intellectual challenges posed by new media. the realchallenges are much more likely to arise from the people using networks forcommunication and information exchange than from the development of thetechnology to move large amounts of electronic information very rapidly fromone place to another, though technology itself may enable new ways of meetingthese challenges. it is the communication and information interchange aspects ofthe networks that provide benefits to our communities and also give rise to theneed to examine how networks relate to culture and society.networks and culturenetworks and culture can be examined from two perspectives: the nature ofnetwork culture (culture "in the small") and the impact of networks on culture atlarge.1note: in this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originatedwith the individual noted, speaking at the november 1992 workshop.1 the literature on the social dynamics in networked environments is extensive. gooddiscussions include: lee sproull and sara kiesler, connections: new ways of working inthe networked organization, mit press, cambridge, mass., 1991; national researchcouncil, people and technology in the workplace, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1991; and tora k. bikson and j.d. eveland, technology transfer as a frameworkfor understanding social impacts of computerization, the rand corporation, santamonica, calif., 1990.networks and society17rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it is clear that members of networked communities engage in socialbehavior. for example, these individuals have been known to "meet" each otherin these online communities. at these meetings, they discuss personal andprofessional matters, find jobs, advertise their services, engage in "stalking"behavior, and become visibly angry.online social interactions provide the behavioral basis on which muchnetwork culture is generated and reproduced; such interactions are also thesubject of the behavior that is regulated by culture at large. as a general rule,culture can be regarded as a collection of three elements: (1) values, or generalstatements about the "desirable"; (2) behavioral norms, including etiquette andconvention, that provide the basis for judging, in individual situations, whether avalue is being observed, thus regulating behavior in the interest of implementingor reinforcing values; and (3) beliefs that provide history, mythology, and worldview. all of these apply to networked communities in various forms. forexample:1. many networked communities believe strongly in the desirability ofunfettered communication. at the same time, many (especially thosethat reside on the internet) believe strongly that commercialadvertising traffic is highly undesirable.2. people observe forms of etiquette and social convention in networkedcommunities. for example, behavior that is regarded by communitymembers as antisocial is censured through peer pressure andcomments (but generally not censored). even behavior as subtle astyping in capital letters has significance, in that typing incapital letters is widely regarded as theelectronic equivalent of shouting.3. networked communities have their own myths, their own equivalentsof urban folklore stories such as alligators in the sewers. onepersistently recurring myth is the report that some governmentagency is about to impose a modem tax that will make itprohibitively expensive for private users to use telephone lines totransmit data. the story may have some origin in truth,2 but itsurfaces so2 this story apparently has its roots in two distinct events. in the early1980s, a proposal was circulated to impose a charge on the leased lines usedby online information services providers. the providers would have paidthis charge, but in all likelihood it would have been passed to the ultimateconsumers. in addition, in the early 1970s, a proposal surfaced in the midwest to impose a small additional surcharge on telephone lines that wereselfdeclared to be supporting data communications traffic. both theseproposals died very quickly, but their effects linger on.networks and society18rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.often as a "new" story that it can be regarded as the networkequivalent of an urban folktale.in short, network cultures exist because networked communities exist, andthey are as diverse as any collection of human beings can be. networkedcommunities exist because networks enable individuals with shared interests oraffinities to affiliate electronically.as with physical communities, network cultures are not homogeneous, andthe participants in networked communities often have conflicting values. arecurrent issue in university communities, for example, is whether pornographicimages or "hate speech" should be banned. although some universities havebanned entire electronic "newsgroups" that were judged pornographic, most havestayed away from such censoring.3 several years ago, stanford university bannedan electronic newsgroup on humor because of complaints about an ethnic joke.the newsgroup was subsequently restored after campus protests about freespeech.electronic networks have also had an impact on culture at large. forexample, commercial online services have become the virtual equivalent of"singles" bars for many individuals. using the realtime conferencing servicesprovided by these services, many people seek online conversation with potentialromantic partners. they flirt through their keyboards, developing romances andcarrying on "illicit" or clandestine affairs. in some instances, individuals whohave interacted online meet face to face and develop relationships in person;marriages have been known to result from such interactions.a second example is that computer networks have become a grassrootsvehicle for lobbying against government and commercial actions. for instance, alarge software company once attempted to market a product that contained a largedatabase of information about consumers. an electronic protest was organizedagainst it on the grounds that it had many privacy implications. these protestsflooded the electronic mailbox of the company's chief executive officer. as aresult, the product was withdrawn.finally, computer networks have served as important political tools. forexample, the relcom, the soviet network on the internet, played a significant rolein the dissemination of information during the soviet coup attempt in 1991.relcom was used both for communication among the coup resisters and forcommunication with the3 a newsgroup is one form of electronic conference. see appendix a for more details.networks and society19rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.outside. some considered it to be one of the best sources of information.by themselves, the examples given above and many others like them are notindividually significant; that is, they do not necessarily demonstrate hownetworks will be used in the future. but taken together they do illustrate a generaland fundamental pointšthat networks may change conduct and behavior insignificant and multiple ways across life and society.conflicting values in networked communitiesas noted above, networked communities are not monolithic. with theirproliferation (and the interconnection of many across geographic or politicalboundaries), electronic networks have been described variously as models of"anarchy," "extreme decentralization," and "accelerating decentralization." mostnetworked communities have little hierarchical administrative structure and fewcentral administrative procedures or systematic methods of policy enforcement,although some communities (e.g., those resident in universities or privatecompanies) operate under the aegis of a single administrative entity and aresubject to the rules promulgated by that entityšand yet each of thesecommunities may manifest its own "culture'' within those rules. under thesecircumstances, it is perhaps understandable that different networked communitiesmight have different values.many universities govern their electronic networks through campus policiesthat are substantially the same as the policies governing other pieces of universityinfrastructure. freedom of speech (discussed more extensively in chapter 4)tends to be an overriding value on these networks, based on the principles ofacademic freedom.4 but incidents challenging this freedom arise frequently.jeffrey i. schiller, network manager at the massachusetts institute oftechnology, for example, notes that at least once a month someone assertsharassment as the result of someone else's electronic free speech. the values thatgovern behavior may be blurred further by campus4 for instance, the "joint statement on rights and freedoms of students" issued in 1967by the american association of university professors, u.s. national student association,association of american colleges, national association of student personneladministrators, and national association of women deans and counselors holds that"academic institutions exist for the transmission of knowledge, the pursuit of truth, thedevelopment of students, and the general wellbeing of society. free inquiry and freeexpression are indispensable to the attainment of these goals."networks and society20rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.connections through the internet to other institutions or organizations that mayhave different values. "and the only thing that has made the situation tenable hasbeen the fact that most of the policies have significant amounts of overlap andnobody is enforcing them," schiller said. "only the most outrageous behaviorwill ever raise an eyebrow. –"a different balance of values is found in the world of commercial networkservice providers. commercial providers are highly motivated to provide a rangeof network services that appeal to large audiences and generally try to suppressmessage traffic found offensive by significant segments of these audiences. forexample, a commercial provider will often explicitly prohibit overtly sexualrealtime chats on its network.a third example illustrates the problem of even defining the boundaries of anelectronic community. in july 1994, a california couple was convicted by atennessee jury of transmitting obscene images through interstate telephone linesthrough their bulletin board system,5 thus raising the question of whether it is thecommunity standards of california or tennessee that are relevant to the supremecourt's position that community standards should define what does or does notconstitute "obscenity."in short, people who use electronic networks subscribe to a range of valuesthat is highly diverse. although they still represent an elite group in the contextof the global population, users vary widely in terms of age, cultural background,and interests. for example, william dutton, a professor at the annenberg schoolfor communication at the university of southern california (usc), polled allusers of a usc bulletin board system and a random sample of 50 users from thepublic electronic network (pen) system6 in santa monica, california, fromamong all those who had logged onto the system more than 10 times during aparticular month. he found that users "vary dramatically in the values and normsthey bring to how rights and responsibilities should be negotiated."7 based on thiswork, dutton developed a typology of user values that includes five categories:5 "couple convicted of pornography sold over computer network," new york times,july 31, 1994, section 1, p. 15.6 the pen had more than 4,000 registered users as of november 1992, and it providestwoway information, email, and conference services for citizens, free of charge.7 dutton suggested several reasons for these differences, including characteristics of thenetwork system used (particularly its ownership), individual differences among users, andcharacteristics of the social context within which the discussion takes place.networks and society21rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1. civil libertarians, who value free speech above all;2. regulators, who "call for censorship and actually are more concernedabout the privacy invasion and intrusive aspects of the system thanthey are about first amendment issues";3. formalists, who rely on previously written documents and aresatisfied with the status quo;4. property rights advocates, who believe individual users have norights and are given the privilege of using the system by usc, whichhas the right to make the rules; and5. balancers, who weigh the conflicting values of free speech andprivacy.to many experienced network users, this typology does not seem at allunfamiliar (though the various sizes of the groups differ depending on theelectronic community in question). the fragmentation is heightened by the factthat user viewpoints are not immutable, especially as a given individual may be amember of many different communities operating on many different networks.sara kiesler, a professor of social sciences and social psychology at carnegiemellon university, noted that a user's attitudes may change because "this sameperson in a different situation has a very different view of the rights that he has."enforcement of behavioral norms in networkedcommunitiesthe means for enforcing behavioral norms in networked communities are asdiverse as user values. for example, commercial providers have contractualagreements with users. several million individuals use these services.8 users tendto view the contracts through which their use arrangements are governed less asdisciplinary mechanisms than as "guarantees of quality of service," according toeberhard wunderlich, division manager of lowspeed services productmanagement at at&t data communications services. nevertheless, theseagreements prohibit certain types of conduct, such as the distribution of obsceneor threatening material, and network providers are under pressure to enforce suchrules to avoid offending clients.8 the three largest services are compuserve (2.3 million users), prodigy (2 million),and america online (1 million). figures provided september 1994 by the public relationsoffice of each organization.networks and society22rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.still other networked communities are governed by informal socialpressures. for example, on the pen, selfappointed "thread police" keep usersfrom straying off the topic in conferences. "anything goes, and, therefore, theypush a great deal of responsibility on selfpolicing," explained dutton. "and thethread police have been one of the creatures of the selfpolicing. – the threadpolice will either talk to people online or try to talk them into getting intoanother conference." on the internet, miscreant behavior is often addressed bymembers of the community sending many electronic messages protesting thebehavior to the person responsible.social pressures also may be applied on corporate networks. for years now,the ibm corporation has had a "sensitive forum" where users may discussproblems concerning each other's messages; almost immediately after the forumwas established, users began making rules, according to davis a. foulger,advisory programmer at ibm's t.j. watson research center. "the rules werenever written down formally as a code, but in fact they are enforced rigorously byemail, and nobody wants 10,000 ibmers to put mail in their mailbox all atonce," foulger said. "dozens of these kinds of rules – have emerged throughdiscussion in our media."yet another sort of etiquette is common on many electronic bulletin boardsand computer conferences. conferences normally are moderated by an individualwho lacks formal powers but regulates activity by severing electronic links withtroublesome users. as jack rickard, editor of boardwatch (a magazine thatserves bulletin board operators), said, "there is very limited control of thecontent of these message areas. – the bulletin board right now is essentiallyuntaxed, unregulated, and censored by rumor more than anything else."how cultural norms evolve: an historicalperspectivecultural norms may derive from many different sources. as described byprofessor henry perritt of villanova university school of law, these sourcesinclude legislatures, administrative agencies, negotiated contracts, tort law,common law, informal associations, common practice, and academia. rules tendto originate in informal sources, and then, over time, are codified, first throughcommon law litigation and later by legislatures, perritt said. network enforcersbasically have three options: disconnect rule breakers, employ peer or socialpressures, or apply the law. although making rules for electronic networks ischallenging, enforcing the rules may be even more problematic, he noted,because of technological and economicnetworks and society23rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barriers to enforcement. attorney lance rose gave the example that "the ease ofspread of information on networks can, on a practical level, defeat various kindsof intellectual property enforcement. – if you put something on the network, it'sgone before you blink an eye."alan f. westin, a professor of law and public government at columbiauniversity, described a predictable pattern to the development of rules and normsfor new forms of communication. at first, the activity is sheltered and informal,involving only a small number of individuals. as more users engage in the newform of communication, government agencies begin to seek related records fortax and criminal investigations. then users begin to file civil lawsuits againstvarious parties for assorted wrongs. tax issues also arise; the government mustdetermine, for instance, whether and how taxexempt organizations may use theemerging form of communication. then freedomofinformation issues come tothe fore; some records will be public, especially if taxpayer money has beenused, but someone must identify the exceptions that should be kept private.thus, the law becomes important because it settles conflicts and, in sodoing, forms a context for resolving issues in the future. as attorney allan r.adler said, "what the law is supposed to do is prevent and resolve conflicts,typically over values and property – [and] any communications medium, bydefinition, is going to raise the prospect of conflicts over values and property."electronic forms of communication are evolving in an established legal contextand at the same time are reshaping the law, adler noted.because the law is the forum of final appeal, the development of legalprecedents or models that can be used in networked communities is of significantinterest. this is no small undertaking. information services once fell into threemore or less distinct categoriesšnewspapers, broadcasts, and telephonenetworksšeach with different rules of access, liability, and freedom of speech."well, the problem is that these neat compartments are breaking down –,"perritt noted. "not only thatšwe have some new kinds of roles emerging. it's nolonger only the provider of the information and the customer; we [also] have newkinds of intermediaries that are very important."anne wells branscomb, a communications lawyer with the center forinformation policy research at harvard university, said electronic networks "area new environment with which we have not had enough legal experience to knowexactly what rules apply. so i think we have a whole new legal world to worryabout."the emergence of cultural norms is often crystallized by some kind ofdramatic event or crisis that underscores the need for newnetworks and society24rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.norms or the ambiguity in existing norms. for example, certain crime legislationin california passed in 1994 mandating life sentences without parole for thosewith three convictions for certain types of felonies was the fairly direct outcomeof a social campaign initiated after a dramatic case of kidnapping and murder.more generally, the development of civil liberties law has been chronicled inlarge part by decisions precipitated by specific acts of injustice perpetrated bykings and political leaders in the context of uncertainty or ambiguity about theirprivileges or rights to commit those acts.as of this writing, a similar pattern can be seen in the response of networkedcommunities to the "clipper" proposal. this proposal from the clintonadministration calls for a standard of secure communication that wouldnevertheless enable law enforcement authorities to decipher thesecommunications upon issuance of an appropriate judicial warrant.9 although theclipper proposal is limited to telephone communications, the overwhelmingsentiment in various communities and public forums on the internet is negative.10congressional hearings have been called on this subject, and the status oflegislation affecting this proposal is unclear.ethics, law, and the promotion of sociallyacceptable behaviorwhat is the role of law in the promotion of socially acceptable behavior?law is arguably a norm that applies across the entire jurisdiction of a politicalstate. moreover, the phrase "socially acceptable behavior" in this context implies aconsensus on what constitutes behavior that is acceptable across that jurisdiction.for a variety of reasons, some deny that a consensus exists, or even that aconsensus can exist, and they do not recognize the value in consulting existinglegal regimes for guidance. for example, david hughes, of old colorado citycommunications, claimed at the february 1993 forum that human behavior onelectronic networks exists outside of9 office of the white house press secretary, "the clipper chip," august 16, 1993;office of the white house press secretary, document describing implementation ofrecommendations of the interagency review of encryption policy, february 4, 1994. bothdocuments can be found in david banisar, 1994 cryptography and privacy sourcebook,electronic privacy information center, washington d.c. (diane publishing, upland, pa.),1994.10 computer professionals for social responsibility, "computer users call onadministration to drop encoding plan," press release of april 29, 1994. this documentcan be found in david banisar, 1994 cryptography and privacy sourcebook, 1994.networks and society25rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.present social norms and laws. he drew an analogy to space exploration, notingthat "there was no space law until you could reach there. space was not legallyregulated."11to be sure, lawšand the coercive power of the state to enforce lawštendsto be the mechanism invoked by society to shape behavior only after all otheravenues have been exhausted and found not to be effective. these other avenuesinclude friendly persuasion, parental admonition, social pressure, contracts,licenses, or informal agreements. how such costs and benefits are weighed bythose involved is an important factor in determining what avenue is moreappropriate for the given problem to be solved. through these other avenues,codes and standards of acceptable behavior and etiquette are established andenforced. indeed, this is one key purpose of education: to socialize people intointernalizing the rules of behavior that the community has come to accept asreasonable.on electronic networks, all of these nonlegal mechanisms are used. forexample, a popular book called zen and the art of the internet12 describes a set of"netiquette" rulesšrules that internet users are inclined to accept and expected tofollow. newcomers who behave in a manner inconsistent with these rules aresubject to reprimand from the group.with most commercial network service providers, a condition of use towhich all users must agree is that users will abide by a certain set of rules aboutacceptable behavior; violators can be punished by the provider's discontinuingtheir access to the system. contractual11 on the other hand, a legal regime does exist for space today, as does one for the sea.both are aspects of international law. international dimensions of network connectivitywill increase as more nations connect to a global network, but the extent to whichinternational law will be relevant remains open. the reason is that in the absence of asupranational mechanism to enforce international laws, such laws are enforceable onlywith the acquiescence of a violating party. for example, a treaty to which the unitedstates and the former soviet union are parties forbids the placement of nuclear weaponson the moon or on the terrestrial seabed. the parties refrain from taking such actionsbecause they do not regard the taking of such actions as being in their longterm selfinterest. however, an intentional and continuing violation of this treaty by one party couldresult only in unilateral actions taken by the other party, since there is no supranationalmechanism to force compliance with the treaty. in general, what keeps parties incompliance with treaty obligations is that the parties have more to gain in the long run thanthey have to lose, rather than the fact of any external enforcement of such compliance. butas parties that do not play by such rules connect to the global network, increasingpressures for more effective enforcement mechanisms may result.12 brendan p. kehoe, zen and the art of the internet: a beginner's guide, 2nd ed., ptrprentice hall, englewood cliffs, n.j., 1993.networks and society26rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relationships between users and providers can be tailored according to the needsof the parties involved, and they often reduce the delays of legislation and thecosts of litigation. others question this strategy, arguing that the contractualrelationship is not an even playing field because the user is most often a singleperson rather than a corporation, and the provider is usually a corporate entitywith financial resources far superior to those of most individuals.bulletin board operators often operate in a similar fashion: they write theirown rules and set them forth the first time a new user logs in. enforcementprovisions are similar to those used by commercial providers. the playing field isarguably more even because most bulletin board operators are relatively small inscale, and thus potential individual users have relatively more clout and greaterfreedom of choice.13many universities have codes of acceptable network behavior as well. forexample, educom has promulgated a bill of rights and responsibilities for usersin the academic community that it urges its members to respect. when adopted,such codes are a part of the rules and regulations governing the academiccommunity, and all relevant academic mechanisms for enforcing rules andregulations are available to university policymakers for dealing with miscreantelectronic behavior.kiesler suggested that human behavior, both good and bad, is more extremeon electronic networks than in other arenas, thus underscoring the need foreffective ways to regulate behavior. "i don't mean that people turn into terriblebeasts on networks, but on average there is more misbehavior, there is moregossip, there is more 'flaming,'14 there are more extreme opinions, and there ismore harassment on networks than there is in other areas," she said. moreover,the consequences may be worse on networks than in other situations, in that morepeople are affected and false rumors can spread beyond a local population,kiesler suggested. she added, "the issue is not how we crack down on people,but how we promote more prosocial behavior. – what do we do to promotemore responsibility taking [and] ethical and moral behavior in networkcommunities?"13 the importance of a user's ability to choose among various service providers isunderscored by the administration's position regarding user responsibilities: users ratherthan government or providers should be the ones to protect user sensibilities.14 "flaming" refers to the making of insulting and ad hominem attacks against anotherperson, generally without much reflection or thought but with a great deal of (presumed)emotion.networks and society27rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how this will evolve in the future is an open question, and speculation onwhether civility and decorum and respect for others will increase (as more usersdemand standards for reasonable behavior) or decrease (as the presence of moreusers leads to greater fragmentation on the network) is just thatšspeculationšatthis time.john perry barlow, a cofounder of the electronic frontier foundation,framed the issue as part of the challenge of community development. cyberspaceis the community of the future, but it is still emerging, barlow said; it is "thelatest thing in suburbs" as opposed to an updated model of the cohesive smalltown. cyberspace still lacks a sense of community experience, which provides aseasoned benchmark for evaluating information, and a sense of responsibility,which derives from development of individual identity, he said. barlow arguedthat it was necessary for society to trust a messy process of sorting outcommunity ethics, values, and conscience rather than turn to the law, which by itsnature cannot be expected to provide adequate guides to behavior in a rapidlyevolving environment. he further suggested that a sense of personal responsibilityhas been difficult to develop or enforce on electronic networks because ofconflicting desires to both authenticate and conceal identities.governance of electronic network communities poses special challenges andopportunities. using a "manytomany" communications mode, all members of anelectronic community can in principle be heard and their comments made part ofthe official record (this is the root of the political electronic marketplacemetaphor described in chapter 1). this raises the interesting question of the roleof elected representatives and how they are to participate in the system. inelectronic communities, peer participation and consensus building throughiterative discussion are often the rule, but the active participants jealously guardtheir rights to determine for themselves the rules under which they will operate.15some commentators have15 a major complication to the very concept of consensusšpresent in mostnonelectronic communities but particularly important in electronic onesšis that mostelectronic groups include many individuals who do not make active contributions butinstead are content to remain "lurkers" who just listen. indeed, in most groups, the numberof people encompassed by a mailing list (i.e., the number of people who receive messagesaddressed to that mailing list) is much larger than the number of people who ever sendanything in. thus, "consensus" can be achieved only among the people who are willing toengage in a discussion.networks and society28rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.even suggested that electronic networks are fundamentally a medium conduciveto democracy.16although many speakers at the workshop and forum argued that communityvalues and ethics should be given priority, other speakers emphasized that theethical foundation for behavior on electronic networks was shaky, due largely to alack of consensus about what constitutes "reasonable" behavior. for example,branscomb said that where electronic networks are concerned, ethics and the lawoften conflict, due to shortcomings in the latter. she observed that "when the lawsdon't make [sense] it erodes ethical values, and that is what is happening, to alarge extent. i know a lot of the computer scientists have said the laws really are apain, they don't make any sense. – i think a lot of that is happening with thecopyright law [for example]. it's easy to replicate things, and the copyright rulesdon't make sense to a lot of us [the users], so we just ignore them. and therefore,we really are in the process of developing the ethical values which we have toimpose upon the system before we can decide what laws we want to enact."17nonetheless, once laws are passed, all those within the applicable politicaljurisdiction are subject to those laws, and so the existing legal regime does affectnetworks; existing law does affect and constrain the behavior of all of us. insteadof asking whether or not law affects behavior on networks, a more useful questionmight be, how should laws be formulated so that they produce the desired effect?speaking of another medium, westin attributed the success of certain laws totheir origins in the community that those laws would affect. he specifically citedthe privacy provisions in the cable communications policy act of 1984 (publiclaw 98549), which were based on a code developed years before by warneramex. he further suggested that laws regulating behavior on electronic networksmight well and fruitfully be based on the expectations of reasonable16 david hughes argued that the founding fathers would have used computer bulletinboards to correspond. this may be true; benjamin franklin was the originator of the systemof surface transport of written information called the u.s. postal service, what we nowcall "snail mail"šthe only technology readily available at the time for exchanging theideas upon which this nation's system of governance is built.17 it is worth noting that ethical values are only part of the issue. changing economicbalances also matter greatlyšeasier replication also means more replication, and increasesin replication raise its potential economic significance. the economic point is discussedfurther in computer science and telecommunications board, national research council,realizing the information future: the internet and beyond (national academy press,washington, d.c., 1994), p. 162.networks and society29rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.behavior developed by the community in question rather than imposed aspronouncements from outside.a question argued repeatedly in both the forum and the workshop was theextent to which special legislation is needed to govern the new networkedcommunities. according to this view, there is something new and unusual aboutthe new electronic environment that may need special legislation to protect itsunique qualities. others argue that there is no particular need for networkspecificlaws, as existing laws for the most part cover miscreant behavior that might occuron networks. moreover, to be effective new legislation requires a socialconsensus both about what is new or unique about networks as compared to othermedia and about what values that legislation will embody. such a consensus doesnot exist today.networks and society30rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3legal considerations for electronicnetworksmany users and providers of network services are wary of lawyers' influenceon networked communities. jack rickard believes that ''when the law appears, it'sdeath upon contact." his plea, shared by most of the bulletin board systemoperators (known as "sysops") is: "just leave us alone." at the same time,advocates of this view do recognize the need for defining socially acceptablebehavior; their method of choice for promoting such behavior is education thatappropriately socializes participants in networked communities.nonetheless, existing law does have an impact. law is important becausewhen something goes wrong, those harmed consult lawyers for help. todetermine what they can do to obtain redress for such harm as may have beendone, lawyers look to existing law for precedent. we are a very litigious society,and so the courts have a vast amount of experience in sorting out our demands forjustice. judges themselves turn to existing law to determine how to seek fair andequitable solutions to our problems. policy analysts use the existing precedents tosee what works and what does not. finally, ordinary people rely on existing lawbecause users carry their expectations with them from one environment toanother.1note: in this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originatedwith the individual noted, speaking at the november 1992 workshop.1 sara kiesler points out that the officers charged in the rodney king beating used theirelectronic communications system as though it were a private telephone line, even thoughthey had been warned that all traffic over that system was recorded. these conversationswere later introduced in court as evidence against them.legal considerations for electronic networks31rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.legal domainsexisting legal domains (box 3.1) offer a rich heritage. the fundamentalrights contained in the u.s. constitution and the bill of rights are a goodbeginning. included are the copyright and patent systems, prohibitions againstdenial of human rights without due process, the right of free speech andassembly, immunity from unreasonable search and seizure, and protectionagainst selfincrimination. a long history of supreme court decisions finds thatthe constitution contains an implied right of privacy, although the boundaries ofthis right are subject to considerable debate. the constitution is especiallyimportant in protecting the rights of minorities against the majority rule.common law tends to develop slowly and deliberately, based on commonsense and logic and the customary expectations of the community. it isconservative, stable, and, some fear, too rigid, but it does provide a workableframework for analysis, even though the frame does not always fit exactly. thus,despite rapid technological change, electronic networks do not constitute alawless frontier in which individuals may do anything they please.the long history of common law complements the basic constitutionalfoundations by providing alternative strategies for protecting property interestsand obtaining redress for grievances for damage occasioned by negligence orwillful disregard of harmful consequences that might ensue. in other words, thelaw expects human beings to behave in a somewhat rational and respectfulmanner in their dealings with each other and with regard to their proprietaryinterests. case histories in property law, tort law, and equity provide ampleprecedents to guide the behavior that might be expected to be reasonable in anelectronic environment.there are also numerous explicit statutes covering computer use and misuse(all but one state has enacted such a statute). statutes also cover privacy but areusually specific to certain kinds of information, such as credit histories andmedical data that are particularly sensitive. the electronic communicationsprivacy act of 1986 specifically forbids eavesdropping on data traffic. lawyersand their clients also must be aware of the laws concerning commercialtransactions, including antitrust provisions.several regulatory agencies have administrative jurisdiction over certaintypes of network activity. the federal communications commission (fcc) hasauthority to license common carriers and is active in promulgating standards forhighdefinition television transmission and telephone network architecture; it alsoregulates cable television and certain uses of the electromagnetic spectrum. thefederal tradelegal considerations for electronic networks32rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.1 legal domainsdomainexamples of domainsourcesconstitutionfree speech; copyright/patents; due process;equal rights; freedomfrom search and seizurecongress/president u.s.supreme courtcommon lawtort; equity; property;intellectual property;contractscourtsstatuteelectronic privacy;computer crime;contract; antitrustcongress and statelegislatures, popularinitiatives and referenda;executive branch action toimplement legislationregulationcode of federalregulations (e.g.,approvals required bysection 214); opennetworksadministrative agencies(federal communicationscommission, federal tradecommission, and others);judicial review; legislativeoversightnote: in all instances, the enforcement mechanisms consist of monetary damages,specific enforcement of contract provisions, incarceration, and/or fines.legal considerations for electronic networks33rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission has authority to regulate the content of advertising so that itdoes not mislead consumers. the national institute of standards and technologyplays a major role in the formulation of federal information processingstandards. state public utility commissions have overlapping jurisdiction overintrastate network traffic, thereby confounding, confusing, and complicating thelegal environment within which network providers and their users operate.finally, judicial interpretation and oversight affect all legal frameworks andregimes. since it is often unclear how existing statutory and/or case law ought toapply to any given instance involving electronic networks, the views of judgesand juries will often set new precedents in this arena. moreover, since in practiceit is often expensive to litigate in defense of one's position, unfair or inappropriatelegal advantages may accrue to those who have the resources to defend apotentially controversial interpretation of existing law. in the absence of legalchallenge, such interpretations may themselves become new precedents.legal models existing in the electronicenvironmentlegal models can provide useful analogies that help to sift out what isdifferent from what is similar. for the purpose of analysis, consider the differentlegal models listed in box 3.2 that exist within the network environment.perhaps the most important legal models for the network environment arethose of publisher and distributor, primarily because of the question of liability.publishers generally are held to a higher standard of liability for content than aredistributors, because publishers have the capability to (1) control access to themedium by others seeking to disseminate their own information, (2) review andgain knowledge of the content prior to publication, (3) alter or exclude contentprior to dissemination, and (4) require attribution or permit anonymity orconfidentiality for content.2 a firm that exerts2 for some analysts, the distinction between capability and the actual exercise of thosecapacities may be an important issue in defining a concept, and responsibility and liabilityfor content, in the electronic environment, since a duty to act does not depend on whetheraction is ultimately taken but merely on whether it should have been taken. for example,allan adler asserted that "– what i mean by capabilities is, if you have the ability,technologically and physically in real time, [and] the authority and opportunity to do thesethings, you may be legally considered a publisher rather than a distributor of information,with the appropriate level of legal liability." (see the discussion of the cubby decision inchapter 4.)legal considerations for electronic networks34rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.editorial control over the electronic traffic it carries (as does the prodigy servicescompany over much of the information content it delivers online regardingsports, news, features, and so on) may claim the legal status of a publisher, but inso doing it also subjects itself to the liability thereby implied. a firm that doesnot exercise direct editorial control over the traffic it carries (e.g., one thatsubcontracts the management of editorial content to a third party) is arguably adistributor, with a correspondingly lower level of liability.box 3.2 legal models to characterize a networkenvironment publisheršprodigy services company (for many services) distributoršcompuserve cooperativešedunet, nearnet library (information provider)šlexis, dialog, medlars private networks  corporatešibm, hewlett packard, citicorp, and others  personalšbulletin board system operators ("sysops") common carrieršmci, at&t, sprint, regional bell holding companies mixed or hybridšcable television trusteeshipšbroadcasters marketplacešinformation entrepreneurs marketing their wares information utilityšsanta monica public electronic network andcleveland freenetnext in importance as a legal model for the network environment is thecooperativešan arrangement whereby independent entities of equal status cometogether to achieve a common purpose and to share costs as well as profits.edunet is best classified as a cooperative because it is put together so as to havesome legal weight. certain regional networks such as nearnet and nysernetalso operate aslegal considerations for electronic networks35rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cooperatives. the internet as a more collaborative effort does not qualify legallyas a cooperative, although various networks interconnected through the internethave a cooperative arrangement that may be evolving toward a cooperative asdefined legally.also important, if only because it is so often ignored, is the informationutility. (here the term "utility" is used in the sense of a service that must beprovided to essentially anyone in the relevant community or service area. it isanalogous to the concept of "common carrier" as used in the world of telephony.)only a few publicly funded networks, such as the santa monica public electronicnetwork (pen) and the cleveland freenet, are true information utilities. manycommercial services look like information utilities in that they offer subscribers apotpourri of information services. however, such services do not representthemselves as information utilities, since doing so would require them to provideaccess and some minimum level of service to all potential users. governmentoperated information networks that operate as public forums are a differentmatter; under the first amendment, governmentoperated networks do not havethe right to discriminate among users or to monitor or control messages and thusmust provide access to everyone in the community. distinctions amonggovernmentoperated networks, governmentsponsored or governmentfundednetwork services, and public resources offered over privately operated networksraise yet other questions for access that are as yet unsettled.it is instructive to identify the various rights and responsibilities of differenttypes of participants in the network environment (box 3.3). as a general rule, itseems to be the case that the more an entity undertakes to do or the more valueadded services it undertakes to provide, the higher the degree of liability forwhich it is responsible. the creators of information are provided legal protection(and restraints) through the copyright and patent laws. publishers are protectedprimarily under the first amendment. distributors govern their relationships withtheir sources and their customers through contract; a customer dissatisfied withthe services provided has one primary optionšto take his or her businesselsewhere. common carriers are subject to an elaborate regulatory systemestablished by law and administered by the fcc and state regulatory agencies andcommissions. at present users are governed largely by the "netiquette" they haveestablished by custom, contract, or common law if they want to litigate aboutsome harm that has occurred. broadcasters (radio and television) carry the burdenof trusteeship; that is, they are licensed to act as trustees of a public property (thepublic airwaves) and have a legal responsibility to act "in the public interest."legal considerations for electronic networks36rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.3 rights and responsibilities distinguishedby functionfunctionrightsresponsibilitiescreatorcontrol of content;compensation; integrityoriginality; liability fordamagepublishercontrol of content;compensation; integrityliability for damagedistributorno control of content;compensationno liability for damagecarrierlimited liability; fortransport; compensationfidelity of carriage; integrity;timely delivery; provision ofequitable accessuseraccessibility; equity; dueprocessavoidance of: negligence,abuse, misuse, andmisappropriationtrusteelicensee of public; propertyaction in the public interestwhat is different about electronic networks?to the extent that electronic networks are a new medium for discourse andcommunication, new laws or new interpretations of existing laws may benecessary. thus, it is necessary to identify how electronic networks might be"new" from a legal perspective.one obvious difference is that territorial jurisdictions are largely irrelevant tothe electronic environment,3 except perhaps in the initial3 this is true in the sense that once connected to a network, a user can oftenelectronically cross political boundaries with relative ease. however, territorialjurisdictions may determine who has access to a given network (e.g., a city may grantaccess to a public network only to its residents; a university may grant access only tostudents on campus).legal considerations for electronic networks37rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stages when spectrum must be allocated for the purpose where wirelesscommunications are employed and licensing authority must be obtained unlessregulatory authority is waived. for example, in the united states, informationproviders that offer users services that go beyond "basic" services have beenpermitted to flourish with minimal government interference.4more confusing, perhaps, is the fact that many legal precedents have beenestablished in the context of a given technologyše.g., broadcast or cable,telephone, or mail. in considering the legal implications of a new medium,analysts quite naturally look to those precedents for guidance. but it is nevercertain how old precedents should apply to new media, and so neither analystsnor users of a new medium are certain which precedents should guide theiranalysis or govern their use.as noted in appendix a, email can be used to support a mode ofcommunications often known as bulletin boards in which a message posted to abulletin board by one user is distributed via email to all of the other subscribersto that bulletin board. some electronic bulletin boards start as a mechanism todeliver private communications among a small group of friends. to the extentthat the term "bulletin board" makes one think of a little bulletin board on one'srefrigerator, the traffic on the electronic bulletin board is clearly outside the reachof the law. but electronic bulletin boards are also a way of communicating withlarge numbers of people in many different geographic locations (perhaps withdiffering laws regarding message traffic).the very term "email" makes one think of the electronic analog to a postalletter; however, email does not, as a matter of law, enjoy the same status as apostal letter. entirely different legal precedents and principles may in fact apply.for example, some users of email have the same expectations of privacy for email that they do for postal mailšan issue that has generated considerable legalcontroversy.5 users of private email systems may expect their messages4 at the same time, the definition of what counts as "basic services" is a matter subjectto considerable debate. for many years, "touchtone" service provided by the localtelephone company was regarded as an "extra" not included in the basic service definition.however, touchtone service has increasingly become a prerequisite to navigating throughother services provided by telephone (e.g., voice mail), leading to pressures to treat it aspart of "basic" telephone service.5 for example, in a 1993 decision, a california appellate court found in favor of anemployer that had terminated an employee after reviewing his email messages and findingamong them personal messages of a sexual nature to other employees. specifically,legal considerations for electronic networks38rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to be private, and indeed they are protected in that expectation to a certain extentby federal statute (e.g., public officials may not tap those communicationswithout judicial authorization); but this expectation may not be appropriate in acorporate email environment where the corporation expects to manage the trafficfor business purposes and in its corporate interests.6 the privacy principlesdrafted by the information policy committee of the clinton administration'sinformation infrastructure task force may ultimately affect these expectations.a further complication is that it is not only electronic networks that areassuming new functions: established media are also doing so, and there is a lackof consensus on which models and precedents are appropriate for what purposes.the regional bell holding companies7 (rbhcs) want to be information serviceproviders as well as carriers. electronic bulletin boards are becoming networksthat allow messages to pass through them unread; a good example is fidonet.newspapers are distributors as well as publishers, as the advertising supplementssupplied by advertisers indicate. broadcasters are offering conferencing facilitiesin electronic town meetings, and both radio and television (using telephonic callins) have turned into very interactive media on the talk shows. cable televisionsystems, traditionally delivering entertainment programming to the home, aregeared up to provide data services to businesses and to experiment with homebased information services. complications are exacerbated by the fact thatdifferent providers may have been regulated under different assumptions (as isthe case for the rbhcs, longdistance telephone service providers, and cablecompanies).the court held that the employee had no reasonable expectation of privacy since he hadsigned a form acknowledging a company policy that restricted employees' use ofcomputers to company business. in a second court case, still under litigation in january1994, a company sued a former employee on the basis of messages retrieved from theformer employee's electronic mailbox (which was not maintained or provided by thecompany). a key issue will be whether the company has the right to access the electronicmessages of its employees. (see michael traynor, "computer email privacy issuesunresolved," the national law journal, january 31, 1994, s2.)6 many corporations do take the position that email messages are subject to review inthe same way that hardcopy letters and memoranda are subject to review, and they dopost notices periodically (e.g., every time the user logs into the host system) to this effect.however, as sara kiesler pointed out at the forum, people habituate to such warnings veryrapidly, and the net effect is that they respond as though those warnings were never givenat all.7 the regional bell holding companies are nynex, bell atlantic, us west, bell south,ameritech, southwestern bell, and pacific telesis.legal considerations for electronic networks39rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the most important difference, and one very troubling for existing law, isthe easy ability to replicate, alter, and manipulate images and text. this abilitychanges established legal conceptsše.g., the notion of when something ispublished. indeed, by accessing previously developed information, anyone with acomputer can become a creator of an information product or the producer of alibrary or database that distributes or acquires information assets with financialvalue. an example is the provider of a valueadded service that searches publicrecords or documents and makes them accessible, for a fee, to users in a muchmore convenient form; proprietary rights have been asserted for such products,even when the underlying information is public and freely available. today'slegal regime provides mixed signals and expectations concerning what is publicdomain information and what is proprietary information entered into theelectronic environment. there is a need for more clarity concerning the nature ofthe traffic and its legal status. in presenting this capability to manipulate anddisseminate information, electronic networks provide the underpinning of anelectronic marketplace in which some information is shared, some is sold, andsome is merely transmitted.the challenge today is to devise a legal regime appropriate for thecapabilities enabled by the technology now available. this regime necessarilyincludes certain aspects of existing law (and precedents and interpretationsapplicable to network technology) and may include new laws specifically neededfor this technology.legal considerations that affect the use ofinformationa number of legal considerations pertain to protection of the rights ofnetwork users. secrecy is designed to prevent deliberate disclosures of information toindividuals not authorized to receive that information. the informationbeing kept secret may refer to the contents of a message (a considerationamong lawyers known as security) or to the identity of a message'sauthor (a consideration known as anonymity). the inverse of anonymityis known as authentication, or the assurance that the putative originatorof a message is in fact the real originator. closely related is the notion ofnonrepudiation, the property that the putative originator of a properlysigned message cannot plausibly deny his or her originating thatmessage. privacy is intended to prevent intrusions into information aboutlegal considerations for electronic networks40rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.individuals by persons not authorized to have access to that information.privacy law today is ambiguous; it is used to cover many differentconcerns about misuse of information. to some, privacy should be morestrictly construed to mean the right to prevent unwelcome andunauthorized intrusions such as obnoxious telephone calls, junk mail,and overeager journalistic inquiryšin other words, any entry into thepersonal space that should be private. such a view is reinforced by anoftforgotten supreme court decision that confirms that one's home isone's castle.both privacy and secrecy are mechanisms that have been invoked to reducethe accountability of individuals under the law. confidentiality is the right to release information with restrictions on itsredistribution. there are a few commonlaw precedents that recognizepersonal confidentiality: the right of a spouse to not testify against amate, the sanctity of the confession to one's religious mentor, and theattorneyclient privilege are the most obvious. however, most of theareas that have come to be considered confidential have developed byexplicit statute achieved through the efforts of concerned citizens. todaythere is a considerable effort to achieve a more uniform way of treatingconfidentiality of medical records, in order to assure individuals ameasure of personal privacy and to not inhibit too strictly the transfer ofmedical information that would benefit both the patient and the public'sinterest in a healthier society. a publicity right is one that gives each individual the right to discloseinformation freely in the public domain or to demand compensation forpublic release. the abandon with which many participants on radio andtelevision talk shows disclose very personal information about their ownbehavior and inner thoughts confirms that this is a right alive and welltoday. there is also no dearth of material generated by public relationsfirms for all manner of public figures who seek media coverage.however, what is missing is a clearly delineated point that defines whensomething is intended to become publicdomain information, when it isintended to remain confidential between the communicants on electronicnetworks, and when it is released with the expectation of remunerationfor redistribution. commonality remains the right of the body politic to determine whatareas shall remain off limits to proprietary appropriation. laws of natureand languages are among the few areas clearly beyond proprietaryappropriation. the controversial area at the moment is in the area of''facts," which are usually assumed not to belegal considerations for electronic networks41rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.subject to copyright protection because they are not original expression.however, we have not yet clarified what nature of "facts" mightappropriately belong within the protected area of personal privacy andwhich are more likely to be required to be disclosed because of a higherpublic interest. liability is the domain of tort law where acts of negligence, abuse,neglect, and misuse cause damage that can be redressed throughlitigation in the civil courts. (civil liability is often synonymous.) criminality is the domain of the penal statutes, which impose morestringent sanctions involving fines as well as incarceration, or terms ofprobation during which behavior is carefully monitored. (criminalliability is a related concept pertaining to the individual who may violatea penal statute.) accessibility involves a right to participate and to reply. as a rule, thefirst amendment gives information providers the right to determine thecontent of their own publications. however, this right is not unlimited,and under certain circumstances, information providers may becompelled to provide content that they might prefer not to carry.examples include the fairness doctrine of the fcc, under whichbroadcasters (e.g., radio and television stations) are required to provideair time for those representing views that oppose those expressed bythose stations; laws that carve out specific exceptions to firstamendment rights (e.g., laws banning cigarette advertising in certainmedia); and regulatory policies intended to guarantee free and openpolitical debate. as a consequence, access is a right more often soughtthan exercised in practice. accuracy is a right to correct information inaccurately recorded. withthe advent of computerized records that can contain a vast number ofsimilar names, opportunities continue to increase for inaccuracies toproliferate and cause embarrassment or harm, whereas the law governingrights to obtain access to records and to justify corrections is not welldeveloped. integrity is the right to protect an original work according to the desiresand wishes of the creator, a right that has not been protected in theunited states so much as in europe, where "moral rights" of authors andartists have been recognized. the recent effort of some in the motionpicture industry to protect the integrity of blackandwhite film classicsis a good example of an effort to ensure the integrity of information.what the proponents of "integrity" achieved was the national historicfilm preservation board, which could designate films as "classic" withthe proviso that they be so labeled in their original form. however, theregister of copyrights nonetheless authorized colorized movies of theseclassics to be marketed under alegal considerations for electronic networks42rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.separate copyright issued to protect the colorization as a new expressionof the work. in an electronic bit stream, where even a few pixels can beplucked out of a work, it is going to be difficult to determine what rightsof integrity can be protected in the original work. equity is an important legal theory in common law that no wrong mustgo unrighted. if harm occurs, then society must find a way to redress it.when lawyers can find no statute, precedent, or commonly acceptedcustom, they fall back on general principles of equity.finally, interoperability is a property of computer systems that facilitates theuse of hardware and software of different models and vendors in a compatiblemanner. although interoperability does not qualify as a legal consideration per se(if it did, the problem of incompatibility would be a phenomenon of the past), avariety of court decisions (some discussed below) have marked relevance to it; inaddition, as the national information infrastructure moves from concept toreality, evolving and assuming increasing prominence, a number of legislativeand regulatory factors may begin to influence interoperability.8court cases lawyers rely on for argumentlawyers and their clients look to existing case law for guidance in arguingtheir cases before the courts. they can choose from hundreds of court cases inwhich the established communications media have litigated their differences andgrievances. box 3.4 summarizes several of the most important cases.the cubby case (box 3.5) is the first case to be decided with respect tocommercial network providers. in essence, the finding in cubby v. compuservewas that a party acting as a distributor onlyšand that thus cannot monitor thetraffic and consequently cannot know or have reason to know of the contentšhasno liability for offending remarks in the content. it is not clear that the judgesunderstood that the technicians could actually monitor the traffic, but the decisiondoes offer some protection.however, cubby may be a more dangerous than helpful case because itcould lead many providers of network services to assume8 for more discussion of this point, see computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, realizing the information future: the internet andbeyond, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1994.legal considerations for electronic networks43rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that they can rely on an assumption that they are distributors of information only,with no responsibility for the content of their offerings. such service providersmay assume that they reside in the same legal niche as the bookstore or thenewspaper stand, which may not be the right niche or the ultimate niche intowhich the law will assign these new electronic services. one danger could comefrom trying to apply the publisher model to electronic bulletin boards. surelythere is some area in the electronic environment that should rightly be considered aprivate space. this would be comparable to a private home or club where friendsand peers may share private and confidential communications. is posting to acontrolledaccess bulletin board "publication"? and how do we characterizepublic conferences to which users contribute their comments, often with nocentralized editorial control or managing supervisor?box 3.4 some relevant legal precedentscaseresultcubby inc. v. compuserveno obligation to monitorfeist publications inc. v. ruraltelephone co. inc.facts not copyrightablesega enterprises v. accolade inc.reverse engineering forinteroperability is permissiblearmstrong v. executive offices ofthe presidentelectronic files are public recordsplayboy enterprises inc. v. georgefrena et al.intent to infringe on copyright is notrequired for a finding of infringementford motor credit co. v. swarens"trust in the infallibility of a computeris hardly a defense. –"the application of a general law across the entire electronic community maywell result in curtailing some activities that really ought to be permitted tocontinue. legal precedents such as cubbyšor,legal considerations for electronic networks44rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more accurately, the implications of their distinctionsšmay come to be appliedtoo broadly.box 3.5 cubby v. compuserve, 1991compuserve is an online information service that grants access to avariety of information sources in exchange for a fee. these informationsources are provided for compuserve contractually; that is, compuservecontracts with vendors to provide information, but then makes thisinformation available to users through a mechanism called forums. theprovider of one information source, cameron communications inc., agreedin its contract with compuserve to "manage, review, create, delete, edit,and otherwise control the contents" of its forum.defamatory statements about a firm known as cubby inc. appeared inthe forum operated by cameron communications. cubby inc. suedcompuserve for libel, based on the defamatory statements. compuservemoved for summary dismissal on the grounds that it acted as a distributor,not a publisher, of those statements and thus was not liable for thestatements.in 1991, the u.s. district court in the southern district of new yorkgranted compuserve's motion for summary dismissal on the grounds thatcompuserve was indeed acting as a distributor and indeed had little or noeditorial control over the contents of a contracted information source. thecourt further reasoned that compuserve had no reasonable opportunity toreview for defamatory material every information source it made available.source: cubby inc. v. compuserve, 776 f. supp. 135 (s.d.n.y.1991):the feist case (box 3.6) clarified the outer boundaries of the copyright law,holding explicitly that facts are not copyrightable. the extent of labor expendedšthe "sweat of the brow"šis not to be considered in granting protection. thiscase will likely create turmoil in the law because it is facts, now, that people aremost concerned aboutše.g., telephone numbers, names and addresses, andtransactiongenerated information (data about what one purchases or how onetravels). the current legal regime does not recognize a right to what might becalled personal autonomy over information about oneself, and without copyrightprotections on compilations of these facts, such compilations may bedisseminated and reproduced quite widely.the sega case (box 3.7) involves a controversial area with respectlegal considerations for electronic networks45rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to fair use of computer software, an area of the law that has not yet been reviewedby the supreme court. it concerns the question of what amount of reverseengineering of software is permissible in order to understand the underlyingconcepts, which are not protected by copyright law, and knowledge of which,according to an amicus brief prepared by a group of intellectual propertyacademics, is essential to achieve interoperability of software.9 incompatibility ofsoftware (lack of interoperability) is a major deterrent to the rapid developmentof networks and an area of the law demanding of public attention.box 3.6 feist v. rural telephone, 1991pursuant to state regulation, the rural telephone company inc.publishes a "white pages" telephone directory that lists telephonesubscribers alphabetically and their corresponding telephone numbers for acertain geographical area of service. in order to produce a similar "whitepages" directory for a much larger geographical area that included theservice area in question, the feist publication company extracted thenames and numbers it needed from the rural telephone company's whitepages without rural's consent. although feist altered many of the listings itobtained, several were identical to those listed in rural's white pages.rural sued feist for copyright infringement.in 1991, the u.s. supreme court ruled that rural's white pages werenot entitled to copyright, and thus that feist was not liable for infringement.the basis for this ruling was that the selection, coordination, andarrangement of rural's white pages did not satisfy the minimumconstitutional standards for copyright protection, since rural had only toobtain data from its subscribers and list them alphabetically, resulting in a"gardenvariety" white pages directory devoid of even the slightest trace ofcreativity (which copyright law is intended to protect).source: feist publications inc. v. rural telephone co. inc., 111 s.ct. 1282 (1991).what the academics seem to be saying is that there is a limit to what thecopyright law can coveršthat copyright law offers very9 some additional discussion of these issues is provided in computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, intellectual property issues insoftware, national academy press, washington d.c., 1991.legal considerations for electronic networks46rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thin protection for computer software interfaces, in fact protecting only theexpression that is different from all others and proprietary to the creator. it maybe that this case marks a turning point that indicates the limits of the judicialsystem in carving out new protections for computer software. users andproviders alike may now turn to congress to sort out what is optimum for thesoftware industry and network users nationwide. in the european community thepolicy with respect to reverse engineering and fair use of proprietary interfaceshas been hammered out in an open and public discussion, not in the courts.box 3.7 sega v. accolade, 1992in order to develop videogame cartridges that were compatible withsega enterprises' "genesis" entertainment system, accolade inc.disassembled the computer programs contained in sega's videogamecomponents to learn the requirements for compatibility. accolade thenproduced a manual that described the functional requirements ofcompatibility with sega products without including any of sega's originalcomputer programs. based only on the manual, accolade then wrote itsown programs that were compatible with the sega interface. sega suedaccolade, charging copyright infringement.in 1992, the ninth circuit court of appeals overturned a lower courtruling that accolade had infringed on sega's copyright of its computerprograms. in particular, the court of appeals held that accolade's use of the"disassembled" programs was protected under the fairuse provisions of thecopyright act if disassembly is the only way to gain access to the ideas andfunctional elements embodied in a copyrighted computer program.source: sega enterprises v. accolade inc., u.s. court of appeals,ninth circuit, no. 9215655; d.c. no. cv913871bac, october 20, 1992.the armstrong case (box 3.8) held that electronic communication can be apublic record and be subject to the freedom of information act, the federalrecords act, and the presidential records act. a case with similar elements wasraised in may 1994 that involves the refusal of a state university to disclose email messages sent to university administrators.10 the individual wishing to seethose messages10 see thomas deloughry, "university of michigan refuses to release email ofadministrators," chronicle of higher education, vol. 21, p. a28, january 26, 1994.legal considerations for electronic networks47rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contends that they are analogous to written letters and thus subject to disclosureunder that state's freedomofinformation law. the university contends that email messages are analogous to telephone calls, which are not subject to suchdisclosure, and in addition that they are protected under the federal electroniccommunications privacy act.box 3.8 armstrong v. executive offices of thepresident, 1993the u.s. court of appeals upheld a lowercourt ruling that theexecutive offices of the president must preserve electronic documents as"federal records" under the federal records act, affirming that hardcopyprintouts were insufficient because they might omit "fundamental pieces ofinformation which are an integral part of the original electronic records, suchas the identity of the sender and/or recipient and the time of the receipt."source: armstrong v. executive offices of the president, 1 f.3d1274, 1993, u.s. app. lexis 20527 (d.c.cir. 1993).both cases raise the issue of whether electronic communications in the formof email constitute "records" that are subject to the intent of the variousfreedomofinformation acts. such cases also raise the issue of what types ofelectronic communication should be kept. for example, should all email used byfederal agencies be kept as public records? in the days when the federalgovernment operated by telephone calls and written documents, it was clear thattelephone calls did not constitute public records, though written notes about thosecalls might. since many people use email instead of a telephone for reasons ofconvenience (e.g., avoiding telephone tag), some argue that at least some emailshould be treated as a telephone call would be. on the other hand, requiring thesender of an email message to distinguish between a noteworthy and nonnoteworthy note presents problems as well, especially if that determination mustbe made at the time of transmittal.the playboy enterprises case (box 3.9) was decided recently. in this case,the court placed on bulletin board operators that charge fees for access asubstantial burden to review files accessible on their systems for possiblecopyright violations, though the extent of this burden was not definitivelyestablished by this case.finally, an early but important computer case is ford motor creditlegal considerations for electronic networks48rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.company v. swarens (box 3.10). an old maxim proclaims that ignorance of thelaw is no excuse. this case held, in a similar vein, that one cannot rely on faiththat the computer will be accurate as a legal defense. put differently, thecomputer does not enjoy special status as an infallible agent, especially when itcan be shown not to be infallible.box 3.9 playboy enterprises v. george frena, 1993the playboy enterprises v. george frena case involved a largenumber of images identified as pictures taken from playboy magazine andprotected by copyright that were found in the form of graphics files on abulletin board system owned and operated by george frena; these fileswere not posted by frena, but rather by users of his bulletin board service.the bulletin board charged fees for users to access these (and other) files.the court held that this use was clearly commercial and that the bulletinboard operator, george frena, was guilty of copyright infringement. thoughfrena argued that he had no knowledge of the source of the images, thecourt held that intent to infringe was not essential to a finding ofinfringement.source: playboy enterprises inc. v. george frena et al., 839 f.supp. 1552, u.s. dist. ct., m.d. fla. dec. 9, 1993.special problems and policy concernsmakers of public policy must grapple with a number of concerns that arise inthe electronic environment. one concern has already been discussed in a previoussection, namely the confusion over the legal models that apply to organizationsengaging in electronic communication. in that domain, policymakers will have tosort out what will happen in the collision of legal regimes associated withdifferent models and the boundaries (if any) at which public and private activityinteract (as they might, for example, at the interface of private and publicnetworks).but other issues arise as well. for example, the question of responsibility forcontent goes beyond the different models (e.g., publisher, distributor) used bycommercial information service providers for handling such responsibility.questions in this area include the following: what content is acceptable and whodecides what is acceptable? if penal statutes are violated, is criminal liability theburdenlegal considerations for electronic networks49rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the perpetrator or of the provider of the network service used to violate thestatutes? what civil or tort liability applies to defamation or negligence? how doissues of pornography, indecency, and obscenity play out in the networkedenvironment?box 3.10 ford v. swarens, 1969a computer error caused the ford motor credit company to believethat mr. swarens was delinquent in payments on his new car. on twooccasions, the company's representatives visited mr. swarens and left afterhe showed canceled checks proving that he was not in fact delinquent. onthe third visit, he threatened company representatives with a shotgun, afterwhich his car was repossessed. in court, mr. swarens was awarded bothcompensatory and punitive damages, and the court of appeals said, "fordexplains that this whole incident occurred because of a mistake by acomputer. men feed data to a computer and men interpret the answer thecomputer spews forth. in this computerized age, the law must require thatmen in the use of computerized data regard those with whom they aredealing as more important than a perforation on a card. trust in theinfallibility of a computer is hardly a defense, when the opportunity to avoidthe error is apparent and repeated."source: ford motor credit co. v. swarens, court of appeals ofkentucky, 447 s.w.2d 53, october 17, 1969.anonymity and confidentiality pose other important concerns. on electronicnetworks, especially those associated with commercial information services,many people assume a different electronic "persona" that is not associated with areal person. anonymity conveys both benefits and drawbacks. for example,history illustrates the use of anonymous communications to protect dissidentsfrom the scrutiny or retaliation of autocratic governments. even in recent years,the identification of a specific individual as a dissident (e.g., in the people'srepublic of china) could mean imprisonment or even death; as a result, suchsocieties often have forums (perhaps illegal but nonetheless public) in whichanonymous protests against the existing regime can be posted. on a smallerscale, murray turoff, a professor of computer and information sciences andmanagement at the new jersey institute of technology, said his students (andexecutives) feel free to discuss online their problems at work only because theycan do so anonymously.legal considerations for electronic networks50rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the other side of anonymity was pointed out by allan adler, who arguedthat if users are granted true anonymity, ''then there can be no justice system thatwill right the wrongs they commit, and there can be no 'rights' that people will beable to vindicate." in short, the justice system or law requires the identity of theperson who caused the harm. adler, along with kiesler and turoff, suggestedthat system operators keep users' identities confidential instead of anonymous andreserve the right to disclose the identity of a user who engages in injuriousconduct. today, the legal status of an anonymous message sent on an electronicnetwork is not clear. do network users have a right to refuse to disclose theiridentity? to prevent disclosure of their identity to a third party (i.e., one notassociated with the network service provider)? to escape accountability and thelaw? do users have to accept responsibility for their behavior?a fourth concern is accessibility. who can get into the system, and who caninterconnect through which gateways? policy questions include the following:who can demand a right to interconnect or become a subscriber or participant?on what basis may service be denied to an end user or to an electronicconnection? is it necessary to mandate interconnection capability betweenvarious network services (perhaps in a manner analogous to the mandating ofinterconnection standards for telephone networks 50 years ago)?a fifth area of concern is electronic commerce. internet "netiquette" looksdown on advertising messages that are publicly broadcast.11 yet it is easy to findinternet messages that look very much like11 for example, a commercial advertisement posted throughout usenet, a networkconsisting primarily of bulletin boards devoted to various topics, has been widelycondemned in the affected community. the usenet community's response to unsolicitedcommercial advertising was largely to flood the advertiser's electronic mailbox withmessages protesting the advertiser's action; other informal actions have been taken aswell. see peter lewis, "sneering at a virtual lynch mob," new york times, may 11,1994, p. d7.more generally, this sentiment against commercial "advertising" seems to be rooted inat least two strains of thought. the first is the sentiment that advertising is an annoyingpollutant, in the same generic class as junk mail. the second is that receiving emailconsumes resources for which users must eventually pay and that it is inappropriate tomake recipients of advertising incur those expenses if they have not affirmatively chosento do so. the latter is in many ways analogous to many people's feelings about theunsought receipt of advertisements via fax, in which the recipient must pay for the paperconsumed by the recipient's fax machine and the incoming telephone line is madeunavailable for use by "legitimate" inbound fax transmissions. how these sentiments willevolve as the internet is used more for commercial transactions remains to be seen.legal considerations for electronic networks51rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.classified advertising. since the newspapers have spent a number of years in thecourts and in congress litigating and lobbying to prevent telecommunicationsfirms from providing electronic advertising, these pseudoadvertising internetmessages constitute a very permissive interpretation of rules governing what isconsidered "appropriate use" of a publicly funded electronic space. as theinternet is opened to more commercial firms, battles over the extent and nature of"appropriate" commercial content can be expected. questions that policymakerswill have to address include: what are legitimate expectations of compensationfor posters or authors of messages that may be valuable to others? what facts andcircumstances define a copyright infringement on a network? how will potentialusers identify what information is proprietary? how will individuals monitor andenforce their rights and responsibilities with respect to billing, collection, andpayment? what advertising messages will be permitted under whatcircumstances?the definition of public domain in the area of commonality remains aproblem. on a network, it is difficult to determine when something is in a privatespace and when something is in the public domain. some observers warn thatanything posted to a public mailing list on the internet, or to a discussion forumor bulletin board on america online or compuserve, is a public statement thatmay be freely redistributed by other users. on the other hand, current copyrightlaw does not require that the creator of a work explicitly insert a copyright noticein order to claim a copyright interest. so, upon viewing a statement on theinternet (for example) that does not contain a copyright notice, users areunderstandably uncertain about what rights they may be violating if they reportthe statement. it is arguably safer to assume that the writer is asserting a claim ofcopyright, and some "netiquette" rules direct the potential reuser to seekpermission to report the message, but the legal murkiness remains.related is the question of what is subject to the freedom of information actand the various sunshine laws. this is particularly important for advisory groupsthat may be using electronic mail or realtime conferences to transact theirbusiness. when can users expect to be operating in a confidential electronicenvironment? when must they invite the journalist or the public in? when doesthe electronic bit stream become a public record? when is a realtime electronicconference a "public meeting"?the concern over "public" access and rights gives rise to an importantdefinitional issue: the distinction between "public" and ''private" enterprises oractivities. in practice, there are at least four ways in which the "public versusprivate" distinction is used to distinguishlegal considerations for electronic networks52rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking activities: (1) the funding sources of the activity (public versusprivate funding); (2) the content carried by the networking activity (publicinformation versus information not in the public domain); (3) whether thenetwork activity is open (public) or closed (private); and (4) the ownership of thenetwork activity (public versus private control).governance is particularly thorny. society recognizes groups within it thatare entitled to varying degrees of selfgovernance (e.g., condominiumassociations, corporations), although they are, of course, subject to a certaindegree of external regulation as well. today, electronic communities are makingtheir own rules, applying them, and living by them. under what circumstancescan authorities of the government step in? (an important related question is whatentity at what geographic level is best able to make and enforce what rules.) it isclear that government authorities can and do step in when actions taken withinthat community have harmful repercussions outside it or when members of thecommunity request outside intervention, but the desirability of such interventionis subject to much argument. questions over territorial jurisdiction are even morecomplex with global networks, because there are all sorts of complicated rulesapplicable to jurisdiction and extradition. jurisdictional autonomy is a very richarea for lawyers and policymakers to sort out.12finally, what sanctions should apply when miscreant behavior occurs?various states have been experimenting with different types of sanctions otherthan fines, jail, community service, and liability for damages. for example, aspart of sentencing, judges have considerable latitude to impose restrictions onbehavior, and so judges have proposed sentences (or conditions or parole orprobation) that include the confiscation of the felon's computer equipment,prohibitions on the felon's use of computer equipment, and so on.informal sanctions have also been used outside the judicial system.complaints directed to an offending user by others in the community are aparticularly effective sanction against offenders, especially when the offenderreceives hundreds of complaints. by shunning offenders, members of thecommunity apply a form of excommunication, an exercise of the traditional waycommunities have protected12 as one example, ivan orton, a prosecutor in seattle, has taken 3 years to file suitagainst richard brandow, a canadian who released what is called the peace virus into the"mac world"š3 years just to get the case together. it is doubtful whether he will be able towin the casešand this case only involves canada, a near neighbor with a nottoodissimilar legal system. imagine the complications when the parties involved are fromnations with very dissimilar legal traditions!legal considerations for electronic networks53rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.their cultural and legal integrity. when a nearinfinite number of venues can beestablished, it is possible to organize a group in a way that moves the entire groupto another venue, leaving the offender without other communicants. how todetermine the appropriate, acceptable, and effective sanctions to controlmiscreant behavior is an area that still needs careful analysis and development.summarythe current legal system has evolved out of many decades of experience andprecedent in dealing with various media for human expression and behavior.electronic networks are a relatively new medium, but their novelty should notblind us to the simple fact that they do exist within the current legal context andthus that the current legal regime will have an effect on them. at the same time,their novelty does introduce complications and difficulties into this legal regime.as electronic networks become more pervasive, a new legal regime willinevitably evolve, involving new law as well as new interpretations of currentlaw. the first steps are being taken today in debates and arguments among usersand providersšindeed, all participants in networked communitiesšas they try tosort out what values we share and what behavior they find acceptable. theethical values that emerge from that process will be the foundation of a legalregime relevant to electronic networks that is designed to curb harmful behaviorwhile preserving what is unique and distinctive about these new electroniccommunities.legal considerations for electronic networks54rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4free speechthe right of free speech enjoyed by americans is rooted in the firstamendment, which states that "congress shall make no law – abridging thefreedom of speech. –" nevertheless, the right to free speech is not entirelyunfettered, and one's ability to speak whatever one likes can be legally limitedunder certain circumstances that depend on the nature of the speech and thecommunications medium in which that speech is expressed. the electronicenvironment, which gives every user access to a large audience and a virtuallyunlimited supply of information, poses particular challenges concerning freespeech. this chapter summarizes a discussion of two free speech scenarios thatwere examined by a panel at cstb's february 1993 forum.note: this chapter, and the three chapters following it, are based on the discussionsheld at the february 1993 forum described in the preface. as noted in the preface, theforum was intended to raise issues related to and associated with the rights andresponsibilities of participants in networked communities as they arose in discussions ofvarious hypothetical scenarios. thus, chapter 4 through 7 collectively have a moredescriptive than analytical quality.free speech55rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scenario 1: explicit photos on a universitynetworka large state university serves as a network "hub" for the state's highschools. the university itself is networked with every faculty member, staffmember, and student having a network computer on his or her desk. theuniversity also is connected to the internet. a student electronically scanspictures of men and women in various sexual poses.issue: the law as the ultimate authoritythe university needs to consider how its policies are consistent with thelaw, because a state university exists in a jurisdiction that probably has indecencyand obscenity laws, according to allan adler, a lawyer with cohn and marks."we do not voluntarily submit ourselves to the law. it is the reality in which welive," he said.adler acknowledged, however, the common practical desire to reachconsensus about behavior or conduct through negotiated policies and agreements.this is a typical approach in situations involving a communications medium, hesaid, where legal resolutions tend to be expensive and most parties get more thanthey bargained for in terms of restrictions on future conduct. clearly, he said,there must be a set of social norms, whether defined by policy, contract, or law,and there must be some authority that enforces those norms; the ultimateauthority is the law.assuming that the university in scenario 1 communicated the networkground rules to users, their usage of the network would imply assent, alder said.assent is required in both contract and criminal law, by individuals in the formercase and by society as a whole in the latter. that is, individuals must be notifiedof regulations that affect their conduct so that they have a fair opportunity tocomply; if they do not assent to compliance, then they cannot fairly be heldresponsible for complying, he explained.responding to a suggestion that users could enforce rules themselves byemploying screening devices, adler argued that defamatory or fraudulentinformation would be difficult to informally identify and filter out, and the lawwould need to step in. for example, an individual about whom a defamatory storyhad been written might wish to prevent others from seeing the story, and thuswould have tofree speech56rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.persuade an unknown universe of individuals to screen stories about himšclearlyan imposing if not impossible task. "if the user is a participant in a system whereeither the user or some third party is defamed or has sustained damage to theirreputation that affects them outside of the immediate electronic network on whichthey are operating, they are going to want some remedy for that," adler said.1as to whether the student, if disconnected, has any first amendment rights,larry lessig, an assistant professor of constitutional law and contracts at theuniversity of chicago, noted that such rights would apply at a state university(though not necessarily at private universities). however, lessig also contendedthat all universities habitually regulate speech. "if a student comes into myclassroom and wants to talk about pornography when i want to talk aboutcontracts, i tell the student, 'i'm going to fail you.' now that is speech regulation,"he asserted. michael godwin, staff counsel for the electronic frontierfoundation, concurred that the classroom is highly regulated and such regulationis appropriate based on the purpose of the classroom, but he raised the questionof whether the university's electronic forum was more like a conversation on theblock (in which freedom of speech guarantees do obtain) than like a lecture in aclassroom.lessig warned that the legal community has few tools to make sense ofbehavior on electronic networks, in part because judges, lawyers, and legislatorshave little or no experience with that world. "i think the point is that we have verylittle understanding of how these principles that seem fundamental to us, like freespeech, can apply in these various different worlds," he said.issue: the need to establish rules and educate usersif the university is only now responding to the problems posed by scenario1, then it is already too late, according to reid w. crawford, legal advisor andinterim vice president for external affairs at iowa state university. he noted thatnetworking issues should be considered within the university community beforesuch problems arise, and any concerns should be shared with the connected highschools. he also said that discussions should begin very early in the process1 an alternative to legal intervention might be to require that any message about aperson leave behind an electronic trail detailing where it was sent from, so that the persondefamed can seekšand the remorseful author can sendša retraction or apology.free speech57rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with university trustees, regents, legislators, the faculty senate, women's groups,civil liberties groups, and other concerned parties.according to crawford, this scenario would be an important public relationsconcern, because the university supports the network with public funds. thus, hesaid, the matter should be handled preemptively through a quiet and nonpublicpolitical and regulatory process managed by the university, involving consultationwith the various constituencies in the university community. crawfordcontinued, "that is not the only step, but it's the first step that has to be taken sothat you can deal with issues in a rational setting. because if you think of itstrictly as a legal issue, you can make all the arguments you want to aboutpornography, playboy, playgirl, or getting into the hardercore and illegalpornography. but if you cannot recognize the public relations issues, i don't thinkyou will ever get to the substantive legal issues."since he made these remarks at the forum in 1993, crawford's point hasbeen underscored by scores of articles in the public press about "sex and theinformation superhighway."2lessig suggested that if users of a university network have an understandingthat any subject is permissible, then it may be appropriate to have some technicalmeans for segregating topics.3 this idea was seconded by murray turoff, whonoted that new jersey institute of technology electronic forums supported thediscussion of very controversial subjects in private conferences that are advertisedin a directory. an affirmative choice must be made by the student before access to aprivate conference is granted.carrying forward the theme of individual responsibility for enforcement,david hughes, a freedomofspeech advocate and managing partner of oldcolorado city communications, suggested that users who wished to screen outmaterial they deem offensive could use a technological filter (akin to "caller id"for telephones), assuming2 see, for example, amy harmon, "the 'seedy' side of cdroms," los angeles times,november 29, 1993, p. a1; john schwartz, "caution: children at play on informationhighway," washington post, november 28, 1993, pp. a1 and a26.3 this is an approach employed by america online, which offers message boards andconferences for different topics. at the same time, the library community believes that anyofficial scheme for "segregating" or labeling violates intellectual freedom. for example,the american library association's "statements on labeling" says that ''labeling is thepractice of describing or designating materials by affixing a prejudicial label and/orsegregating them by a prejudicial system. the american library association opposesthese means of predisposing people's attitudes toward library materials for the followingreasons: labeling is an attempt to prejudice attitudes and as such, it is a censor's tool. –"free speech58rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such a device could be developed for electronic traffic.4 this technologicalsolution would be the equivalent of a porchši.e., it would allow offensivemessages to reach the door but not to enter the house. still, other technicalapproaches for screening undesirable material may not be viable in the electronicenvironment. for example, broadcast media have often resorted to segregatingmaterial not intended for children by broadcasting such material late at night; inan electronic environment in which the material is available 24 hours per day,such an approach becomes more difficult to implement.the first concern of george perry, vice president and general counsel for theprodigy services company, with regard to scenario 1 was whether any laws werebroken; he was not sure, noting that the answer might depend on the nature of thepictures. therefore, the real question becomes the nature of the relationshipamong the user, the provider, and, perhaps, the victim, he said. perry did not see afreedomofspeech issue in the scenario, arguing that speech has never beenentirely free.given that electronic networks are a new medium with very few commonlyaccepted rules of behavior, perry emphasized the need for providers to establishthem. "i think it is absolutely critical that operators of these systems, whether theyare universities or commercial operations, establish their rules. – i don't thinkthat every network in which you express yourself has to have the same rules, butyou've got to have some rules; otherwise the place is just going to crumble."a view that went farther was espoused by hughes. he contended that theprimary responsibility in handling the explicit photographs lay with theindividual and that the university had no responsibility. if the universityresponded to the incident by disconnecting the student from the network, then thestudent should respond by demanding his or her freedom of electronic speech,hughes asserted.4 the technological feasibility of an electronic filter is not at all a given, although someprototypes are being developed. it is easy to imagine a filter that would delete or suppresstextbased messages that contained, for example, certain fourletter words; it would be farmore difficult, however, to develop a filter that could screen out bitmapped graphicimages of humans in sexual poses. (one could, of course, screen authors' names andsubject keywords.) moreover, any such filter would require a user to specify with someprecision what he or she found offensive, a feat not all individuals could accomplish.examplebased learning techniques may enable a program to derive a filter based on a fewsamples of undesirable material, but whether such techniques are feasible and applicableon a large operational scale is the subject of considerable technical argument.free speech59rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he based this argument on the premise that the digitized photographsconstitute speech rather than property, and that freedom of speech is theoverriding principle. methods of handling problems on electronic networksshould evolve from that foundation, hughes argued, rather than from universitypolicies or social norms developed for other communications media.in hughes's view, the university's only responsibility in scenario 1 is toeducate students and the public. he asserted that members of the public who lackexperience with electronic networksšincluding parents and newspaper reportersšare unable to make sound, objective judgments about such situations. on hisown network, hughes educates and influences his user population to adhere to anethic. "we discuss that ethic, and out comes socially responsible behavioršnotby imposing external authority on them. i never delete, on my system, a piece ofmailšnever, no matter how obtrusive. i handle it technologically sometimes [bymasking the appearance of the message] so that it is free speech, and we have adiscussion to the point of responsible group behavior." others argue that maskingthe appearance of the message is itself a form of censorship.in closing discussion of scenario 1, moderator henry perritt noted thatpanel members generally agreed on the importance of establishing rules underwhich electronic forums operate. rules need not be the same from forum toforum, as perry pointed out, but they need to be explicit and give importantconsideration to the views of stakeholdersšoperators and users. perritt pointedout that the disagreements were over the extent (if any) to which othermechanisms were needed to enforce those rules.scenario 2: negative comments harm a thirdpartyin an investment forum bulletin board hosted by a commercial networkservice provider, several users are discussing the merits of investing in xyzcorp., a "penny stock" whose price can fluctuate widely on relatively smalltrading volume. john, a regular user of the bulletin board, has gained somecredibility with other users for his stock picks. he posts a note on the bulletinboard that says: "i was heavy in this stock 4 months ago, but sold most of myholdings last month. the company is out of cash, and sales are in the tank. insidemanagement is waiting for the stock to go up a quarter pointfree speech60rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to dump some big positions." the next day xyz's shares fall precipitously onheavy trading.issue: provider responsibility and liabilitylessig argued that because the first amendment applies less forcefully inthe context of commercial speech, it may be better to first ask to what extent it isreasonable to make individuals (in this case, the provider) seek out and screeninformation to avoid harming others. lessig outlined two points relevant to theproblem.first, he offered the analogy of electronic networks functioning as thenational enquirer of cyberspace, in that no one could reasonably rely onanything that was said. thus, "the person has no claim they had been harmed,because they shouldn't have relied upon [the information], and nobody shouldhave relied upon it." that is not to say, however, that speakers should be immunefrom liability, lessig added. it is only when individuals feel responsible for theirwords and actions that others begin to give them credibility, he noted. thus, if thenetwork is to gain credibility there must be some responsibility.adler was disturbed by the national enquirer analogy, arguing thatcredibility is essential if electronic networks are to evolve into the marketplace ofthe future. trying to ward off liability by warning users to distrust the network isthe wrong approach, he said; users must feel comfortable knowing that they donot routinely risk any type of injury and that injuries, when sustained, can beredressed. moreover, the first amendment has been linked to oliver wendellholmes's notion that the marketplace is where truth will prevail through a freecompetition of ideas, adler added.5lessig's second point was that what is reasonable liability depends primarilyon technology. if there were a simple way to search the bulletin board forharmful information, then common law courts5 specifically, justice holmes wrote that "when men have realized that time has upsetmany fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than they believe the veryfoundations of their own conduct that the ultimate good desired is better reached by freetrade in ideasšthat the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself acceptedin the competition of the market, and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishessafely can be carried out. that at any rate is the theory of our constitution. it is anexperiment, as all life is an experiment." see abrams v. united states, 250 u.s. 616, 630(1919).free speech61rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.might find it reasonable to impose that duty on providers, he said.6 however,emphasizing his earlier point, lessig pointed out that common law is made byjudges, who may be unfamiliar with electronic networks. "the biggest and, ithink, most frightening thing about regulation in this area is that the people doingthe regulation have no experience at all," he said. "they have no conception ofwhat cyberspace looks like or even feels like."there was some dispute on this point. marc rotenberg, a privacy advocatewith computer professionals for social responsibility, suggested that cubby inc.v. compuserve inc. (described in chapter 3) was a landmark free speech casethat demonstrated that judges are beginning to understand electronic networks.rotenberg sympathized with compuserve's argument that it acted as adistributor, not a publisher, and that it did not know and had no reason to know ofthe statements in question. the court agreed, emphasizing the first amendmentand saying that compuserve deserved the same protection as a traditional newsvendor. rotenberg was most enthusiastic about the cubby decision, calling it"wonderful" and "sensible." he said the court appeared to be promotingelectronic networks as an information resource by limiting but not eliminatingliability for providers. moderator perritt suggested that even if judges didn'tunderstand the new technology, they could be educated about specialized subjectsthrough the testimony of expert witnesses and amicus briefs and that suchapproaches could be encouraged for cases involving electronic networks.others, however, warned that the decision establishes troubling precedents.adler was disturbed by the finding that compuserve was not responsible becauseit had little or no editorial control. in fact, the provider did have the technologicalability to exercise control but chose not to do so, placing that responsibility on acontractor, adler noted; he further wondered whether publishers should beallowed to pass liability on to a contractor simply by declaring themselves to bedistributors and thus lowering their liability. "so when6 if the cost of searching the bulletin board for harmful postings were less than the valueof the damage caused by information likely to be on the bulletin board, common lawwould hold the bulletin board owner liable for not undertaking a search if damaginginformation were indeed found on the board. (more formally, the cost comparison wouldbe between the cost of the search and the expected value of the damage associated withharmful information (i.e., the product of the likelihood that the information will be foundon the board times the damage it would cause if it were indeed found).) see richardposner, economic analysis of law, 4th ed., little, brown, boston, mass., 1992, pp.163169.free speech62rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.we are talking about rights and responsibilities in this world, one of the things wehave to consider is, do the responsibilities flow from whether or not you actuallyhave the capability, whether or not it is feasible for you to exercise control, orwhether or not you choose to place yourself in that position of exercisingcontrol?" in addition, rights and responsibilities flow from a social decisionregarding whether it is beneficial to grant individuals the rights or to saddle themwith the responsibilities.the central problem with the cubby decision, adler said, is lack of clarity,or failure to distinguish among the various electronic services and formats. adlersaid he feared that some readers of the decision would conclude that solicitationof criminal activity, defamation, and other crimes or torts could be carried out onelectronic networks without liability.hughes said he was frightened by the notion that a provider's capability toreview materials translates into an obligation to do so. it is the provider thatdefines its services and thus its obligations, he argued. (of course, a providernever has complete freedom, as it is subject to the laws of the jurisdiction inwhich it operates.) hughes said further that even a single system may havemultiple roles. for example, the prodigy services company is a publisher, whichimplies some review of content; but the service also carries free speech, for whichit should not be held accountable, according to hughes.the point regarding multiple roles was reinforced by davis foulger fromibm, who argued that different types of computermediated communications(e.g., electronic newsletters, conferences, and mail) may carry different types ofresponsibility. electronic newsletters, he suggested, may be entirely analogous toprintbased newsletters, with all of the liabilities of the latter carrying over to theformer, whereas an unmoderated conferencing forum may carry fewerresponsibilities. given the flexibility offered by electronic networks to define thetype of communication, hughes and foulger agreed that the selfdefinition oughtto be the element that defines liability; for example, in the case of a commercialnetwork whose contractual agreement with users declares that the network ownsall data on its system, the network should be subject to all of the legalmechanisms used to hold an individual liable for that data.hughes went on to note a further complication to the selfdefinition process:the extensive interconnection between networks means that a given network maybe unable to control the input to it. hughes asked: "to what extent am iaccountable for what someone else says on another system that happens to bedisplayed on mine?"godwin argued that cubby posed a "knew" or "should have known"free speech63rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.standard of liability for defamation, and he thought that the decision was proper.but godwin also argued that the case does not imply that liability results from acomplete failure to exercise discretion or a decision not to exercise discretion. henoted that "cubby is based on california v. smith,7 [in which] bookstores wereheld to be not responsible for monitoring and not responsible for the specificcontents of their books [even though] bookstores can exercise discretion aboutwhat they carry." he further argued that a broad kind of discretion need notnecessarily result in liability; such a freedom from liability would be important toforum operators, who need to be able to shape the character of their forums butwho also want to avoid liability for the specific contents of those forums.providers were satisfied with the cubby decision but said it leaves somequestions unanswered. perry, while pleased that compuserve was not heldliable, said a provider's obligation remains unclear. for instance, if a system islarge, with perhaps 50 million messages posted each year, how far should theoperator have to go in investigating allegations about a piece of information? "do ihave an obligation to go find that thing in the 50 million [notes]? – once i findit, do i have an obligation to go out and discover the facts as to whether or notwhat the individual was saying was true –?"perry argued that, in the scenario he just outlined, both a publisher and adistributor have an obligation to determine the facts. this responsibility is clearerin the case of a publisher, he noted; in the cubby case, the court found that if adistributor is notified of a problem, then it, too, faces some liability unless it takesaction. moreover, he warned that "it is very dangerous to make the publisher /distributor distinction when it comes particularly to commercial operators,because in fact they are a wide spectrum of different kinds of beasts. at one endthey may very well be publishers. on another end they may be pure distributors.on another end they may be none of either. so i think it's dangerous for us to takethose preexisting analogies and try to apply the law that we have today thatapplies to those areas, to this new medium."in general, liability protection models from other media may not beappropriate on electronic networks, adler said, noting that the7 in this decision (361 u.s. 147 (1959)) the u.s. supreme court held a distributor's lackof editorial control precluded states from holding the distributor strictly liable forpublication contents (a.j. sassan, "cubby inc. v. compuserve inc.šcomparing apples tooranges: the need for a new media classification," software law journal, vol. v,1992).free speech64rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distributor model suggests that "the best way to avoid any possible liability is toexercise the least control. [but] i'm not sure that is socially responsible." rule bylaw is not necessarily so bad, he said, pointing out that, historically, citizens havenot objected to laws per se, but rather to the arbitrary exercise of lawšlawwithout participation and consent.as to how liability should be applied, adler emphasized the distinctionbetween a common carrier and a service provider: the former is virtually immunefrom liability because it is legally required to provide equal access to all userswithout editorial control over content, whereas the latter can be held responsibleif it is notified of a problem and does nothing to eliminate the continuing harm. itis not clear which definition applies in scenario 2.issue: user responsibility and liabilityliability for defamation is a critical issue in the electronic environment. incommon law, the question of defamation rested on the truth or falsity of astatement about an individual. however, in light of first amendmentconsiderations, the supreme court has focused on the degree of fault that can beattributed to the speaker, adler said. of course, if the speaker (or poster) of adefamatory message is truly anonymous (i.e., if it is genuinely impossible todetermine the identity of the speaker with certainty, as might be the case if themessage originated on another network, for example), then the matter ends there,and no party can be held liable.true anonymity currently is rare on electronic networks.8 in many morecases, the true identities of speakers are confidential (i.e., the identities ofspeakers are withheld as a matter of policy on the part of the service provider,although the provider does in fact know these true identities). in such cases,adler maintained, "the question is whether the service provider is willing toaccept the liability for the harm that is caused by maintaining the promise ofconfidentiality, or whether – there is a balance – that says there are compellinginterests which outweigh the values of the promise of confidentiality and requiredisclosure."but perry and hughes took a somewhat different tack. perry argued that auser's liability on a bulletin board ought to be the same8 anonymous use of electronic networks is nevertheless expected to increase. eventoday, there are socalled "anonymous remailers" that accept email messages and forwardthem to their intended recipient stripped of any identifying information.free speech65rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as in any other circumstance. hughes agreed, saying that john's note in scenario 2was an individual act of irresponsible speech, for which the provider was notresponsible. both suggested that under the circumstances of scenario 2, theprovider should not have to bear the liability to which adler referred. hughesfurther argued that when identities are kept confidential as a policy choice on thepart of the provider, a complainant should seek the assistance of law enforcementauthorities and show probable cause for issuance of a search warrant (in acriminal case) or a subpoena (in a civil case) that would compel the provider toprovide the sender's identity. in this case, the decision concerning whether todivulge the speaker's identity does not rest with the provider but with lawenforcement authorities.if the provider in scenario 2 maintained the confidentiality of the originatorof the communication, thus shielding the only potential defendant, then theprovider still would not be obligated to report a violation to law enforcementauthorities, hughes said, citing the electronic communications privacy act of1986 (public law 99508). however, he said, the provider has some fundamentalethical responsibility. "some things are right and some things are wrong,"hughes argued.discussion and common themesthe balance between free speech and other values is tested regularly, and theregulation of speech comes in many forms. even in academia, usually regardedas the bastion of free speech, users sometimes are banned from networks. carlkadie, a graduate student in computer science at the university of illinois andmoderator of the academicfreedom mailing list on the internet, cited the exampleof an iowa state university student being expelled from the campus network forcopying materials from an erotic forum into an open forum meant for discussionof newsgroups and newsgroup policy. the expulsion was lifted after protests frominternet and campus network users, but access to the erotic forum remainsrestricted. kadie went on to argue that because many universities are stateuniversities and because many parts of the internet are owned or leased byfederal or state government, lawsuits could be filed in these cases based on thefirst amendment,9 although the law is weaker for cases involving library policyon selection (or, more to the point, exclusion)9 the first amendment applies only to public forums, which can result fromgovernment funding or a dedication to public use (e.g., an airport or a shopping mall evenif privately funded), and different types of speech may have different levels of protection.free speech66rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of electronic resources. "i think many of these arguments have to be won or loston the moral argument and [by] appealing to freedom of expressionšacademicfreedomšand can't depend so much on legal protections," kadie said.still, users generally can be more outspoken on university networks thananywhere else. kadie expressed the hope that those who determine rules forbehavior on electronic networks will "learn from the experience (and, hopefully,wisdom) codified in longstanding academic policies and principles. – i don'tthink academia should be the only forum for free speech. – i would hope thattechnical solutions such as 'kill files'10 and the ability to create new forums [as isdone in santa monica] would be enough to have people [on nonacademicnetworks] regulate themselves."it may be difficult to transfer this principle of openness to other arenas. forinstance, corporate executives may want to control postings of material relevantto company business. economic considerations also may argue for the regulationof speech at times. this is particularly true for commercial informationproviders, as clients demand to be insulated from certain types of content, notedperry. perry said, "there are different environments in which you have to dealwith the same set of problems, maybe with a different view and a differenthistorical and traditional background." these differences in perspective can leadto conflicting views about what speech is or is not appropriate for public viewingor exposure.finally, it was argued that free speech was not possible when one was deniedaccess to the electronic environment. as sara kiesler noted, "the purest form ofcensorship is absence of access. if you can't have access to a network at all, thenyou are completely censored from that forum. therefore, we have to know whohas access, and, even for those who have physical access, who's being drivenoff."there was broad agreement among panel participants that free speech is notan absolute right to be exercised under all circumstances. the relevant issue forfree speech is what circumstances justify the uses of which mechanisms todiscourage and/or suppress certain types of speech. the nature of thecircumstances in which free speech should be discouraged is a matter of politicaland social debate, but it is clear that policymakers have a variety of suchmechanisms at their disposal to discourage or suppress expression:10 a "kill file" is a list of users (i.e., network accounts) whose messages are to be deletedautomatically from the set of messages shown to the owner of the kill file.free speech67rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. educate and persuade: at a minimum, most people agree that animportant step involves persuasion and education, relying on voluntarymeans to dissuade people from saying things that are arguably harmful,objectionable, or offensive to others. rely on contractual provisions: someone agrees, as a condition of use, toabide by regulations regarding the content of speech. weigh political considerations: an institution may wish to weigh how itwill be seen in the eyes of its relevant public in determining the natureof its response. rely on market mechanisms: grassroots pressure on suppliers ofinformation services often forces change because suppliers fear losingthe business of those complaining. explicitly rely on first amendment freedoms: a state university mayhave far fewer options for regulating speech due to the fact that it can beregarded as an arm of government.how are these issues different in the electronic networked environment?lessig asserted thatin ordinary life, social norms are created in a context where other things besidesspeech are going on, things such as exclusion, anger, and the impact of localgeographies. – [these are the] sorts of things that help the process of normcreation in a speech context. [but] what makes electronic networks so difficultfrom the perspective of creating and molding norms is that the interactive humanbehavior on these networks is mostly if not entirely pure speech. from theconstitutional perspective, this is the first environment in which society has hadto face the problem of creating and changing norms when the only thing it isdoing is trying to regulate speech.the steering committee generally concurred with this assessment,concluding that networks offer a greater degree of anonymity than is possible forspeakers under other circumstances. networks enable communications to very large audiences at relativelylow cost as compared to traditional media. networks are a relatively new medium for communications, and thereare few precedents and little experience to guide the behavior ofindividuals using this medium. as a result, š speakers are less familiar with a sense of appropriateness and ethicshere (treating a big megaphone as though it were a smaller one); and š policymakers are less confident in this domain.free speech68rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5electronic vandalismthe extent of electronic vandalism and other computerrelated crime isunknown. annual losses in the united states due to computer crime have beenestimated at $2 million to $730 million, but these figures are suspect; severalstudies have estimated that only 1 percent of all computer crime is detected, andthe federal bureau of investigation (fbi) estimates that of crimes that aredetected, only 14 percent are reported.1 in any case, it is clear that security onelectronic networks is a growing concern.2 antivirus programs have becomealmost ubiquitous, and, as eberhard wunderlich of at&t noted at the novemberworkshop, there is a trend toward moving beyond user passwords to smart cardsfor access control, encryption, and electronic signatures. in the first half of 1994,concerns for security on the internet were prompted by a rash of penetrationattempts, many of which were successful.3but technology cannot guarantee absolute security. forum participants1 c.d. chen, ''computer crime and the computer fraud and abuse act of 1986,"computer law journal, vol. x(1), pp. 7186, winter 1990.2 a classic case of network penetration is that of the hanover hacker, recounted byclifford stoll in the cuckoo's egg: tracking a spy through the maze of computerespionage, doubleday, new york, 1989.3 peter h. lewis, "hackers on internet posing security risks, experts say," new yorktimes, july 21, 1994, p. a1.electronic vandalism69rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.indicated, for instance, that a system operator may have difficulty detecting afraudulent (i.e., stolen) user identification, particularly one forged by an expert.as mitchell d. kapor, cofounder and chair of the electronic frontierfoundation, said, "there's always some tiny fraction of the elite that is, in fact,technically capable of inflicting huge amounts of damage. –"for those cases in which damage does occur, some remedy may be found inthe law, though even this remedy is subject to the caveat that its efficacy dependson the reality of enforcement. if a district attorney refuses to prosecute or thecivil courts take too long to handle a lawsuit, the determination of trespass ortheft becomes an academic discussion.scenario 1: virus damages bulletin boarda computer club at a local high school sets up a dialin bulletin board, usingequipment bought for the club by a banker whose son is club president. thebulletin board is set up at the club president's home, and it can exchangemessages with other bulletin boards across north america. the banker also has acomputer system for working at home that is tied directly into the club'scomputer; the banker's computer is used to write a public newsletter for his bank.the telephone number of the bulletin board is distributed through a nationalmagazine, and over time, the following activities are taking place on the bulletinboard, although no club members are involved in any of these activities: stolen credit card numbers are posted; hate messages are sent to canada, where such messages are illegal; a program is posted in a public space by joe, a nonmember, and othersdownload the program and discover that it contains a virus that causesconsiderable damage; and a second program is posted that is designed to disrupt network serviceswhen run on a computer connected to a national network such as theinternet or compuserve.issue: criminal liabilityclub members have no criminal liability for failing to monitor the activitiesin this scenario, said scott charney, chief of the computerelectronic vandalism70rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crime unit at the justice department. if a potential criminal case involving acomputer warranted an investigation, both the law and sensible policy woulddictate use of the least intrusive means, such as a subpoena, to obtaininformation, he said. however, the answers to several questions might alter thisresponse. the first question is how prosecutors learned of the problem; the clubmembers themselves might have reported it, for example, thereby inviting aninvestigation.the second and more complicated question involves intent. "suppose, forexample, that the people running this board knew about the illegal access codesand were actually fostering it and encouraging it," charney said. "that doesn'tmean the [bulletin board] is any less valid, but those running it may not beinnocent third parties anymore. and how do you investigate that and get theevidence you need without infringing on the newsletter, which is protected underthe first amendment to the constitution?"if they pursued the virus case in scenario 1, federal prosecutors would notseize equipment or search the bank computers, because neither the bulletin boardnor the bank is involved in criminal activity, charney said. in fact, it is not clearwhether there is any criminal case at all; if the bulletin board is open to thepublic, then joe, even as a nonmember, has access authority and hence nocriminal liability, because the statute under which criminal liability is imposedrequires unauthorized access.issue: deficiencies in the lawsmark rasch, an attorney with the firm arent, fox, kintner, plotkin, andkahn, said joe's inappropriate behavior has two elements: possible unauthorizedaccess to the bulletin board and uploading the computer virus. since joe isarguably an "authorized" user (anyone could be an "authorized" user of a publicbulletin board system, and 18 u.s.c. section 1030 simply prohibits unauthorizedaccess), joe might well escape any liability at all. as for the uploading of thecomputer virus, "prosecutors must prove joe's intent. why did he do it? the waythe federal law is structured right now, if joe accesses with authorization, evenwith intent to destroy and damage all the information in that computer, thecomputer crime statute says he is not guilty of a crime, because it is his initialaccess [that the law focuses on]."44 note that joe may still be liable to prosecution under the applicable state's criminallaw, if any.electronic vandalism71rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rasch suggested that legislators based the law on an imperfect analogyšanoffice breakin, where no matter what intruders do in the office, they are guilty atminimum of trespassing. although the analogy falls short, rasch said lawmakershave relied on such analogies because of the lack of common experience in theenvironment of electronic networks. "when we see crimes in society, we canrelate to them as criminal acts because we have a common experience about whatis a crime and what is not a crime," he said. "and when we deal in cyberspaceand we deal in the electronic environment, we don't have those experiences. wedon't have those common human judgments. we don't have that ethical standardto fall back on. so then we end up – trying to draw analogies."kent alexander, now u.s. attorney for the northern district of georgia, saidjoe has extensive criminal and civil liability but that prosecuting him would be achallenge. alexander said the computer fraud and abuse act of 1986 seldomapplies in real cases, adding that prosecutors often depend on broader laws suchas the wire fraud statute (18 u.s.c. section 1343), which applies if a telephone isused in a scheme to defraud. alexander and rasch both said a federaldestructionofproperty statute is needed.that prospect prompted some caution. for example, marc rotenberg andmichael godwin argued that although it was appropriate to criminalizeundesirable behavior such as destruction of property and computer trespass, itwas unnecessary to specify what the instrumentality of such behavior was.godwin said the law generally approaches computers as if they were "inherentlydangerous" in ways that other generalpurpose tools, such as hammers, are not; heargued that this legal approach infringes on freedom of speech and that computeruse should not be overregulated in this manner. still, alexander insisted thatsome computerrelated laws are needed, because "cyberspace is – what we aregoing to live in." rasch said, "the reason we need specific computer crimestatutes is because analogies don't actually work perfectly," although he cautionedthat it would be preferable to target a potential miscreant's overall strategy ratherthan a precise mechanism, because a vandal might be able to "engineer around" adefined mechanism.litigation specialist thomas guidoboni, of the firm bonner and o'connell,agreed with other speakers that the computer fraud and abuse act is flawed. heargued that victims should be able to recover damages through the civil systembut that criminalizing and jailing hackers does not benefit victims, other than byserving as a deterrent. (the statute specifies punishment consisting of a fine and/or imprisonment.) he contended that, although the congress prohibitedelectronic vandalism72rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer trespassing, it did not address worse wrongs (such as the maliciousdestruction of computer files): "they need to be educated. – [t]hey don't reallyknow what to prohibit."charney said the federal law should specify the type(s) of prohibitednetwork intrusion. he noted that the justice department has asked the congressto amend the computer fraud and abuse act because the ethics of computerusage have evolved and users' roles have changed since 1986. "it's better to say,'look, if you upload a virus, even if you are authorized [to access the computer] –intending to damage, without authority, other people's material, that's going to becriminal.' that way, everybody has plenty of notice and you've got a statute thatdirectly applies to the conduct." such a statute should not criminalize legitimatework with viruses, such as in the research community, he added.godwin noted that federal law doesn't require that intent to damage beestablished, and he suggested it is bad policy for criminal laws to ignore intent.he said criminal statutes generally, and rightly, focus on the intent or mental stateof the defendant, because "we try to criminalize people for setting out to do badthings, not for unwittingly doing bad things." joe's potential criminal liability forputting out a virus that disrupts network service or that damages a "federalinterest" computer5 may not reflect the proper balance between civil and criminalsanctions, godwin suggested, because the law now "makes no distinctionbetween someone who accidentally causes damage and perhaps a terrorist whodeliberately causes damage to vital systems." rasch countered by arguing thateven if the statute itself makes no such distinction, it is possible to makedistinctions in other ways, such as in sentencing; he cited the sentence in themorris case as an example (box 5.1), arguing that morris was not imprisonedbecause the damage he caused was accidental.godwin noted that morris had authorized access to the computer from whichhe launched the virus. guidoboni, who defended morris, had arguedunsuccessfully that his client, as a member of the internet community, hadauthorized access to all computers on the system. guidoboni pointed out at theforum that "authorization" and "access" can be difficult to define for the internet.guidoboni also warned against attempting to curb computer vandalism through"foolish"5 as defined in the computer fraud and abuse act of 1986, a federal interest computeris a computer used exclusively or parttime by the u.s. government or a financialinstitution, where the offense affects the government's operation of the computer. the termalso applies if two or more computers, not all of which are located in the same state, areused in committing the offense.electronic vandalism73rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.censorship, noting that the government refused to release the "cure" for themorris virus, for fear of hackers obtaining it. "so of course a lot of you people onthe internet couldn't fix what was wrong, because our government didn't want togive you the code to fix it. – [it was their effort to] prevent a perceived wrongthat probably did more harm in the end."box 5.1 united states v. robert t. morris, 1991robert morris was one of the first to be prosecuted under thecomputer fraud and abuse act of 1986. as a cornell university graduatestudent, morris wrote and released onto the internet a "worm" programdesigned to propagate itself automatically without harm to the hostcomputers, but due to a flaw in its design, the morris worm causedthousands of computers nationwide to crash on november 23, 1988. byitself, the worm did no permanent damage, although the estimated cost ofrectifying its effects at each location involved ranged from $200 to $53,000.as a graduate student in the cornell university computer sciencedepartment, he had full and legal access to all the department's computingfacilities; these facilities were connected to the internet.although morris' defense claimed the worm was a benign test ofcomputer security that went wrong, morris was convicted on the groundsthat he intentionally accessed remote computers without authorization. hewas sentenced to 3 years probation, fined $10,050, and ordered to perform400 hours of community service, a sentence far less than the maximumpermissible under law. the conviction later was upheld by a federal appealscourt, and review was denied by the supreme court.source: united states v. robert t. morris, no. 89cr139(n.d.n.y.), aff'd 928 f.2d 504 (2nd cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 s. ct. 72(1991).issue: civil obligations and liabilitiescivil liabilities arise from the general principle in common law that a personwho has been wronged by another person is entitled to compensation for thatwrong from that other person. charney suggested that joe might haveconsiderable civil liability if the damage he caused was extensive. alexander saida civil case against joe probably would not hold up, assuming there were nofederal agents or state police involved, because hackers usually are judgmentproof.electronic vandalism74rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(hackers are usually judgmentproof because they are typically young peoplewho have no assets to seize.) conversely, although the father in scenario 1 hasnot committed a criminal act, he probably will be sued because he and his bankare the only parties with any money, guidoboni observed. whether there is avalid case is doubtful, he added. godwin noted that civil liability depends little, ifat all, on the intentions of a defendant.godwin argued that "to a large extent, many of the issues regarding liabilityare not criminal law issues at all. we have a large body of civil law devoted tonegligence obligations, obligations to be nonnegligent in maintaining other kindsof spaces, be it your yard or your business." he contended that, ultimately,individuals who maintain forums will have some duties of care that arise fromcivil obligations. he cautioned, however, that because an online bulletin board isa forum for speech, whatever civil obligations are imposed on a system operatormust be consistent with the first amendment.6 he further contended thatdistribution of virus codes or information, and general discussion of viruses, areprotected by the first amendment. "it's always very troubling to discover thatsomeone's teenaged son or daughter has access to a potentially damaging bit ofcomputer code," he said. "but one of the choices that we have made in living in afree society is to say we're going to allow people to be a source of a lot of risk.we're going to risk having people who have dangerous information."scenario 2: multisystem intruder damages filescomputer a is penetrated by an unauthorized user. the intruder usescomputer a to reach computer b, where he causes extensive damage to files.the operator of computer a monitors the keystrokes of the intruder, whoeventually is caught. the intruder claims that the operator violated thewiretapping statute.7 computer a did6 as private parties, prodigy, america online, compuserve, or genie are not subjectto the first amendment in the sense that they have the right to establish the rules thatapply to the use of their services as a contractual matter and to refuse to provide service tothose subscribers who do not adhere to such rules. on the other hand, actions that can belegally taken by a governmental entity must be consistent with the first amendment; tothe extent that such actions are required to enforce a contract, all parties to the contract areaffected by the first amendment.7 the wiretap statute is united states code annotated, title 18, sections 25102521. toelectronic vandalism75rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not display a warning message regarding unauthorized access because itsoperators forgot to install such a message, while computer b did not display awarning message on the premise that anyone accessing it from computer awould be an authorized user.issue: trespassing and theftscenario 2 is principally a trespassing case, and it illustrates the need forcomputer crime statutes, rasch said. computer trespassing is abhorrent, heasserted, even if no damage is done, because it destroys trust in the system. thecrime is different in character from a home or office breakin because the distrustlingers. "when you are a user, and you see somebody without authorization onyour system, you don't know that he didn't do anything, and it can take you a verylong time to come to the conclusion that he didn't do anything," rasch said. "itwould be like having a calculator that 1 out of every 100,000 times adds thenumbers up incorrectly."rasch argued that although trespassing is a crime in itself, monetary damagealso should be calculated, to adjust the level of the offense. at the same time, heraised the issue of whether stealing electronic information should be criminalizedat all. "if i steal the files in your office, you know i've stolen them. if, on theother hand, i simply copy them, the law is not clear on whether i've stolensomething. in a computer environment, i can steal all the information in yourcomputer and you won't know it, and you'll still have all the information."8although the federal statute does not criminalize reckless or negligentactions, rasch said negligence will become an increasingly commonuse wiretaps for collecting information about the content of communications, lawenforcement officials must obtain a court order by demonstrating probable cause andnecessity. however, a party to a communication can consent to its interception. federalpolicy holds that system operators do not have a privileged status allowing them tomonitor communications, and so federal agencies place notices on computer systemswarning hackers that they are subject to monitoring, according to patrick lanthier,director of public policy and technology for pacific bell. different policies may obtainunder state law.8 there is a long legal tradition of protecting intellectual property, which is itself a legalconstruction that vests in certain people property interests in the intangible (for example,the law grants authors copyright protection and companies trade secret protection).however, the boundaries that separate criminal versus civil liability for violating theselaws are fuzzier than those for governing theft of tangible property.electronic vandalism76rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basis for civil litigation. as to whether reckless actions should be criminalized, heacknowledged that this approach would help prosecute wrongdoing andencourage users to be careful, but he noted that the problem of proving adefendant's mental state would persist. he dismissed claims that intent can bedifficult to prove, saying, "a person is presumed to intend the natural andprobable consequences of his actions, so generally you can prove intent."godwin argued that the phrase "stealing information" implies thatinformation is property, when in fact an argument can be made that informationshould be assumed not to be property.9 to become property and be subject totheft, information must meet certain tests, such as those imposed by copyright ortrade secret laws, he said. he agreed with prosecutor charney that privacy is thekey issue in computer intrusion, just as it in wiretapping. "i think it's appropriatesometimes to criminalize intrusion and the examination and even the copying ofdata as perhaps the violation of a privacy interest," godwin said. "but treating itlike a theft crime, i think, doesn't help the public consciousness of – the truenature of these crimes."while he supported the use of incentives to curb user negligence, godwinquestioned whether criminal law is the right tool. users already have incentives tosecure their systems and refrain from distributing damaging software; whetherthese incentives are adequate is the question, he said.godwin argued that criminal behavior on electronic networks should not bedefined until "we actually have a sense of what the social norms are. – many ofus just say it's obvious that intruding in a computer is like intruding in yourhome," he said. "believe me, if it were that obvious, then many of the people whohave done computer intrusions would never have done it, because these peoplehave never walked [without permission] into other people's homes."issue: determining damageassuming the two computers are in different states (i.e., a federal interestcomputer was involved pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1030(e)(2)),9 the question of whether or not information should be or can be regarded as property issubject to considerable debate. what is undeniable is that certain types of information andperhaps certain pieces of information (i.e., specific instantiations of those types) aregenerally regarded by society at large as being more appropriately shared or appropriatelyprivate than other types (and perhaps pieces) of information. put differently, agreement onthe principles that differentiate these categories could not be expected to result if a groupof randomly chosen "reasonable people" were asked to articulate such principles.electronic vandalism77rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and the intruder is not authorized to access either computer a or computer b, theintruder could be prosecuted under the computer fraud and abuse act (section1030(a)(5)) if damage totaled $1,000 or more,10 charney said. the intruder mightalso face a misdemeanor charge under sections 1030(a)(2) and 1030(a)(3) if heaccessed, without authorization, certain specified computers (i.e., computers usedby financial institutions, card issuers, consumer reporting agencies, or the federalgovernment).charney stressed the difficulty of calculating damage, a necessary task indetermining whether a federal crime has been committed and how severe thesentence would be. if all the files in computer b were destroyed, for example, itis not clear how to calculate their value, he noted. charney also pointed out that,ironically, if the operator of computer b had complete backup files, any federalcrime effectively would be erased. "does that make sense? i don't think so," theprosecutor observed. of course, the victim would most likely incur costsassociated with restoring the backup, changing passwords, cleaning up thesystem, and so on, although the cost of the "ancillary" activities might well besignificantly less than the cost of recreating the destroyed files from scratch.he applauded a recent u.s. sentencing commission recommendation fornew sentencing guidelines for computer crime that would focus not on economicdamage, but rather on confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data.11 thatapproach makes sense, charney said, because in many computer offenses "thereal problem is not money, it's privacy and trusted systems, and i think we need toaddress that."guidoboni agreed with charney that damage calculations are a problem. forexample, prosecutors in the morris case claimed substantial amounts of economicdamage that would have been dismissed as "speculative" in the average civilcase, guidoboni said.issue: ethics and educationcharney and godwin agreed that computer users need ethics edu10 this level of damage is likely, assuming that estimates of average losses are accurate.the average loss due to computer crime has been estimated at $44,000 to $10 million(chen, "computer crime and the computer fraud and abuse act of 1986," 1990).11 federal register, december 31, 1992. as of may 1994, the recommendation (revisedsince 1992) had not been adopted.electronic vandalism78rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cation.12 charney noted that the justice and education departments recentlypublished a booklet for educators on the ethical use of information technologies.many computer hackers are not trying to damage anything; they simply are youngand do not know any better, he explained. in such cases, federal agents visit theintruders' homes and tell the parents, and the problem generally stops. ''look,there will always be some percentage of the population that has a criminal bent,and as they learn to use computers, they are going to do nasty things with them,"charney said. "but if you eliminate all these other cases that exist only becausethe people haven't been educated, then you can apply what limited resources youhave left to the really serious cases."other forum participants offered conflicting perspectives on the ethicalstatus of computer users. lance hoffman, professor of electrical engineering andcomputer science at george washington university, felt he was "living infantasyland, listening to some of this discussion." he suggested that the term"ethically educated computer user" might be an oxymoron, citing a class hetaught in which 22 out of 23 students did not feel that stealing information was acrime. on the other hand, raschšas noted earlieršsuggested that "stealinginformation" was not a crime.still other participants argued that many hackers have a sense of ethics,citing the legion of doom as an illustration. the legion of doom was a group ofseveral dozen hackers who broke into telephone systems and computer networks.the group acquired widespread notoriety beginning in 1989, when federal agentsraided the homes of three atlanta members who had been trafficking in stolenaccess codes. one hacker had broken into a bell south computer and obtained anadministrative document. the crackdown continued into 1990, with raids intexas and elsewhere.13john perry barlow said these hackers "were astonishingly ethical people inspite of the fact that they had been raised in an environment where they hadliterally been without adult supervision,14 both12 the need for ethics education was underscored in the cstb report computers atrisk: safe computing in the information age (national academy press, washington,d.c.), published in 1990.13 g. cartwright, "clash of the cyberpunks," texas monthly, vol. 21, pp. 104106,112116, january 1993.14 this may be hyperbole. at least one former member of the legion of doom says hisparents knew of his activities. moreover, the ethics of these hackers were selfserving, andthey were fully cognizant of the law. for example, members were instructed to avoidcausing damage to filesšnot for altruistic reasons, but so that they could avoid gettingcaught.electronic vandalism79rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in their homes and in their chosen environment (i.e., the electronic networkingenvironment). they had developed a set of ethics as a natural result of being in anenvironment where law simply didn't apply." argued barlow, "if they didn't haveethics, you would not be able to place a phone callševeršin this country. theyare amazingly careful about what they do. and there is nobody who is in a verygood position to stop them." alexander, who prosecuted the bell south case,15agreed with barlow about their technical capabilities, noting that "if they hadwanted to shut down service in the entire atlanta area or up and down the easternseaboard or the entire country, they could have."more recently (mid1994), public attention has been called to the ethicsissue by the national computer ethics and responsibilities campaign, whichaims to provide people with the tools and pointers they need to use informationtechnology in responsible and ethical ways. sponsored by several differentorganizations,16 the campaign is undertaking a variety of activities intended toencourage serious, ongoing discussion of the issue, lend the subject credibilityand impact, provide a strong rationale for commentators to focus on the issue,create a structure that gets information into the hands of people who need it, andraise public awareness. its core message is that users of information technologieshave responsibilities that are peculiar to the management, development, and useof those technologies. the campaign is not promoting any approach, "code ofconduct," position, or recommendation other than the need to raise awareness ofthe positive and negative consequences of the analogtodigital shift and of thefact that tools and resources exist to help people make intelligent, informedchoices about how best to develop, manage, and use information technologywhether it is in the home, corporation, or classroom.15 united states v. riggs aka the prophet, 967 f.2d 561, u.s. app. lexis 17592 (11thcir. 1992).16 sponsors of the campaign launch activities include the atterbury foundation, bostoncomputer society, business software alliance, compuserve, computer ethics institute,computer professionals for social responsibility, computing technology industryassociation, electronic privacy information center, merrill lynch & co. inc., monsanto,national computer security association, software creations bbs, software publishersassociation, symantec corporation, and ziffdavis publishing company. affiliatedorganizations included educom, the electronic messaging association, the ieeecomputer society, the california privacy rights clearinghouse, and others.electronic vandalism80rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issue: operator responsibilities and liabilitiessystem operators and network service providers have an obligation toprovide security capabilities and procedures that discourage unauthorized accessand/or damaging conduct. but users of these systems and services haveobligations as well to use these capabilities and procedures. guidoboni arguedthat system operators should assume some responsibility for security rather thandepend on laws to compensate for bad management. in the morris case, he noted,passwords had been left in files that were accessible to nearly anyone. in asimilar vein, alexander said failure to install adequate system security shouldneither be criminalized nor become a basis for blocking prosecution ofintruders.17 he argued that common sense and the freemarket system willencourage adoption of safeguards. more recently, the clinton administration'sinformation infrastructure task force has suggested that "users of personalinformation must take reasonable steps to prevent the information they have frombeing disclosed or altered improperly. such users should use appropriatemanagerial and technical controls to protect the confidentiality and integrity ofpersonal information."18 such a principle argues that individuals have an activeresponsibility to protect information about themselves.common themesan important theme of the dialogue, noted by several participants, was theunusual degree of accord among the factions represented. for instance, a varietyof speakers stressed the need for user ethics education. in addition, prosecutorcharney and civil liberties advocate godwin agreed that privacy, more than theftor specific damage, is the key issue in computer trespassing. (this is not to say,however, that damage resulting from breakins is unimportant. indeed, even whenthere is no explicit damage, companies may incur substantial costs if they areforced to take a network out of service17 in some european countries, failure to install adequate security can nullify anycriminal charges against an intruder; moreover, the system operator can be held liable,charney noted.18 see p. 3 in principles for providing and using personal information and theaccompanying commentary, distributed for comments by the information infrastructuretask force information policy committee working group on privacy in the nationalinformation infrastructure on may 4, 1994. initial reactions to this document suggest thatthis particular principle is the most controversial.electronic vandalism81rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.temporarily to check it out and patch security holes. in addition, a user's sense ofoperating in a trustworthy computing environment may be compromised.)perhaps most important, a consensus emerged that federal computer crimestatutesšunited states code annotated, title 18, section 1030šneeds to beupdated, although panel members differed as to how. this statute originated withthe counterfeit access device and computer fraud and abuse act of 1984(public law 98473) and was amended by the computer fraud and abuse act of1986 (public law 99474). it provides criminal sanctions for individuals whointentionally access a computer without authorization or exceed authorizedaccess; it does not address reckless or negligent access or intent to cause damage.the law is difficult to apply in practice. charney and others pointed out, forexample, that insiders pose a significant threat to network security: "we're seeing afairly dramatic increase in the number of insiders who plant viruses and othertypes of malicious codes because they're either disgruntled or they're on their wayout the door . –" these cases are a challenge to prosecutors because thedefendants had authorized access to the system. charney said legislation has beenproposed, although not passed, that would criminalize "unauthorized use"instead. rotenberg also emphasized the threat from insiders, suggesting that thefederal statute be revamped altogether to focus on actual harm and criminalizing"people who cause damage and people who intend to cause damage."others pointed out that the definition of "authorization" is problematic,especially in a networked environment designed to make it easy to sharecomputing resources. as rasch said, "we have a question of what is somebody'sauthorization on a network. – as a member of the internet community, i cansend electronic mail to anybody on the network. and i can access their computer,albeit for limited purposes.19 therefore, i have authority [under one definition19 one technical nuance to this point is the fact that internet email delivery is handledby an independent "postal system" that is not under the direct control of a mail sender.thus, "bob's" sending an email message to "alice" does not give bob even limited accessto alice's computer any more than bob's sending a letter gives him access to alice's postalbox. perhaps the real issue is not who has access (though that is the concern of the law),but rather what is legal to send through email. (for example, what is the electronicequivalent of a mail bomb?) a second technical nuance is that bob might use anothercapability provided by most internetconnected computers, such as ''finger," that would infact require direct access to alice's computer. (the "finger" command typically providesinformation about a user with an account on the target computer.)electronic vandalism82rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the word] to access every computer on the network. – even worse, theproblem is not just authorization, it's also exceeding authorization. so even if youare authorized to be on a system, if you exceed that authorization, you may besubject to criminal sanctions." david hughes pointed out that "it's not justauthorization on the internet, but everything is getting connected to everythingelse. – it looks like we are hooking up every network possible to every networkpossible. – furthermore, the information is moving, and you don't even knowwhat systems it's going through and whether you have authorization to go throughthat system." in short, hughes argued that basing criminality on whether a userhas authorized access to a system can raise some perplexing questions.david r. johnson, a lawyer with wilmer, cutler, and pickering, pointed outthat the computer fraud and abuse act criminalized unauthorized access onlybecause the congress was concerned that criminalizing electronic destruction byusers with authorized access could open up a new avenue for inappropriateprosecution of whistleblowers and others engaged in first amendmenttypeactivities.still, the concordance among the panel members was seen as a positive sign.anne wells branscomb spoke for many when she observed that "the legalprofession seems to have made a bridge now to the computer scientists and theuser, [and the] managers of some of these systems. – [i]n the past i think theyhave been talking at crosspurposes, have lived in different worlds."in summary, electronic vandalism can be characterized along at least twoseparate dimensions. the first involves the nature of the offense: electronictrespass, electronic invasion of privacy, and destruction or theft of electronicproperty. electronic trespass can be captured by the idea that a trespasser isexecuting commands on a computer that he or she does not have authorization touse. electronic invasion of privacy refers to the unauthorized examination of filesin a computer. electronic destruction of property refers to the unauthorizeddeletion or alteration of files in a computer.the second dimension involves the intent or lack thereof on the part of thealleged perpetrator. with a few exceptions, the presence of intent is whatdetermines the extent to which an alleged perpetrator can be prosecuted undercriminal statutes; in the absence of intent, liability for harmful actions is generallyrestricted to civil liability.although expressed in terms relevant to computing, these notions are notnew. what computing and networking primarily change is the difficulty ofdetermining when a given offense has occurred. for example:electronic vandalism83rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. trespass. the concept of trespass is grounded in physical space that canbe precisely delimited. what is the analog of physical space in a mediumin which physical space has lost its traditional meaning? beforenetworking became common, the concept of trespass could be applied toan unauthorized user sitting at a terminal hardwired to a mainframe.the terminal was located in a physical space, and the user's presencethere, if unauthorized, clearly constituted trespass against the owner ofthat space (who was also usually the owner of the mainframe). but whencomputers are interconnected all over the world, and the user may beaccessing the network from his or her home and thus may not be subjectto the jurisdiction of any interested party, on what is the concept oftrespass based? perhaps the unauthorized execution of commands issufficient, although this interpretation may be problematic whenexecution is possible without a remote login that clearly demarcates apoint of (authorized or unauthorized) access. invasion of privacy. in a physical space, an invader of privacy may wellleave tracks or other evidence that he or she has opened file cabinets orclosets. in many electronic environments, it is easy to view files anddirectories without leaving any trace whatever. thus, the owners of acomputer that has been compromised may have no idea of whatinformation the alleged invader has obtained. (at the same time, othercomputer systems maintain logs, and so a trace of at least some activitiesmay exist, whereas espionage activity may take place with paperdocuments, access to which may not leave any observable traces.) destruction or theft of property. the concept of electronic property iscomplicated by the fact that it, like all intellectual property, isintangible. when physical property is stolen, the original owner nolonger has use of that property. likewise, when it is destroyed, theoriginal owner must buy it again to replace it, thus incurring a cost thatis comparable to the cost of initial acquisition. but when electronicproperty is stolen, the original owner may not even be aware of itbecause he or she still has the use of it. when electronic property isdestroyed, and backups are available, it can be replaced at relatively lowcost.2020 the status of "low cost" as a relative descriptor must be emphasized. for example,restoring a large database from a backup could require considerable work, although thecost might still be much lower than the cost of reconstructing the database from scratch.moreover, "restored" files often do not contain the most recent changes made to them(e.g., a file might be restored using the backup made yesterday, but such a backup wouldobviously not include changes made since yesterday). even worse, the absence of recentchanges might not be noted by the user. finally, the backups themselves may not beentirely reliable, and so it may not be possible to restore the "backedup" version of the fileproperly.electronic vandalism84rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6intellectual property interestsprotection of intellectual property interests, whether by copyright, tradesecret, patent, trademark, export law, or even encryption, is no simple matter evenin traditional communications media. restrictions on photocopying are violatedroutinely, though certain types of photocopying are protected by law under fairuse provisions. pop music is created through "sampling" of other compositions, apractice of debatable legality that has parallels in electronic communications.national approaches to property protection differ, while the status ofinternational copyright law is somewhat murky1; and some u.s. laws related tointellectual property are so arcane that users may not even be aware of theirexistence or applicability.1 international agreements such as the universal copyright convention set minimumstandards for copyright laws, but nations still have divergent views of what copyrightmeans, according to steven j. metalitz, vice president and general counsel for theinformation industry association. for example, u.s. tradition holds that "copyright is alimited monopoly that's given to encourage and give incentive to creation," whileeuropeans view intellectual property as "an extension of the author's personality," metalitzsaid. in an effort to promote strong international standards for intellectual property rights,the united states in 1989 signed the berne convention for the protection of literary andartistic works; virtually every major nation is a signatory of that convention. see u.s.department of commerce, globalization of the mass media, nationaltelecommunications and information administration (ntia), special publication93290, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., 1993.intellectual property interests85rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.within this sphere of uncertainty, electronic networks generate special concerns,and indeed the internet itself is playing a significant role in changing the natureof publication.2 for example, in the research community, professional societiesare investigating ways to offer their journals through the internet, and some havealready begun to do so. many researchers would like to effectively circumventthe traditional publication process, which can lead to years of delay, and maketheir work available on the network for free. in other instances, many individualshesitate to use the internet at all, fearingšwith some arguable justificationšthatmaterial they created may be appropriated by others without permission.the research community is not the only one affected. the onlineavailability of various publications raises questions regarding the limits ofelectronic redistribution of print articles in general. in june 1994, the clarinetcommunications corporation, publisher of an internet newspaper, was asked byknightridder tribune and its tribune media services division to cease itselectronic publication of syndicated columns written by dave barry and mikeroyko, due to concerns about too much information piracy occurring on "thenet." it seems that a subscriber to clarinet, the electronic newspaper, sent a copyof a dave barry column from the clarinet, presumably by email, to anonsubscriber mailing list, where it then reached a knightridder employee whoreported it to executives at knightridder. in july 1994, the working group onintellectual property rights of the administration's information infrastructuretask force released a draft report on how copyright law and practices may needto be updated in an age of highly interconnected electronic networks. the reportproposes, for example, that existing law be clarified to ensure that copyright lawprotects the creator of works that are disseminated through electronic networks.3although intellectual property is traditionally the domain of copyright,patents, and trade secrets, most of the discussion of intellectual property2 for example, a recent cstb study, realizing the information future: the internet andbeyond (national academy press, washington, d.c., 1994), found that "there is – broadappreciation that a robust market for networked information and resources is fundamentalto the success of the evolving national information infrastructure." nevertheless, it is"much less certain – how intellectual property protection can or should evolve to fit thenetworked environment" (p. 160).3 see intellectual property and the national information infrastructure, a preliminarydraft of the report of the working group on intellectual property rights, informationinfrastructure task force, july 1994. a revised version will be developed after publiccomment and input are received.intellectual property interests86rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.matters in a networked environment is related to copyright, and discussions at thefebruary 1993 forum reflected this weighting. both scenarios in this chapter areuniversitybased because the university is a domain in which the clash amongcompeting values and rights (e.g., the value of the free and easy availability ofknowledge and information versus the right to receive compensation for one'sintellectual work) is often played out most clearly.background: copyright protectionthe copyright act of 1976 (public law 94553) protects "original works ofauthorship" that are "fixed in a tangible medium of expression, now known orlater developed, from which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwisecommunicated either directly or with the aid of a machine or device."4 the ownerof a copyright has exclusive rights to (1) reproduce the copyrighted work; (2)prepare derivative works; (3) distribute copies to the public by rental, lease, orlending; (4) perform the work; and (5) display the work publicly.5 these andother provisions are delineated in the united states code annotated, title 17,sections 101120.copyright protection clearly applies to certain types of electronic materials.the 1980 amendments to the copyright act of 1976 expressly protect computerprograms as literary works. the original expression of information in databasescan be copyrighted, though the facts themselves cannot, a position reinforced bythe supreme court decision in feist v. rural telephone (see chapter 3). thiscase eliminated copyright protection for white pages telephone directories, andsome believe that it has had a significant impact on the business and practices ofonline database providers.original and creative text can be copyrighted as well, although enforcingthis protection can be onerous. an example raised by attorney lance rose in thenovember 1992 workshop is that long email messages could probably beprotected under copyright law, but for practical reasons (i.e., the legal costs) theremay be no legal recourse for violations. other original and creative intellectualcreations whose status is ambiguous under current law include the "look and feel"of an online service and a short email message created by one person but postedpublicly by another.for users and system operators, it can be difficult to identify4 u.s. department of commerce, globalization of the mass media, 1993.5 u.s. department of commerce, globalization of the mass media, 1993.intellectual property interests87rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.copyrighted materials, because current legal practice does not require posting of acopyright notice (though notice is still required to qualify for recovery of certaindamages). thus, the burden is on the user to know the law. nevertheless, at leastsome network operators, notably commercial information services, strive to keepcopyrighted materials off their networks. commercial software is fairly easy toidentify and remove, but graphics are more difficult, according to stephen m.case, president of america online. (even if images are copyrighted, it isrelatively simple to strip copyright notices from them in such a way that there isno indication that they are protected by copyright.) case takes this responsibilityto heart, even though he employs contractors to review system files.6a 1993 federal court case, playboy enterprises inc. v. frena, described inchapter 3, underscores the need for caution, as it held that a finding of copyrightinfringement did not require an intent to infringe. in another case involving theposting of copyrighted video games on a public system with the knowledge andencouragement of the system operator, a federal court granted a temporaryinjunction in favor of the copyright holder on the grounds that it was unlikelythat a fairuse defense would be successful.7scenario 1: database agreement is violatedthe library of a large university connected to the internet subscribes to anelectronic database (accessible via a gateway on the library system) and anelectronic journal (to be distributed to subscribers by electronic mail). thedatabase owner provides access for up to six users at a time, for a flat fee to bepaid by the library. a student exceeds the sixuser limit on the database.6 as case observed, "– the reality of it is the customer is a whole [lot] less accountablefor anything on the system. they are paying money to us. they are calling us when theyhave problems. – [t]hey are going to hold us accountable. similarly, from a practicalstandpoint, any company that believes we are committing an infringing action will hold usliable." case's point also applies to music as well.7 sega enterprises ltd. et al. v. maphia et al., 1004 u.s. dist. ct. for the northerndistrict of california, march 18, 1994.intellectual property interests88rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issue: licenses, copyrights, and enforcement responsibilitiesforum participants generally agreed that the database subscriptionagreement, or license, should be enforced by the university, not the provider, inscenario 1. karen hunter, vice president and assistant to the chair of elsevierscience inc., said her company asks its licensee universities to "reinforce thenotion of copyright" and to stress the ethics of database use with faculty andstudents. hunter's chief concern is not how but whether the university tries toenforce its agreement. the sixuser limit in the scenario presumably applies to aprice, she noted; if the university cannot keep the system secure, then the priceneeds to be renegotiated.robert a. simons, general counsel and secretary for dialog informationservices, said universities have a duty to comply with their subscriptionagreements; the question is whether their controls are reasonable and, if a studentsomehow bypasses reasonable controls, whether the university has violated thecontract. such an incident probably would not concern the provider, he said,unless it occurred frequently and the university obviously was not exercising anycontrol.if a faculty member violated the user limit, then the infraction would becomemore serious, because a faculty member may be viewed as an agent of theuniversity, simons said. "[for] faculty members, i think there is an even higherduty, not only on their part but particularly on the university's part to educate themas to what is right and what is wrong," he said. "i think the university has anaffirmative [duty] to publish 'do's' and 'don'ts' with respect to its network system,much as it has the duty to post a sign on its photocopy machine in order that itnot be deemed a vicarious or contributory infringer."peter w. martin, a cornell law school professor and former dean, said theuniversity should have a rule and a disciplinary mechanism for dealing with thestudent in scenario 1. university rules and regulations traditionally address issuesthat "get at the core of the academic enterprise" and also affect the universitycommunity, and this situation meets those criteria, he said. "[t]he traditionalmindset would be to say to any third party –, 'that's an internal matter for us;you can't force us to discipline.' and unless a faculty member or libraryadministrator or some other student cares and sort of launches a disciplinaryproceeding, it won't happen." at cornell, martin said, administrators would careenough about the contractual agreement with the database provider that theywould initiate a disciplinary proceeding.nancy m. cline, dean of university libraries at pennsylvania stateintellectual property interests89rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.university, was concerned about the need to be responsive to copyright issues andsaid that expectations of behavior can be conveyed through policy guidelines,faculty contracts, and student codes of conduct; once such expectations areconveyed, the personal responsibility for appropriate use rests with individuals.beyond that, she was concerned about the prospect of being asked to enforcecertain types of contractual provisions having to do with access, pointing out thedifficulty of doing so as well as the concern for privacy rights. her purchasingdecisions are based in part on the expectations and obligations tied to particularproducts. for example, cline can enforce concurrent user limitations but hasdifficulty predicting the number of users (a total some providers request to assureprofits). it is difficult to "predict safely some of those boundaries withoutjeopardizing the nature of scholarship," she said.in that vein, she warned against focusing strictly on tight access controlsšwhether through strict limitations on the number of users or through theimposition of "peraccess" fees that would effectively exclude the majority ofstudentsšwithout considering the purposes of education and research.universities should not be "blocking off access [to knowledge] and controlling itso rigorously through contract or other types of containment processes – that itwould change the very nature of scholarship and research. – there's a vitality to alot of research that is predicated on people being able to discover and find and usethings that may not necessarily come to them through the usual channels." shecontinued, "there is a great deal of discovery that goes on in a university contextthat is serendipitous. people wander into things and thereby branch out anddiscover a new technique, a new application, whatever. – i would hate to see agraduate from microbiology go out into the workplace never having been able touse medline8 or some of these other [network] resources just because he or shewas the twentyfirst student in a 20workstation contract." she further argued thatlimitations on access to certain materials reduce the likelihood that thosematerials will be used and that if people cannot readily use these materials, theremay be no need for these materials to be generated in the first place.panel members could not offer an ideal mechanism for restricting use.simons said counting individual users is almost impossible and makes littlesense: "publishers were almost unanimous in agreeing that counting noses orheads is not the same as counting workstations. –8 medline is an electronic bibliographic database produced by the national libraryof medicine.intellectual property interests90rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it's almost impossible, and it's an impractical approach to try to count noses. it'sas if one is saying that without a copyright issue, i'm going to post somethingwith a thumbtack on a bulletin board, but only if you allow 20 people to look atit, and not 21. – that doesn't make much sense in either a copyrightenvironment or a commercial environment." on the other hand, the number ofworkstations with simultaneous access to the relevant files could be restricted.but ronald l. plesser, an attorney specializing in new information technologies,questioned whether physical access should be limited. he noted that manyuniversities issue personal identification numbers that can be used at variousworkstations. he said that pricing strategies for handling such situations willevolve in the marketplace.pamela samuelson, a professor of intellectual property law at the universityof pittsburgh, expressed concern about requiring users to know and abide by allthe details of many different licensing agreements. she agreed that universitiesshould foster discussions and establish guidelines regarding appropriate behavioron electronic networks, suggesting that universities help foster a consensus aboutwhat is "reasonable within that environment."plesser and simons said current copyright law works fairly well in theelectronic environment, though improvements are certainly possible. plesser saidthe breakdown comes in enforcement. there are two problems, he said: how toknow when someone takes proprietary electronic material and plagiarizes it oralters it, and how to identify the perpetrator so that he or she can be held liablefor damages or payment. "we've got to create maybe some new mechanisms ofenforcement, collection, [and] payment," he stated.emphasizing the distinction between licensing and copyright protections,plesser said licenses may be issued both for copyrighted works and for databasesthat may not be copyrighted, and so copyright law is not always relevant toproperty protection. "the fact that you can't copyright [material] or may not beable to enforce the copyright does not necessarily mean you can't license it,control the use, and control the issue," he said. "so i think the law comes fromtwo places." he noted that the feist case (described in chapter 3) raised some ofthese issues.simons predicted that a mechanism will be developed whereby users mayobtain duplicates of copyrighted electronic materials for a fee; a notice specifyingacceptable and unacceptable uses of the materials could be placed on copyrightedmaterial so that users would be sure of the restrictions. a system of this naturewould transform electronic networks used for information access into anelectronicintellectual property interests91rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bookstore, he suggested. ''once we do that, those publishers and authors who arecurrently worried about placing their valuable data into this morass – will say,'aha, it's now a marketplace where i can go and buy and sell my wares. –'"issue: fair usecomputer and network technology increases the ease with which electronictext can be copied, distributed, and altered. thus, david johnson wondered "if thecopyright statutes that arose out of the print mechanisms are themselvesbecoming hopelessly outdated." he went on to note that we may need to "give upon an effort to protect particular artifacts of electronic text as if they wereproperty and instead focus on how to control access to information throughparticular channels"; the proper route, he said, was to address "the repetitivedistribution of information through channels like libraries and universities andinstitutions" and what that type of distribution would do to the nature of life in theaffected communities.licensing agreements for the use of electronic documents alter a university'sapproach to discipline significantly, by effectively imposing a new definition offair use,9 according to martin. as a condition of providing service, the providerhas nearly unlimited power to place any restraints whatever on usage as long asthe university agrees to them in advance, he said. martin described the agreementas overriding fairuse provisions, in that "the leverage is there for the provider toassert through license his own view of what is appropriate distribution of thatinformation, without regard to what fair use under the copyright laws wouldallow." martin further argued that "what's new about [the networkingenvironment] and its licensing framework via the universities is that universitiescannot, as they9 fair use is an exception to the rights of a copyright owner. these provisions (title 17,section 107) allow use of a work for limited purposes. fair use is judged according to (1)the purpose of the use (i.e., commercial or private), (2) the nature of the original work(i.e., fiction or fact), (3) the extent of the portion used (i.e., brief or substantial), and (4) theeffect of the use on the economic value of the original work. see m.f. radcliffe,"intellectual property and multimedia: legal issues in the new media world,"multimedia 2000: market developments, media business impacts and future trends, m.de sonne, ed., national association of broadcasters, washington, d.c., 1993, pp.121148. the recently issued preliminary draft of the report of the administration'sworking group on intellectual property rights points out that the last of these provisionshas repeatedly been held to be the most important in determining the applicability of fairuse, a point that is certain to grow in significance as networks make possible much largermarkets for such work.intellectual property interests92rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.could with print materials, put up signs next to the copy machines [describingappropriate use] and then leave faculty and students to their own judgments,protected by fairuse provisions."samuelson, however, said that fair use is determined not by publishers butrather by law. "and i think it's really important to note, especially when you aredealing with university contexts, that there has to be some room for fair use thatthe community can participate in and not really rely on publishers to define whatthe scope of use is." copyrighted electronic materials are covered by the fairuseprovisions in copyright law, according to samuelson; notions of fair use havebeen extended to the electronic environment in at least two precedentsettinglegal cases.10in general, samuelson said, users are becoming increasingly sensitive to theboundaries of fair use, and a consensus is evolving that caution should beexercised in reproducing and widely distributing the material of other authorswithout explicit permission. she suggested that copyright law would remain as "akind of net" but that new mechanisms for handling these issues will evolve as theinternet is usedincreasingly for commercial services. she went on to predict "akind of transition from today's environment, in which people basically exchangeinformation without the expectation of the commercialization of thatenvironment, to an environment where commercialization is a more routine[mechanism for distribution]."providers indicated that the question of who should determine fair use isdifficult to answer. hunter said publishers are not so much "dictating" fair use astrying to fill a legal void. part of the problem is that, although the copyrightguidelines of the national commission on new technological uses ofcopyrighted works (an advisory commission established in the late 1970s toaddress copyright issues as they related to new technologies) address fair use inlibrary photocopying, there appears to be no legal precedent for electronicnetworks. "i think [fair use] will be defined by – negotiation and use and a lot ofother things, but i don't think it's fair to say that the law provides for fair use inthe electronic environment," hunter10 samuelson cited galoob toys v. nintendo of america and sega v. accolade. in thefirst case, the ninth circuit court of appeals held in 1992 that galoob's enhancement ofnintendo's game genie video game did not infringe on nintendo's copyright, on thegrounds that the galoob enhancement did not incorporate any part of the game geniesoftware but rather operated on the data bytes generated by that software (thus theenhancement was not a derivative work based on game genie) and that the galoobenhancement did not harm the market for game genie (and was thus protected as fairuse). sega v. accolade is described in chapter 3.intellectual property interests93rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.said; "i don't think we have that yet." the confusion also was noted by plesser,who represents trade associations and private companies.issue: effects of property protection concerns on authors andcontributorssome forum participants suggested that concerns about property protectionkeep potential contributors out of the electronic environment. in running a legalinformation institute at cornell that distributes materials on the internet, martinfinds that many individuals are afraid to contribute because any contribution theymake can be appropriated by others: "they consider it like dumping somevaluable watches into central parkš[they] will be gone." he also discernedconsiderable confusion over the application of copyright law on electronicnetworks, particularly with regard to how copyrighted information may be usedwithout the author's permission. plesser agreed that many academics refuse to puttheir software, texts, or other materials on the internet, for fear of losing "thevalue of their creation."hunter said the provider community is divided on this issue. "there are a lotof publishers who are very reticent about the whole network environment," shesaid. "there are others who say it's a reality, it's the future, and we have to get inand test it." (in the period since hunter made these remarks, such tests haveincreased in number.11) she likened the situation to a story about the designer of anew campus who constructed the building but postponed laying down sidewalksfor about six months, to "see what paths people generate. that's the kind of worldwe're in. i think we're trying to see how – [people] want to use the information."cline, on the other hand, said some groups of faculty are collaborating onthe internet with great intensity, having established community understandingsabout network use. acceptance of the technology has gone so far that someinstitutions accept electronic publications in tenure evaluations, she said. sheacknowledged the legitimacy of concerns about the quality of material"published" electronically, but she did not believe that such publications, suitablyjuried or reviewed, would be handicapped in comparison to print publications.1211 see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council, realizing the information future, 1994.12 of course, maintaining the standards of review may be problematic if the ease ofpublication and distribution translates into less care in preparation because of the lowerbarriers to becoming a publisher or distributor.intellectual property interests94rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scenario 2: foreign user copies encryptionsoftwarea university is connected to the internet. under a joint effort of its alumnirelations and industrial liaison programs, the university also provides library andinternet access for company x, a small startup business founded by universityalumni, in return for stock options in company x. to facilitate privatecommunications, the university provides rsabased publickey encryptionsoftware13 on its host computers, encourages the software's use, and maintainsdatabases that facilitate the lookup of the publickeys of all users using theuniversity as a node. someone from iraq accesses the university computers anddownloads the software [which is not approved for export to iraq].issue: obligations to monitormartin, as the owner of an internet mailbox that may be accessed fromforeign locations, said he feels no duty to monitor users who browse through hissystem. he is not concerned about someone adding or manipulating files becausehe controls those types of activities.other participants felt obliged to monitor their systems. hunter saidproviders have some obligation to inspect their materials for violations of law. inthe case of journal publication, inspection may be a responsibility of the editor orreviewer of articles to be published. simons views the export issue as soimportant that his licensing agreements often require publishers to refrain fromusing any material that would constitute "encryption data" under the internationaltraffic in arms regulations or u.s. department of commerce rules.14otherwise, it would be possible to inadvertently "export"13 "rsa" refers to a highly secure publickey encryption scheme. softwareimplementations are available in the united states and elsewhere, although the software issubject to u.s. export control laws.14 as listed items on the u.s. munitions list, certain highly capable cryptographictechnologies are regulated by the international traffic in arms regulations (itar)administered by the office of munitions control in the department of state. specifically,export of such technologies (and directly related technical data) is forbidden. in addition,under the export administration act, the department of commerce controlsintellectual property interests95rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such data and thus break the law, he said. he suggested that according to certainviews of export control, the mere presence of foreign nationals in attendance at anunclassified domestic conference could be considered an export of technical data.lance hoffman wondered whether faculty and universities understood theirobligations at all. he cited his experience in teaching a class on encryption thatincludes students who are foreign nationals; all assignments are done online.this combination of factors raises the possibility of inadvertent "export" ofmaterials that could be considered encryption data, which are treated asmunitions and barred from export by u.s. law (the international traffic in armsregulations). hoffman said he doubted that university counsels are familiar withthis law.issue: obligations to turn over recordsparticipants said the university would be obliged to turn over certain recordsto authorities as specified by law. alan mcdonald, a special assistant to theassistant director of the technical services division of the federal bureau ofinvestigation (fbi), said an fbi request for transaction records would requirecooperation from the university, like any other service provider. the situationprobably is covered either by the electronic communications privacy act(ecpa) or the general process of federal criminal procedure; the fbi mightobtain a subpoena under united states code annotated, title 18, section 2703,he said.plesser agreed that the university would have to comply with the ecpa,assuming that the university, for billing purposes, kept records of which materialswere accessed and that law enforcement authorities requested that information.the action required would depend in part on whether the request was fortransactional or content data, a distinction that is difficult to make in the scenario,he said. (this issue is discussed further in chapter 7.)"the university can't just hand [the data] over on request," plesser said."they have to make sure that there is a legal process and thatthe export of dualuse items, i.e., items that have substantial use that is both military andcivilian. certain computer products with encryption capabilities are regarded as dualuse,notwithstanding a general relaxation of controls on many computer and communicationstechnologies in march 1994. the definition of "export" is subject to some debate.intellectual property interests96rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it's quite defined, and that they are not notifying the person to whom [theinformation] relates."common themesthe protection of intellectual property proprietary interests is problematiceven outside the networking context. concerns for such protection have becomemore widespread with the advent of easily available copying technologies such asphotocopiers, tape recorders, and video cassette recorders (vcrs). seen in thislight, computer networks are yet another technology to facilitate copying.at the same time, computer networks have properties that set them apartfrom other copying technologies. for example, computer networks make easy thelargescale redistribution of copied information. with photocopiers and vcrs, aseparate copy must be made for each new recipient. however, on computernetworks it can be as easy to send a copy of an electronic document (a book, amusical recording, a photographic reproduction of a painting) to a thousandpeople as to one person, and sending it to one can be trivial indeed.15 moreover,while the laws of physics impose definite limitations on the extent of analogcopying, digital copies can be made with perfect fidelity; thus digital copies canbe made ad infinitum, vastly increasing the potential scope of redistributionthrough the remote access capabilities enabled by networks. while a photocopyof a book or a pirated video cassette recording or even a floppy disk must bephysically carried from place to place to transfer information, a computer networkcan transfer information without such restrictions. thus, laws and regulationsbased on impeding the movement of physical objects across geographicalboundaries are increasingly difficult to enforce in a networked environment.previous copying technologies such as tape recorders and photocopiers haveresulted in a legal regime based on the concept of fair use; much of the debatetoday revolves around the extent to which nowtraditional concepts of fair use canbe sustained in a networked environment. in addition, electronic digitaltechnology changes the economic calculus. before digital media and thenetwork, the limited number and quality of copies and the limited distribution ofthose copies made individual copying insufficiently significant economically15 of course, such a statement does not take into account the struggles that many usersencounter in their daily travails with userunfriendly technologies and interfaces.intellectual property interests97rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to merit enforcement. digital reproduction and network distribution enable muchbroader circulation of higherquality reproductions at the same expense of moneyand effort and thus have very different economic consequences and implications.finally, digitally stored information can be altered with relative ease. thesame technology that enables perfect reproduction also allows changes to beintroduced in reproductions with relative ease. a few keystrokes can modify anelectronic document; absent the use of technology to guarantee that no changeshave been made, such changes are undetectable.16 for example, digitalphotographs can be modified to show scenes that never existed, and the viewerwill never know that they have been modified. coupled with the ability to sendanonymous or pseudonymous transmissions, the potential to alter information inlargely undetectable ways raises new concerns and reinforces old ones aboutmaintaining the integrity of information and protecting the rights of the creatorsof such information.16 technology is now available that can authenticate the integrity of digital data. it ispossible to digitally "sign" a given bit stream (file) in such a way that any modification tothe file while in transit, on a bulletin board, and so forth can be detected with very highconfidence. however, it is also true that digital signature technology is not widely usedtoday.intellectual property interests98rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7privacylike the topics examined in previous chapters, privacy issues take on uniqueaspects in the electronic environment. the discussion of scenario 1 below centerson four issues: the obligation to notify authorities of death threats, generalprovider practices and responsibilities, liability for violating privacy, and ethicaland social issues. the later discussion of scenario 2 focuses on legal privacyprotection for subscriber information, informed consent, and blocking unwantedsales pitches. both scenarios involved a relatively large commercial or universityprovider. however, a wide range of sizes and types of providers is possible, andso it is unlikely that one type of analysis or policy will fit all.scenario 1: operator learns of possible deaththreatjohn and sally "meet" on a bulletin board provided by a commercial networkoperator and then begin corresponding through email. the operator has a"standard" set of acceptable use policies that prohibit sending (through email) orposting (on either type of bulletin board) any "defamatory, obscene, threatening,sexually explicit, ethnically offensive, or illegal material."1 john receives aprivate email note from sally's husband saying, "i know what's going on betweenyou1 this policy is similar to the one used by america online.privacy99rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.two, and i'm not putting up with it. it's too late to save her. she's a gonner." johnnotifies the operator and forwards a copy of this note, requesting that the operatornotify the local police in sally's home town (since john has no way of knowingwhere sally lives).issue: obligation to notify authorities of death threatspanel members generally agreed that authorities should be notified of thethreat in scenario 1, although they expressed different views on the legalramifications and requirements.speaking from the perspective of the common carriers, kenneth r.raymond, director of technology strategies analysis for nynex telesectorresources group, noted that telephone users complaining of annoyance orthreatening telephone calls are given a special telephone company telephonenumber and then referred to local law enforcement authorities. law enforcementofficers provide the paperwork needed to obtain information from the telephonecompany. "in this way, the common carrier provides the referral and theinformation required by law enforcement authorities, placing the issue squarely inthe hands of those that are best able to deal with it."although raymond acknowledged that "scenario 1 is somewhat different, inthat two end users are communicating through a third party," he asserted thatauthorities still need to be notified; the question is, what information can beobtained in a timely manner? basic notification of police is required in newyork, where state law requires that telephone operators who overhear certaintypes of communications, such as those involving fraud or threats, report them tolaw enforcement authorities, he said. thus, said raymond, the telephoneoperator's duty to notify police is not a question here. rather, the question iswhether others have a duty, need, or requirement to facilitate the provision ofinformation to help save sally.james e. tobin, vice president for international consumer affairs atamerican express company, agreed with raymond that authorities need to benotified in scenario 1. he said the network operator can set up the expectationthat information will be kept private unless certain events occur, but "pragmatismtends to override. in fact, i would say that, as important as privacy is, it would bedifficult to argue that a life is subservient to that important right of privacy. and ithink, leaving legalities aside, there are moral questions that come into play."tobin argued that john is the recipient and "owner" of the mesprivacy100rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sage2 and therefore could report it to the police directly; then the police could findout from the network operator where sally lives. even if the operator came acrossthe threat without john's help (e.g., in performing system maintenance), the policeshould be notified, tobin argued. "if there is any question, turn it over to thepolice and let the chips fall where they may," he said. "if there is a reason tobelieve that someone's life may be in danger, i think you just have to grit yourteeth, call your attorney, and turn it over to the police, or you are going to face theconsequences."ann harkins, then chief counsel to the senate judiciary subcommittee ontechnology and the law, said the system operator has no clear duty under the lawbut would be well advised to react practically, because there would be asignificant risk of a lawsuit for negligence if sally were killed. therefore, eventhough the language of the threat is ambiguous, the operator should contact policewithout disclosing any additional information about john or sally, harkins said.she added that it was for all practical purposes irrelevant that the rules of thesystem prohibited threats, because the lifethreatening nature of the informationwas the dominating issue.one forum participant argued that the operator should do nothing. theoperator's position differs from that of john, who is arguably the owner of themessage, and the law is not clear as to the operator's obligation, according tomarc rotenberg of computer professionals for social responsibility. using thetelephone analogy, the operator is acting as a common carrier and thus, accordingto the electronic communications privacy act (ecpa), should not interfere,rotenberg said, emphasizing that the service is supposed to be confidential. headded that the situation would be very different if the message involved had beenposted in a publicly accessible area. finally, if the operator had monitored thecommunications directly (rather than being told of the contents by one of theparticipants), the operator might still be exposed to liability for that action even ifjohn were ultimately convicted of wrongdoing.as to whether the operator would be liable for failing to act if sally werekilled, rotenberg suggested that the duty is not clear enough to invoke liability.he argued that it may not be easy to identify the source of trouble; perhaps, forexample, john is the guilty party, having2 whether this claim would stand up in court is another matter. under some courtprecedents, it is the sender (i.e., the originator) of the message that "owns" it and who maydecide what can be done with it. specifically, in a recent case involving the letters of j.d.salinger, the court decided that the letters belonged to salinger and not the recipient; thus,authority to release the letters rested with salinger or his estate.privacy101rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.set up the situation to find out where sally lives so that he can harm her.issue: general provider practices and responsibilitiesthe mere existence of system rules does not guarantee that the systemoperator will know the content of messages, as raymond pointed out. oneapproach, he noted, would be to remove from the network those users about whomthe system operator received complaints from other users. ''[i]f there is acomplaint that somebody does something that is inappropriate, and you theninvestigate and find [that] – it's not something that requires law enforcement oranything like that, you would then tell that customer that he or she is no longerwelcomed on this service."raymond further wondered how knowledge of questionable or potentiallyreportable activities might reach system operators. in the absence of a specificreport by a user (as was made in the scenario), he thought that becausesupervising user activities and message traffic would be difficult and costly, "iwould never be monitoring this traffic in any way, shape, or form, and i can'timagine how you would do it," he said. such a problem also affects networkservice providers, who carry such large amounts of message traffic that it is forthe most part impractical to monitor the contents of all messages transmitted. insuch cases, the only practical approach is for the network service provider toestablish rules and guidelines on how its services are to be used and to rely onenduser action to bring questionable activities to its attention and/or to monitorpublic areas of message postings. once the provider's attention is drawn to aquestionable activity, the provider is then in a position to take action (such as tocontact the appropriate law enforcement authorities).other forum participants expressed various views on how operators shouldhandle these situations. david hughes of old colorado city communicationssaid he would "communicate with the guy that's making the threat and say, 'youmade a threat that i interpret as a death threat. do you understand theconsequences of that?" vinton g. cerf, president of the internet society, agreedthat operators should not specify responses in advance, explaining that he would"rather say nothing and hold the ethical sense internally, and when a situationarises, judge that myself."on the other hand, murray turoff of the new jersey institute of technologysaid, "i would like to argue once again for more responsibility on the other side.if you are going to have any policies on what sort of traffic you are going to allowor not allow, you shouldprivacy102rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have clearcut policies on what you're going to do when those policies areviolated."issue: liability for violating privacya number of participants suggested that the current legal regime, includingthe ecpa, probably would protect the operator from liability for violation ofprivacy if he or she notified the police. harkins argued that section 2702 (whichstates that an operator may report such a communication to the police but is notobligated to do so) would allow john to dispose of the message as he saw fitwithout liability; in particular, he could be regarded as consenting explicitly to theoperator's disclosing of the message to the police, and both john and the operatorwould be held blameless for that act. justice department prosecutor scottcharney said section 2702 states that a service provider who inadvertently learnsthe contents of a communication that pertains to the commission of a crime maygive it to the police; the statute thus may preempt any civil liability for violationof privacy.the protection might hold even if the threat turned out to be a hoax,according to rotenberg. if the operator notified police and the husband werearrested, but the note turned out to be a prank played by sally, then the operatorprobably still would not be liable, rotenberg said. he said a good samaritan law3would protect individuals who offer help with good intentions but inadvertentlycause some harm.michael godwin of the electronic frontier foundation and david hughespraised section 2702 of the ecpa. godwin said that "it strikes a balance betweenthe legal traditions of not imposing an obligation on individuals to prevent crimewith benevolence and an allowance for someone who is a good samaritan, whodoes inadvertently discover that there is crime and wants to disclose it pursuant tothe ethical principle just articulated." hughes called this distinction "extremelyimportant" and desirable.issue: ethical and social issuesoliver reed smoot, jr., an attorney who serves as executive vice3 westin described a good samaritan law as a statute essentially stating that "if apasserby or a bystander intervenes in a situation to attempt to do a good thing, butworsens the situation or complicates the situation, that person will not be responsibleunless the bystander happens to be a professional, say a doctor, and doesn't use theprofessional care that a doctor would bring to intervention in that situation."privacy103rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.president and treasurer of the computer and business equipment manufacturersassociation, said that the threat of murder clearly outweighs privacy interests inscenario 1, but that a more ambiguous situation (i.e., one that involved a lesserthreat) might be more difficult to handle. he said the legal system provides aformal, disinterested process for resolving conflicting values. in particular,smoot noted that under the criminal statute, "in order for the [operator's]obligation to be created, what has to happen is that a prosecutor has to decide thatthis is a serious enough problem to get a subpoena, or perhaps convince amagistrate that a warrant is appropriate. and i think maybe that's a better way tohandle this, to resolve the conflicting values and to handle the ambiguity, than itis just to say, 'oh well, the system operator obviously has an ethical obligation todisregard the privacy interest and pass this along,' because that's not at all obviousto me."4forum participants offered several views of the relationship between ethicsand the law. patrick sullivan, executive director of the computer ethics institute,suggested that ethics should take precedence in scenario 1 and that any actiontaken should be the same as in a nonelectronic environment. "in terms of theethics of the scenario, there is really no question," he said. "there is an obligationto warn, and one isn't going to split hairs over linguistic interpretations of themessage. there will be a duty to prevent harm. –"but alan westin of columbia university contended that legal questions stillmust be answered. "so you frame [the question] first as an ethical dilemma, but in alitigious society in which numbers of people have said that whoever has thedeepest pockets is going to face the lawsuit, and the system operator is the onetypically with the deepest pockets in this situation, you can't disconnect thequestion of what is the legal liability from what is the ethical choice."attorney david johnson suggested that the real issue, whether in an ethicalor a legal context, is not what actions are required but rather whether the operatorconsiders the situation carefully. "the ultimate duty may be to simply payattention to the question and be4 similar views have been expressed by jeffrey schiller, manager of mit's campuscomputer network, as a result of a real situation that occurred at mit. campus policefeared that a student was committing suicide somewhere and asked the university to searchthe student's private electronic files for clues as to the location, schiller said. he recalledthat "we decided that potentially saving a life was probably more important than protectingprivacy and so it was a pretty clearcut decision. but i'm sure there are plenty of shades ofgray that can get interspersed here, so we need to develop, possibly over time, theprecedents of what's appropriate and what's not."privacy104rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thoughtful about it," johnson said. "– stone's book5 on corporate responsibilityin a sense makes the point that we can probably, in an organized context like this– go a long way by simply having a sense of procedures for deliberatingthoughtfully on these questions." johnson further argued that it would beappropriate for a defendant to assert in court that "even though he made a badcall, he was thoughtful about it."scenario 2: provider sells user profiles tomerchandisersa commercial network operator collects information about the interests andpurchases of its users by keeping track of the forums and bulletin boards they useand the purchases they make; it then sells this information to othermerchandisers. users are not asked if they wish to participate in the redistributionof such information.issue: legal privacy protection for subscriber informationthe redistribution of information in scenario 2 is neither permitted norforbidden under current law, harkins said. she asserted that the ecpa allowscompanies to sell general information about subscribers to electronic services butnot the contents of their communications.by contrast, the law is more protective of the privacy of cable subscribers.the cable communications policy act of 1984 states that cable operators mustnotify subscribers annually, in writing, concerning what personal information iscollected and how it is used. subscribers may request that their information notbe used for these purposes. george perry of the prodigy services company notedthat, ironically, this provision would cover users of emerging interactive cableservices but not users of similar services provided through personal computersand telephones.rotenberg advocated applying the cable privacy model to electroniccommercial transactions. he argued that intrusion can be greater in the electronicworld than outside it, noting that mere participation in a forum or discussion maybe disclosed. "the problem is not only5 christopher d. stone, where the law ends: the social control of corporatebehavior, harper and row, new york, 1973.privacy105rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that there are commercial transactions which are generated through the use of thenetwork disclosed to others, but that one's participation in a forum or discussiongroup [can be made available]. the facts of those exchanges or those inquiriesmay be disclosed to others, and that takes concerns about privacy to a higherlevel."tobin said he would support use of the cable privacy model for electronicnetworks but not necessarily a legal requirement for such notification. he didstress that apart from legal constraints, companies have a commercial incentive toavoid annoying their customers, who may take their business elsewhere.providers may use information about their customers so long as the latter knowabout and approve it, tobin said. "they may not find out," he added. "and if youwant to take that chance as a network operator, then you take that chance; but youcould end up with some serious trouble on your hands. –" despite suchincentives, however, what types of behavior constitute "annoyance'' of customersis the subject of much debate.harkins said privacy notice and consent mechanisms are not likely to belegislated for electronic networks because the issues are so complicated and cutacross so many jurisdictional lines; five or six senate committees, for instance,deal with privacy statutes. "the instinct, at least [from] what i've seen in the last 5years, is to push and put a lot of pressure on industry to have its own watchdogsystem –," she said.issue: informed consentparticipants generally agreed that users should have control overdissemination of their personal information, but they also suggested that thisprotection may be difficult to assure. westin asserted that individuals should beallowed to make their own decisions and choices about their personal privacy. hesuggested that electronic networks can place unique pressures on privacy, in thatelectronic networks may be able to compile a "richer, more detailed profile" of auser than can individual companies preparing onedimensional lists of theircustomers.rotenberg argued that the public should be able to choose in advancewhether their personal information may be disclosed, just as they do in everydaylife, and that users should set their own risk levels, just as people do in thephysical world. "but unfortunately, in the electronic world, the default is in thewrong setting, particularly in this area of electronic communications privacy,"rotenberg said. "the default [setting for] the transactional data is that it may beprivacy106rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.publicly disclosed, sold, [and] collected unless someone says something to thecontrary. so i would pull us back in the other direction and give people a choiceabout disclosing data [i.e., an optin choice6]." providers should assume allinformation is sensitive and therefore provide increased protection, rotenbergsaid.the need to obtain informed consent varies in salience and urgency,depending on the nature of the information and society's attitudes about it, tobinsaid. "optin" consent probably is not needed in direct marketing, he said,because the risk of harm is minimal if a provider releases, for example,information about who subscribes to time magazine.7 but, he argued, "as youmove down the spectrum toward medical information, certainly something assensitive as being hivpositive or [one's] sexual lifestylešthe potential damageto somebody of that information getting into the wrong hands or even hands thatthey don't want it in is so great that i think that consent in advance, probably inwriting, is required if you are going to do it at all."obtaining informed consent is not as easy as might be expected, tobin said.according to tobin, at american express,every 6 months there is an attitudinal survey done of customers. we actually tellthem what we do with the information, but in a very superficial way. we tellthem what it results in. we tell them we take information on what they purchaseand merge it with other commercially available information, including somecredit bureau information, [and] put their names on mailing lists to offer themproducts and services in which we believe they may be interested. and so whatwe try to tell them is what happens. we don't tell them how it happens. we alsotry to elicit from them, in their own words, what they expect, and we find thatthey basically understand that we take subscription lists. americans actuallyhave a pretty6 with "optout," certain personal information may be disclosed unless the userexplicitly checks a box requesting that the information be kept private. with "optin," theinformation is kept private unless the user explicitly checks a box indicating that theinformation may be released. advocates of optin suggest that an affirmative actionrequired to disclose otherwise private information is the best guarantor of privacy, butinformation procurers argue that such a requirement would shrink to relatively smallproportions the information they could provide and would damage an industry that hasconsiderable economic and social importance. optin places the burden of obtainingconsent on the information procurer, while optout places the burden of denying consenton the individual.7 of course, the same lack of sensitivity might not apply to the subscriber list of anewsletter on "paying less tax legally," especially if the internal revenue service wereinterested in that list to determine targets for audit.privacy107rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.good understanding of what happens in very broad terms. but the level ofsensitivity to it is surprisingly lower than you would expect.at the same time, tobin felt that the definitions of "informed" and "consent"were debatable, and that the potential damage resulting from collection and useof information is difficult to determine. ''we don't want to make that decision[about the use of information]. – we don't want congress to make that decision.we want the customer to make that decision," tobin said. "but the trick here ishow do you explain to these people the complexity of information that isavailable to us, what we do with it, and what they get out of it? – i'm convincedthat the vast majority of our customers don't really understand technically what'sgoing on."cerf said individuals tend to value convenience over privacy.i think, judging from my own behavior and that of others, that we have aremarkable ability to ignore risk in favor of convenience. and so when you'reconfronted even with the understanding of how much information is floatingaround about your personal habits, the convenience of ordering things over thetelephone with your credit card or sending something on email – almostinvariably overcomes most people's reason for concern about privacy and otherkinds of risks. and so this raises an interesting question about whether we haveto contemplate saving people from themselves. i have no position at this point,but i raise it as a very interesting subject.sara kiesler of carnegie mellon university pointed out that "the way peopleperceive risks is not always in direct parallel with the actual risk. that is, peoplewill get very concerned about things like getting brain tumors from using cellularphones, and they will probably overevaluate the probability of damage. – it'sdifficult for people to consider negative consequences that they can't actually seein their minds, and the sharing of information about them is hard to visualize. [as aresult, people do not ask themselves] what bad things could happen to them as aresult of people knowing all these things about them." this, she said, explainswhy convenience overrides risk: people are unable to visualize the negativeconsequences. kiesler also felt this phenomenon explained why people tend tohabituate to warnings (e.g., a message displayed daily on a user's computer statingthat electronic mail is not private) and to behave as though those warnings werenever displayed.88 kiesler cited the example of transcripts used during the rodney king case. in this1992 case, rodney king was beaten by members of the los angeles police department.privacy108rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the result is what kiesler called the illusion of privacy. "when you don'thave cues around you about who else is there," kiesler explained, "and especiallyin electronic forums where you have lurkers [people who only receive messagesand never send them] and so on, what happens is that you have an illusion thatyou are much more private than you really are. – [people] continue to say thingson networks that they wouldn't say otherwise, even though you warn them." perryconcurred, saying many prodigy users are new to computers and do notunderstand the difference between public bulletin board notes and private email."and even after you explain it to them, they don't understand. so it really is avery critical problem because the messages look so much alike and users treatthem kind of alike." william dutton of the university of southern californiaquestioned whether there is any legitimate expectation of privacy on electronicnetworks yet, in that the courts have ruled out any such expectation on cordlesstelephones.9others felt that user education was a reasonable option, even whileadvocating individual choice about disclosure. raymond noted that personalcommunications services will keep track of not only telephone and accountnumbers but also location data. "of necessity, additional information will be inthat database," he said, "and i think the informedchoice kind of approachšeducate consumers as to what goes in there and how it is going to be usedšis onereasonable way to handle it, because then they can decide whether it is worth it tohave that service or whether they would prefer not having that kind ofinformation collected."steven metalitz, vice president and counsel to the information industryassociation, argued that the issue went beyond "convenience versus risk" to thebroader question of "overall benefit versus risk," posing the possibility that a usermight get "cheaper use of a system if he consented or if he did not opt out of yourinformation collection." metalitz was troubled by "people sitting in this roomdeciding that the public at large is not sufficiently educated about this. –a number of transcripts of police radio conversations describing the incident wereintroduced as evidence at the trial. kiesler argued that the police officers in question wouldnever have said the things they did if they had been conscious of the fact that all suchconversations were being recorded as a matter of department policy.9 congress decided in 1986 that, based on technological differences, the electroniccommunications privacy act would protect conversations on cellular telephones but notthose on cordless telephones, according to steven metalitz. court decisions have rejectedthe claim that government eavesdropping on users of cordless telephone violates thefourth amendment. legislation may change this state of affairs in the future.privacy109rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.[w]e have to avoid the temptation to conclude that other people just can'tfigure out what their privacy is worth, or – that we have to decide for them orput our thumb on the scales for them as to how they should decide these things."issue: blocking unwanted sales pitchessome forum participants believed that current techniques for blockingunwanted sales pitches, whether in physical or electronic form, are inadequate.for the sake of discussion, westin suggested the use of an approach used by thedirect marketing association (dma): the dma maintains a list of consumerswho ask to be removed from mailing lists, and each electronic network maintains amaster list of users who do not wish their personal information circulated; theselists could be shared among the networks.a number of speakers, however, felt the dma system did not apply toblocking sales calls or the sending of junk email. they also noted otherproblems. allan adler noted that use of the dma list is voluntary and appliesonly to nationalšnot regional or localšmailers. tobin said the list is effectiveonly if a mailer uses the exact name and address provided by the consumer.sullivan noted that consumers who are unaware of the list appear by default towant the mailings, when in fact they may not. mitchell kapor said the dma listis an example of an ineffective privatesector privacy code, saying the associationdoes not enforce the code.adler noted that the congress, recognizing the problems with the dma list,enacted the telephone consumer protection act of 1991 (public law 102243),which calls for the federal communications commission (fcc) to establish amethod whereby consumers may elude unsolicited telephone sales calls. thesponsors of the law originally wanted to establish a national database ofconsumers who do not want to receive unsolicited sales calls, but merchandisersopposed this idea. so the fcc decided that every solicitor must keep an inhouse"do not call" list, adler said. if consumers who ask to be placed on the list arecalled again within a certain time period, they may bring a civil suit, adler said.the electronic environment presents both unique problems and singularsolutions regarding sales pitches, which forum participants indicated is anincreasing problem. on the negative side, cerf noted that whereas unwanted junkmail may simply be thrown out, unwanted "junk email" could clog an electronicmailbox, blocking messages of higher priority from entering. "on somecommercial email services, the size of the mailbox is of some finite length. itruns outprivacy110rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.after 100 messages and you get this little message that comes back saying there isno room left. if my email runs out of space and the important messages don'tmake it, i'm going to get annoyed."on the positive side, several speakers suggested that marketplacemechanisms could resolve these problems. turoff proposed that merchandisers berequired to pay consumers to whom they advertise, with the price set by therecipients. he also suggested that users employ a screening feature to deletematerial from a particular mailer. david farber of the university ofpennsylvania, for instance, runs an "invisible script" that quietly discards emailfrom specific individuals and specific bins.common themesfirst, the dialogue revealed that many providers and attorneys agreed onseveral important points, including the efficacy of the ecpašcodified primarilyat united states code annotated, title 18, section 2702šand the prudence ofallowing users to make their own decisions and choices regarding their personalprivacy. second, it was emphasized that models of ethical practice with regard toprivacy can be drawn from networked communities.on the more general issues about privacy, it is clear that such concerns arenot new, and americans have a strong tradition of wishing to be left alone. at thesame time, the right to privacy has never been an absolute one, and its costs andbenefits must be balanced against those of public disclosure and/or surveillance.10moreover, electronic networks have a number of characteristics that magnifysome of the traditional concerns.a legal regime has developed around information stored on paper. how thisregime should be interpreted when information is stored electronically isproblematic. for example, in a technological environment in which the content ofa document can be assembled instantaneously from a multitude of sources, whatcounts as a "record"? what about institutions that deliberately refrain from thecollection10 westin's recent work with pollster louis harris found that the american publicdivides into three categories on this subject: privacy fundamentalists (about 25 percent ofrespondents), who are deeply concerned about privacy, want laws protecting their privacy,and want to approve or reject use of their personal information for commercial purposes;the unconcerned (18 to 20 percent), who "couldn't care less about privacy"; and thepragmatic majority (56 to 58 percent), who value privacy but whose definition ofunreasonable invasion depends on "whether principles of fair information practices" or"constitutional norms" have been followed.privacy111rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of certain types of electronic information to forestall requests for such records?many electronic networks produce vast and unique traces of both verbatimcommunications and transactional data (e.g., who called whom when, networkusage statistics, user credit histories). what traces count as a record?a second issue is that the many network interconnections give rise topotential conflicts across international boundaries. different nationstates havedifferent approaches to the protection of privacy (e.g., the united states takes asectoral casebycase approach, protecting different types of information indistinct ways, whereas europeans focus on umbrella rules covering all personalinformation, according to metalitz), and there is no international privacy law.11a third issue is that the meaning of the legal term "the reasonableexpectation of privacy" (the foundation for u.s. privacy law as enunciated by thesupreme court in 1967) is not clear in the electronic environment. for example,it is clear that electronic networks tend to encourage frank if not imprudentspeech, thus magnifying the confusion over what circumstances provide a"reasonable expectation of privacy." even today, conversations on cordlesstelephones tied to a base station are not afforded the same legal protection fromeavesdropping as cellular telephones that are truly mobile. the perceptions of the"man on the street" about what is "fair'' may conflict with basic assumptionsregarding the conduct of business. matters such as the extent of computer literacyin the public may affect profoundly what constitutes reasonable expectations ofprivacy.given all the dilemmas, a variety of new measuresšboth technical andlegalšlikely will be needed to ensure electronic privacy and security.technology will not be able to provide perfect privacy or security, buttechnological fixes can provide preventive measures to help reduce the range ofrisks that are faced by users of electronic networks. legal measures will benecessary to help deal (remedially, if nothing else) with those circumstances inwhich it is impractical or undesirable to use the technical measures.11 of course, there is little international criminal law, tort law, or intellectual propertylaw either. however, international cooperation on developing common approaches toprivacy is not entirely absent. guidelines for developed nations were issued in 1981 by theorganization for economic cooperation and development (oecd). the oecdguidelines have become the basis for national law in 17 of the 24 member states (whichare located in north america, europe, japan and australia), and the guidelines also havebeen used by new democracies in eastern europe, according to marc rotenberg. morerecently, the european community (ec) issued a draft data protection directive, which ifadopted would ban export of data from the 12 ec member states to countries lackingadequate privacy protection.privacy112rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8common themescomputermediated communications are now several decades old. in thattime, the power of computer technology to change the nature of communicationhas been amply demonstrated. early pioneers in the use of computermediatedcommunications had some glimmerings that a new medium for discourse wasabout to emerge, and in recent years an incipient largescale interest in the use ofsuch communications has proved their forecast to be correct.at the same time, this largescale interest has prompted and indeednecessitated serious attention to the social issues that surround the formation andevolution of communities on electronic networks. these issues are complex anddifficult to resolve.values and norms in networked environmentsnetworked communities are beginning to grapple with the rules that govern(or that should govern) behavior on electronic networks. less formal rules ofconduct and the means to enforce these rules are emerging as people acquiremore and more experience with electronic networks. in many cases, behaviorssanctioned by those whonote: the material in this chapter is based primarily on the thoughts of the steeringcommittee, although comments from other workshop and forum participants have beenused liberally when appropriate.common themes113rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have had extensive experience with electronic networks are evolving even asnewcomers to the technology are having their first networking experiences. therelevant legal regime is unquestionably changing, as new interpretations ofexisting laws and even new laws are being enacted, but its presence and potentialinfluence on human behavior on electronic networks cannot be denied.technology surely has a role in providing tools that help to guide electronicbehavior along socially acceptable lines or help to mitigate the consequences ofmiscreant electronic behavior, but the ultimate issues in this domain are socialand political.some commentators and analysts believe that the emergence of social normsshould be left primarily in the hands of the people who will be affected (i.e., theusers of electronic networks). a legal regime (statutes plus the case law thatinterprets those statutes) that does not make sense when applied to electronicnetworks will tend to erode the ethical values on which that regime is founded.as a result of such pressures, a set of new values will evolve that will ultimatelyconstitute the basis for a new legal regime. no one is smart enough to take intoaccount all of the ethical issues that will emerge, and so uncertainty is inherent in asituation in which social norms grow and evolve rather than being created denovo.at the same time, the "natural" evolution of old behaviors into new ones maybe problematic and perhaps socially undesirable. a maladapted set of socialnorms could result for several reasons. one reason is that these rules mightevolve in the absence of a real understanding on the part of new users regardingthe power and reach of computermediated communications (examples areprovided in box 8.1). as george perry pointed out, "individuals have never had amegaphone the size of the cyberspace megaphone. our society has to figure outwhat to do with this power." moreover, with new problems come new forms ofsolutions. perry recalled the example of the president of a business whocomplained about something that was on a prodigy bulletin board. when toldthat he could post his own message on the bulletin board to tell people what wasreally going on, he said, "oh! you suppose i could do that?" and the problem wassolved by that simple action.a second reason is that electronic networks erase many of the physicalbarriersšsuch as geographyšto interaction. one important consequence is thatelectronic networks can bring together people with radically different points ofview, moral persuasions, and interests. for example, it is clear that differentcultures value different ethical norms, and as a result, different behaviors areconsidered ethical or unethical depending on the culture. to the extent that peoplecommon themes114rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from different cultures must interact, conflict might be expected. a secondconsequence is that government and other institutions whose influence isdetermined largely by the physical control of borders and political boundarieswill find that influence challenged by continuing increases in electroniccommerce and social discourse.box 8.1 examples of the scalingup problemon defamationa person may write something on an electronic network that isdefamatory. most likely he regards it in the same light as if he had made theremark at a small cocktail party, and he thinks he has every right to defamesomebody at a cocktail party. in fact, he does not, but for all practicalpurposes, he will not be sued for what is said at the cocktail party. doing thesame thing on an electronic network has entirely different socialconsequences (e.g., he is much more likely to be the target of a lawsuit fordefamation), but the lack of immediate cues to those differences may welllead him to behave as though the social environment is the same.on copyrightan otherwise lawabiding person may well violate copyright laws in arelatively small way (e.g., by performing excessive photocopying). theelectronic networking environment makes it easy to violate copyright laws ina much larger way with approximately the same degree of effort, but againthe lack of immediate cues may well lead the person to believe that she isdoing the same thing she did with the photocopier.a third reason is that electronic networks can act to raise barriers withimpunity. people who live within the same physical community are subject toimportant homogenizing influences (e.g., they are exposed to the samenewspapers and radio and television broadcasts), and arguably these influencessupport a common set of values. to the extent that a given electronic communityof people is closed to outsiders, traffic within that community can be madeimmune to external scrutiny and indeed can be entirely insulated from the outsideworld. thus, it is not impossible to imagine the existence of different electroniccommunities that share nothing but the same network protocol.common themes115rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for these reasons, policymakers are understandably nervous about a legaland social environment that is both fraught with ambiguity and whose futureevolution is also uncertain. thus, the challenge for society at large is to balancethe desirability of "natural evolution" against its relatively immediate need forguidelines to mitigate the risks of entirely unrestricted behavior that could affectlarge numbers of new users. although even more strenuous outreach efforts to theelectronic public and to policymakers will be necessary, an increasing degree ofdiscussion and dialogue between technologists and policymakers in recent yearsgives rise to the hope that society is beginning to meet this challenge.recurring concernstaking a retrospective view of the november 1992 workshop and thefebruary 1993 forum and other events addressing similar issues, it has becomeclear that several concerns recur consistently. as with many social tensions, anindividual is much more likely to attempt to balance competing interests ratherthan side completely and totally with one of these interests. these points oftension include the following: the extent to which the government should regulate behavior onelectronic networks. for example, a benign view of government wouldlead people to be less concerned about governmental malfeasance and tobe more willing to leave to government the discretion to makeappropriate judgments that balance competing concerns. for thesepeople, the law is a way to codify ethical principles and to provide auniform standard of behavior to ensure order, set social expectations, andprovide continuity. a correlate of this position is the belief that societyshould understandšin advancešhow it intends to deal with rareproblems that may pose severe difficulties for the individuals affected.finally, people who believe in an active role for government in thesematters are often motivated to find a high degree of certainty in theirdealings with the communities involved.on the other hand, a fundamental distrust of government would makemany people unwilling to give government the benefit of any doubt atall; such people would insist that the role of government in regulatingbehavior be kept to a minimum, and, fearing inappropriate governmentaction, they would oppose government controls or regulations oncomputer technology and advocate privately negotiated (or communityestablished) "rules of the road." such people would believe that in manycases, the law is too heavyhanded andcommon themes116rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.largely incapable of taking into account mitigating or aggravatingfactors in deciding what should be done in cases of inappropriatebehavior, that an absolutely uniform standard is fundamentallyundesirable, and that some tolerance of ambiguity is both necessary anddesirable. the role of the marketplace in influencing behavior. the view thatmarketplace forces can and should regulate and define acceptablebehavior on electronic networks would lead people to be less concernedabout abuses that may be rare, even if they are severe. these peoplewould assert that largescale systematic abuse can be controlled bypublic opinion and pressure and deny the need for laws to regulate theirbehavior. on the other hand, public opinion and pressure have notentirely eliminated crime and other antisocial behavior in otherdomains, and so it seems unlikely that the marketplace will entirelyprevent computer abuse. an additional dimension of this question is theextent to which social defenses against undesirable behavior should bebased on matters of utility or economic feasibility or on matters offundamental rights. the value of sharing information freely versus keeping information private or proprietary. the internet is the preferred medium ofcommunications for much of the scientific community, a communitythat highly values the free exchange of information. at the same time,the livelihoods of many people depend on their creativity and intellect,and they have an understandable desire to protect the compensation theymay receive for their intellectual work. in other cases, individual desiresfor privacy may conflict with community interests in disclosure. at root,the fundamental difficulty is that as a society, we regard someinformation as appropriately sharable and other information asappropriately private or proprietary, and there are no clear guidelines fordistinguishing between the two. the need for law that specifically relates to behavior on electronic networks. the assertion that networkspecific law is needed represents aclaim that the current legal regime is not adequate for application toelectronic networks, perhaps as the result of an enabling technology thatchanges much more rapidly than the relevant legal regime.nevertheless, it is clear that in the absence of networkspecific laws, theapplication of existing laws to electronic networks will have to beinterpreted in light of the new capabilities and limitations of themedium. the extent to which continuity with past precedents is desirable. usersand providers of network services are, like it or not, inevitably bound bythe constraints of the environment in which they operate. but they mayhave different beliefs about the desirability of suchcommon themes117rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuity. the belief that continuity is desirable is one aspect of a beliefin the value of consistency and social stability. this position would leadpeople to believe that social continuity, extended to electronic networks,will give users of electronic networks a firmer grounding in what thenorms of behavior are (or should be). those with a weaker belief in thevirtues of continuity tend to see electronic networks as an opportunityfor designing the ground rules of a new society from scratch andavoiding the socially undesirable difficulties that continuity with thepast has created. in addition, they tend to be more concerned about notforeclosing opportunities that the new technology may provide. the nature of informed consent relevant to providing information.although all stakeholders endorse in principle the idea that a user ofelectronic networks making an agreement should give his or herinformed consent as a part of that agreement, there is debate over whatnotions of informed consent should be applicable. some believe thatinformed consent should be predicated on understanding the generalpurposes of the information collector. others believe that true informedconsent requires that all of the possibilities (or perhaps a number ofexamples that illustrate the true range of possibilities) for the dispositionof information be made available to the individual.a second dimension of the informed consent issue is the dispositionof individuals who express no preference or inclination regarding theirputative rights on electronic networks. as a general rule, there is a highdegree of consensus that the wishes of individuals who explicitly chooseto participate or agree or who explicitly decline to participate or agreeshould be honored. the debate is over the relative propriety of "optout"nonagreement (an agreement that applies unless the individual explicitlydeclines) and "optin" agreement (an agreement that applies only if theindividual explicitly accepts). there does seem to be something of aconsensus that when the potential consequences of an agreement aremore severe, optin agreement is more desirable. but there is argumentover what counts as a severe consequence.the description of these themes is oversimplified, and it is doubtful that anysingle individual could be associated solely with any one extreme. it is clear,however, that the positions taken with respect to these themes are reflections ofpersonal value and social ideology or perhaps misunderstandings about how thelegal system works, rather than the results of technical deliberation.in almost none of these situations does electronic networking raisefundamentally new issues. still, even when old concerns are magnifiedcommon themes118rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.through use of this technology, dispute and argument become apparent. thereason is that to the extent that these old concerns have been resolved in the past,their resolution has come about not because the concerns have disappeared or thevarious stakeholders have changed their minds, but because politicalcompromises and the need to move forward have driven decisions. thus,resolution very much depends on the circumstances of the moment. networkingtechnology reopens traditional debates largely because it threatens the status quothat results from a given configuration of circumstances; with newcircumstances, new compromises become necessary and thus the samefundamental questions need to be reexamined.if this is true, the debate over social norms on electronic networks, in formand even in structure, will not differ much from the debate over abortion rights,school choice, sex education, crime, welfare reform, or any other controversialsocial issue. this is not to say that the debates should not be taking place, butonly that our hopes about what such debates can accomplish should bemoderated. these debates will not resolve fundamental issues or even result inconsensus, but they can serve an educational role, illuminating and illustratingissues and providing alternative visions of the future for the concerned public.ultimately, the debate will be resolved just as all debates over social philosophyare resolved: over time and with a great deal of effort in the courts, newspapers,schools, places of religious worship, and other public forums for argument.common themes119rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.common themes120rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes121rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes122rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix anetwork technologynetwork building blocksthe essence of an electronic network is connectivity between computers.the first computers ran as standalone machines that could be accessed only fromtheir immediate physical location.1 later, they became reachable through "dumb"terminals connected to hardwired lines and dialin ports. more recently,computertocomputer connections were implemented through hardwired anddialin ports and through local area and wide area networks. today, manycomputers participate in the growing global network, sometimes referred to as"the net." one of the main components of this network is the internet, whichitself is a network of networks with international reach. transmissions over theglobal network may pass through several computers and network gateways beforereaching their final destinations.when computers are networked, the network must support a method ofuniquely addressing the various computers connected to it. any user regardlessof location (but connected to the network) who wishes1 even today, there are valid reasons to establish "islands" of computing capability thatdo not interact with other systems. for example, a corporation may choose not to connectits network or its individual computers to the external world because of security concerns.still, recent experience demonstrates that important and powerful synergistic effects arepossible when many individual computing elements are connected to each other.appendix a123rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to interact with another computer must be able to refer specifically to thatcomputer and not some other computer. assigning unique addresses to computerson a network is the equivalent of assigning unique telephone numbers totelephones connected to the telephone system.computer networks can implement storeandforward communications,realtime connections, and distributed computing.storeandforward communicationwith storeandforward communication, the contents of a communicationare temporarily stored on intermediate computers before reaching their finaldestination. electronic mail is a good example. a message is typed at theoriginating computer and is then handed to a ''mailer" running on the samecomputer or on another "mail host" computer tied in through a local areanetwork. over some period of time, the message will be transferred to andtemporarily stored at a series of other computers until it reaches its ultimatedestination. at this destination, it is stored on a host computer until the addresseechecks her or his electronic mail.storeandforward systems now generally have various enhancements,including the capability to attach files and perform transfers. however, becausethe native communication protocols of intermediate nodes are not controllablethroughout the process, or may in fact be unknown to all systems, file transfersare often limited to text. in any case, the transmission of the message does notcreate a realtime connection between the sender's and the recipient's computers,and so true realtime interactivity is not possible.one technical note: packetswitched networks also implement a kind of"storeandforward" communication of the packets that are the basic unit oftransmission. however, intermediate nodes forward packets nearlyinstantaneously, and these packets remain at the intermediate nodes for veryshort times.realtime connectionsa realtime connection is one that allows a user on one computer to access aremote computer and directly perform actions on that remote computer. theseactions may be as simple as transferring files or searching a database on theremote computer or as complex as controlling the operation of the remotecomputer. like the other types of interconnections, realtime connections nowoften involve several levels of intermediate networks. these intermediatenetworksappendix a124rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.are transparent to the user, except that there may be some small time delayinduced by the bandwidth, processing, or data communications rate of theintervening physical network media.historically, realtime access to remote computers was the first type ofnetworking to be widely developed. it was a practical way around the scarcity ofcomputing power, which was often measured in processor cycles. the idea was toallow researchers to use powerful computers that they did not own themselves.even with the tremendous decreases in the price of computing power, realtimeconnections play an important role in providing researchers access to the fastestsupercomputers.distributed computingdistributed computing allows a database, file system, or application to bedispersed across a networked set of computers. some records in a distributeddatabase or files in a distributed file system may be replicated across severalcomputers to provide greater reliability, faster access, or simultaneous access to alarger number of people. applications may be distributed in order to takeadvantage of unused resources on other machines, but they are also distributed sothat part of an application can run on a user's workstation while another part runson a file server or database server and accesses information requested by theuser.network servicesnetworks support many different types of computermediatedcommunications. the most basic form of communication, a "onetoone"message communication between two individuals, is supported through electronicmail and realtime "talk" facilities that allow the parties to simulate a telephoneconversation through exchanges of text (advanced systems support voice andvideo as well). but networking technology greatly expands this basic notion ofcommunication with ease. for example, networks also support the notion of''onetomany" communication, a mode that could be characterized as a broadcastmode in which a single source transmits information to many people. perhapsmost important, electronic networks support a mode of communication for whichthere is no close historical analogša manytomany mode of communication inwhich many people write and many people read simultaneously. a manytomanycommunications mode that can be operated for essentially the same individualeffort as a onetoone mode is unprecedented in the history ofappendix a125rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications media.2 this mode has facilitated a new pattern of socialinteraction that is difficult to achieve through other communications media.described below are several of the most important forms of computermediated communications. note that these forms do not necessarily map cleanlyor uniquely to the onetoone, onetomany, or manytomany modes describedabove.electronic mailelectronic mail (or email) is today the single most common form ofcommunication on electronic networks. email has gone mainstream as it isincreasingly used in business settings. email is used most often in a onetoonemode to send private messages from one person to another. however, simply byadding to the address list, it is possible to send (broadcast) the same message tomany parties, illustrating the use of email in a onetomany mode.the primary advantage of email communication is that it eliminates theneed for the message sender and receiver to be active simultaneously; a messagesent by one party need not be read by its recipient until it is convenient for therecipient to read it. postal mail or interdepartmental mail is similar but suffersfrom the delays and uncertainties inherent in moving physical objects.3 email isoften used instead of the telephone because it solves the problem of "telephonetag." it also provides a written record, and for many people it is free. still, it isusually more timeconsuming to carry on a dialogue using email, and there canbe uncertainty about whether the recipient has received a message and acted onrequests.storeandforward conferencingstoreandforward conferencing is a manytomany mode of communicationin which messages are created by members of a group and read by others withinthat group. conferencing goes under many2 the cost in resources required to support manytomany communications is an entirelydifferent matter. in fact, the ease with which manytomany communications can beachieved (from the standpoint of the individual end user) may well mask the true cost inresources needed in support. by all accounts, these resources are substantial.3 email is not immune to delays and uncertainties either, although overall delays aregenerally much smaller than those associated with postal mail. the telephone system,however, is highly reliable and operates in real time. thus, fax transmission rather than email is often the most reliable way to transmit a single copy of a document.appendix a126rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.names (e.g., electronic bulletin boards, "newsgroups," newsletters, forums,mailing lists), but the basic idea is essentially public discussion. people postmessages, other people reply, and a structured conversation emerges over a periodof time.the boundaries of the relevant group in a conference may or may not bewell defined. some networked conferences strictly limit those who mayparticipate (e.g., a conference running on a corporate network may be limitedstrictly to employees of the owning company). other conferences are essentiallypublic: the group consists of anyone who wishes to join the conference. stillother conferences screen potential members through an application process. in allcases, potential conference members need to know of the conference's existence;in a world in which electronic networks are ever more common, this may be themost daunting admission "requirement" of all.some conferences are "moderated"; others are not. in an unmoderatedconference, all messages posted by all members are visible to all conferencemembers. in a moderated conference, a moderator screens or reviews messagessubmitted for posting by group members. messages that the moderator deemsirrelevant or inappropriate for public posting are eliminated or sent back to thesender for revision. for example, a moderator may decide that a messagecontains a personal attack on another group member and send that message backwith a request to rephrase the message.properly speaking, an electronic bulletin board is a mode of communicationin which all messages ever sent are easily accessible to all participants.4 a userviewing such a board would be able to see new messages as well as oldmessages, perhaps dating back to a time before he or she had joined the bulletinboard for the first time. however, "bulletin board" has also come to mean anautomatic mail redistribution site. in this mode, a mail redistribution site is set upto service discussion on a particular topic among a list of people. if the list isopen, then new participants can add themselves to the list automatically bysending a request to the redistribution site. the discussion goes on as users sendmail on the topic to the redistribution site, and all members of the list receive it.5old messagesši.e., messages sent4 another use of the term "bulletin board" refers to small dialin computer systemstypically operated by private "sysops." this type of system is described below in thesection "computer bulletin board systems."5 this characteristic distinguishes it from a simple, individually owned mailing list, inwhich the sender of a message must know the individual addresses of all those with whomone wishes to communicate. indeed, in some mail redistribution schemes, it is difficult ifnot impossible for the message sender to know the individual identities (or addresses) ofeveryone who receives the message.appendix a127rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.among board participants before a given user joins the listšare usually notaccessible, unless someone has explicitly archived those messages. (a moreproper name of this type of bulletin board is a listserver.)realtime conferencingrealtime conferencing is a manytomany mode of communication that issimilar to storeandforward conferencing, except that the messages are sent backand forth in real time. realtime conferencing builds on the realtime connectionsdescribed in the previous section. one use of realtime conferencing is the realtime chat, in which members of the conference are logged into the conferencesimultaneously and messages typed by those members are displayed in real time.realtime chats are the typed network equivalent of citizens' band (cb) radio.two other forms of realtime conferencing are games such as multiuser dungeons(muds) and multiuser simulation environments (muses). muds and musesenable remote participants to join ongoing computermediated games (dungeons)or simulations. more sophisticated realtime conferences based on audio andvideo links are beginning to take place on the internet today.file transferfile transfers provide one type of remote access to information contained incomputer files: a user in new york can move a file to or from a computer locatedin california. a file may contain text, graphic images, or any other type ofdigitally encoded information. file transfers may be anonymous or restricted. inthe case of anonymous file transfers, any user on any computer connected to thenetwork can obtain a file, knowing only the location on which the file is storedand the name of the file. restricted file transfers are limited to some welldefinedgroup of individuals who, for example, can obtain certain files from certaincomputers only if they have been granted access rights to those files.remote computer useanother way to obtain information remotely is to use the network asessentially a very long cable that connects a user at a terminal or workstation innew york directly to a computer in californiaša remote login. this user, sittingin new york, has access to capabilities of the california computer that would beavailable to aappendix a128rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.user sitting at a terminal that was directly connected to it.6 remote use provides apath for the retrieval of information that is not contained in complete files (e.g.,the browsing of entries in a catalog, the conducting of a database search) and thusnot obtainable through file transfer.remote computer use makes it possible to share computing resources; a userin new york in need of a faster computer may be able to find one in california.at the same time, it is more difficult to control remote networkenabled physicalaccess to a computer than to control access when a user must physically appear at adirectly connected machine. passwords and other security measures help tocontrol remote access, but facilitating ease of remote use and denyingunauthorized access are goals that are inherently contentious.information search servicesas described above, one major use of electronic networks is to transferinformation between sites for the benefit of remote users. but all of the servicesdescribed above require that the potential user know a lot about the informationbeing sought: on what computer it is located and under what file name it isstored. a potential user that does not know this information can be handicappedin his or her search for information.a number of tools have been developed for use on the internet to help userssearch for and retrieve information (table a.1). gopher and the wideareainformation server (wais), for example, provide a menudriven interface forobtaining information from both local and remote systems on the network.gopher gives the impression of a single large distributed database. althoughthese and other information search tools are used for different purposes, theyshare one themešthey reduce the amount of "lowlevel" information needed bythe user to retrieve information, allowing him or her to specify a request forinformation in terms that are more meaningful (e.g., by a set of key words orphrases that specify the topic of interest on which information is being sought).6 in many cases, the capabilities available to remote users are restricted due to securityconsiderations. in other cases, the capabilities are identical, and remote users have exactlythe same capabilities as do local users.appendix a129rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table a.1 informationfinding resources for use on the internetname of tooltype of informationsoughthow search is specifiedfingeremail address (loginname) of a user on a givensystemlast name of user, systemon which he/she may residearchieusually information intext and binary filesfile names to be searchedfor on various ftp sitesgopherusually information intext and binary filesmenus that containdescriptions of generalcategories of interest; userbrowses these menus and isautomatically connected tothe systems on which menuitems of interest are foundveronicafiles, gopher sites, andmenuskey words to be searchedfor on various gophermenus, key wordsassociated with variousfileswidearea informationserverinformation in fileskey words or phraseslikely to be found in thefiles that are desired. (if thefile is not text, key wordsmay be appended toauxiliary files that point tothe desired nontext file.)worldwide webinformation in fileshypertext search; a userbrowses a document andcomes across a reference tolocate. (he/she pursues anautomatic link from thatitem in the document to thereference.)mosaicainformation in filesmouse pointing andclickingwhoisinformation about a userwithout knowing thesystem on which he/shemay residename of usernote: a more complete description of most of these services can be found in ed krol, the wholeinternet: user's guide and catalog, o'reilly and associates, sebastapol, calif., 1992.a mosaic is a convenient and easytouse graphical user interface to the internet that became popularin the latter part of 1993 and has been responsible for driving much of the recent internet use. mosaicmakes use of many of the resources described above.appendix a130rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a rough typology of networksa very rough typology of the various types of networks is the following:global network, computer bulletin board systems, and commercial services. thetypology is rough because there is some overlap between the types, but as a firstapproximation it will suffice.the global network and the internetthe term "global network" is used to refer to the worldwide connection ofcomputers and networks that is part of and connected to the internet. the internetis a set of interconnected networks, numbering in the tens of thousands and mostof which make use of a protocol suite known as tcp/ip for communication. theinternet is perhaps the single most important driver of the global network.networks other than the internet have some significance as well, though thenetworks described here can connect to the internet. bitnet is a cooperativenetwork consisting mostly of academic institutions and even today providesprimary connectivity to network communications for certain institutions. usenetis a network that supports only newsgroups. uucp refers to an associatednetwork that supports only mail but not newsgroups. fidonet is a network thatconnects personal computers, primarily those using msdos.7computer bulletin board systemsfrom a technical perspective, a bulletin board system (bbs) is quite simple.in its most basic form, a bbs involves a computer with a modem on a telephoneline. bbs users make their connections by telephone, and data flows between theuser and the bbs. connections between user and bbs are transient, lasting onlyfor the duration of the telephone call. a user dials a connection to the bbs andmay interactively read "messages" posted by others, and, if authorized, post hisor her own messages. the connection from the user to the bbs is typically aterminalstyle interface, e.g., a vt100 terminal emulation, rather than email inthe sense described above.bbss are an example of grassroots computingšinexpensive, generallyinformal, open to everyone with a modem and a computer, and often7 for more discussion of these and other networks, see john quarterman, the matrix:computer networks and conferencing systems worldwide, digital press, bedford, mass.,1990.appendix a131rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shortlived. some bbss charge for usage, others seek voluntary contributions,and still others are entirely free of charge. bbss cover a wide range of subjectmaterial, e.g., coin collecting, parakeet raising, politics, lifestyle, religion, lawenforcement, distribution of government information, and hacker information.the low cost of setting up and running a bbs has allowed many individualsto establish their own. in 1992, jack rickard, editor of boardwatch magazine,estimated the number of publicly accessible bulletin boards in the united statesat 45,000, and the number has grown substantially since then.8 many bbss areconnected to each other or to other networks; other bbss stand alone. freenets,of which one of the most famous is the cleveland freenet, are communitybasednetworks that are open to the public and provide bbs capabilities. they servemany of the same functions as public libraries and town meetings.commercial servicesa number of commercial networks have emerged in the last decade. amongthe most prominent are compuserve, the prodigy services company, genie, andamerica online. although the services provided by commercial networks vary,they generally include access to a variety of information sources (e.g., magazineand newspaper articles, financial information for publicly owned companies),electronic mail among subscribers, public conferences on a variety of subjectsranging from romance to nuclear energy, and a variety of consumer services(e.g., home shopping). in general, commercial services charge users for the timethey are connected to the network and for the specific services they use (though aset of basic services may be available for a fixed fee). policies exist regardingacceptable use of the network services offered, and they are enforced to varyingdegrees.9 common carriers (e.g., local exchange companies) may begin to offersimilar services in the near future.8 this total includes only systems run by either individuals or companies that wouldwelcome a call from a stranger. these bulletin boards typically host between 200 and2,000 callers each, with an average "unique" caller base of about 250 per board(discounting the common caller base among boards), according to rickard. this indicates atotal u.s. caller base of over 11 million9 for example, a commercial information service might offer a public "chat" service toits users (i.e., a conference), subject to the condition that users not engage in the use ofprofanity. these "terms of service" may stipulate that participants using profane languageare subject to disconnection from the conference, but in actual practice action may betaken only when another participant complains. another service might terminate theconnection when the profane language first appears.appendix a132rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the internetthe internet is a worldwide network of networks that originated in researchand education communities but now also accommodates some commercialtraffic. member networks share a common set of protocols that enablecommunication between them, but each member network is administrativelydistinct in much the same way that a given road might pass through a number ofseparate and distinct states with different law enforcement practices and rules ofthe road. as a result, the internet does not have the character of a single, centrallyrun organization, though certain aspects of its operations are coordinated. theinternet provides all of the functions and services described in the section"network services," above.organizationthe organization of the internet is best described in terms of progressivelyhigher levels of aggregation: the local view. typically, the local view centers on an institution. theinstitution has a mainframe computer or a local area network, and peopleuse terminals, personal computers, or workstations that are physicallywired to the network or the mainframe. the regional view. at the next level of aggregation, each of those localnetworks or mainframes is connected into some sort of a regionalnetwork. thus, the regional network consists of many interconnectedstate or local networks. for example, the california education andresearch foundation network (cerfnet) alone connects more than 150academic and commercial institutions to the internet. there are a fewdozen regional networks, most of which began as academic cooperativesand some of which have become commercial enterprises. in addition,several fully commercial enterprises now provide internet connections toinstitutions. the national view. regional networks serving research and educationusers have been connected through a highspeed "backbone" networkknown as nsfnet, which has been run with financial support from thenational science foundation since 1988. (nsfnet is expected to bereplaced in 1995 by a web of competing commercial and nonprofitbackbone networks.) some networks outside the united states aremultinational, e.g., nordunet (scandinavian nations) and danteand ebone (europe). the global view. the internet now reaches internationally. in recentyears, various links have been established to networks in otherappendix a133rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.countries. however, the detailed structure of networks in these othercountries may not parallel that in the united states. (for example,networks internal to other nations are often similar to regional networksin the united states.)but even these views do not quite explain the "true" nature of theinterconnections among internet institutions. for example, multiple connectionsbetween regional midlevel networks on an ad hoc basis are common; it is evenpossible for individuals to become internet sites on their own. the resultingnetwork is more like a seamless and tangled web of interconnections that conformto the common protocols than a hierarchically structured organism. among otherthings, the internet's lack of hierarchy makes it far more robust and adaptable tonew circumstances.managementthe management of the internet is decentralized. all internet sites sharecommunications protocols and an agreedupon set of naming and addressingconventions. a central body, the internet assigned numbers authority, allocatesinternet addresses. daytoday operation is conducted by a set of hierarchicallyrelated network information centers. other than these shared elements, verylittle is common, though a spirit of friendly cooperation enables this decentralizedoperation to function. as susan estrada, former executive director of thecalifornia education and research foundation network, noted, "everybody ornobody" runs the internet.in the past, the decentralized character of the internet has interfered withenforcement of the nsf acceptable use policy (aup). the aup attempted toregulate the nature of traffic carried across nsfnet and was intended to restrictthe use of nsfnet to research and education purposes. however, manycommercial enterprises are (and have been) connected to the internet. since auser generally has no way to control the precise routing of any given traffic, acommercial user may send commercial traffic across nsfnet without knowingit (or even caring about it). indeed, the nsf aup has often been honored more inthe breach than in actual practice. (it is expected that efforts to apply this policywill change in 19941995 as nsf support for the backbone is reduced and thebackbone network is privatized.)appendix a134rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.size and scalesince it is so easy to add a connection to the internet, the size of the internetchanges rapidly. the internet connects more than 70 countries (around 150countries if email links to the internet are included), between 2 million and 20million users, and some 3,000 newsgroups. it also connects many thousands ofinformation archives of various sorts. the internet connected 46,000 domains injuly 1994,10 and the number of added networks doubles every year.11 thesenumbers are growing rapidly. for several years, the traffic across the nsfnetbackbone (measured in terms of number of packets of information carried) hasgrown at an average rate of 15 to 20 percent per month, driven primarily byincreases in the number of users.a brief historical backgroundthe earliest roots of computer networking can be clearly traced back to thetimesharing services of the 1960s. at that time, computers were large andexpensive, and consequently rather scarce. timesharing, using remote terminalcommunications, was developed as a way to expand the availability of limitedcomputing resources. general electric and tymshare were among the betterknown, early commercial timesharing services; many universities and companiesmaintained their own timesharing mainframe computers. as computers becamemore common, many corporations established their own mainframebased localarea networks, often with proprietary networking technologies. subsequently,they linked a number of their own computing sites to form the first longhaul orwide area networks. xerox, digital equipment corporation, internationalbusiness machines (ibm), and american telephone and telegraph (at&t)were among the early pioneers. also beginning in the late 1960s, networkingbegan to move out of the singlecorporation realm with the establishment ofseveral small, experimental, packetswitched networks in europe to link scientificresearch facilities.today's widespread availability of fast, reliable, global, and nearlyubiquitous networking is directly related to two significant developments:10 a ''domain" is approximately one administrative entity that is connected to theinternet; typically, it is a single university or a single company. the domain may besubdivided into a number of smaller subdomains.11 vinton cerf, personal communication, 1994.appendix a135rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.arpanet and personal computers. arpanet was developed in 1968 by theadvanced research projects agency of the u.s. department of defense andimplemented in 1969 by bolt, beranek, and newman both as a network researchproject per se and, as it turned out, a very successful method to link militaryresearch computers. it demonstrated the viability and systemwide reliability oflonghaul packetswitched networks. the development of the transmissioncontrol protocol (tcp) and the internet protocol (ip) in the mid to late 1970senabled the linking of a growing number of wide area and local area networks viaarpanet and thus greatly increased the number of researchers with networkaccess. this linking of a number of networks eventually led to the use of thename "arpa internet" in 1977 to stress the internetwork aspects of this growingresource for scientific research. more formally, "internet" was formed in 1983,when the defense communications agency reorganized military networking andmandated the use of the tcp/ip protocols for all hosts on military networks.in the mid to late 1980s the national science foundation (nsf) established anumber of supercomputer centers to make greatly increased computing poweravailable to the broad spectrum of research scientists outside of the militaryresearch community. after some initial experience using arpanet, nsfestablished the nsfnet backbone for the internet in 1987 and 1988 and began tolink an increasing number of colleges and universities to the network. this greatlyincreased both the capacity and number of users on the network and reinforcedthe fact that the original arpanet had become only one of the many networkson an already large and continually growing internet.appendix a136rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bworkshop schedule and sessiondescriptionsschedulethursday, november 5, 19928:00 a.m.continental breakfast8:30welcome8:45session 1šinternet10:30break10:45 a.m.session 2šcommercial information services12:30 p.m.lunch1:30session 3šgrassroots networks3:15break3:30session 4šmapping different network services onto differentmetaphors5:30 p.m.reception and buffet dinnerfriday, november 6, 19928:15 a.m.continental breakfast9:00 a.m.session 5šcontent, censorship, accuracy, defamationnoonlunch1:00 p.m.session 6šprivacy and proprietary interests4:15 p.m.session 7šsummary and wrapupappendix b137rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.session descriptionsthe first three sessions are to be devoted to examining user, provider, andoutsider perspectives on different types of networked communities. sessions 1 to3 will address the following questions: what policies, laws, regulations, or ethical standards apply to the use ofthese services, who sets them, how are they developed, and how are theyenforced? what are users' expectations regarding privacy and protection of otherproprietary interests? what are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of providers oroperators of these services? what are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of users of theseservices? what problems arise from connecting systems offering these services tosystems that operate under different policies?sessions 5 and 6 are to be devoted to examining important issues that cutacross different networked communities.session 1šinternetchair: stephen kentpresenters:jeffrey schiller (massachusetts institute of technology)susan estrada (farnet)david farber (university of pennsylvania)the internet is the largest network in the world, connecting over a millionusers through thousands of subnetworks running through universities, industry,government agencies, and other organizations. this session will identify therights and responsibilities of the internet community, including the organizationsthat offer internet nodes or gateways and the people who use electronic mail andother internet services.session 2šcommercial information serviceschair: george perrypresenters:stephen case (america online)murray turoff (new jersey institute of technology)patrick lanthier (pacific bell)eberhard wunderlich (at&t)appendix b138rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercial information services (including enhanced services to be offeredby common carriers) offer (or will offer) the general public online information,bulletin boards, electronic mail, and conferencing facilities, and consumerservices to their subscribers. this session will focus on the rights andresponsibilities of the providers of such services and members of the public whouse them.session 3šgrassroots networkschair: mitchell kaporpresenters:tom grundner (cleveland freenet)jack rickard (boardwatch)william dutton (university of southern california)grassroots networks encompass efforts like freenet and local communitybulletin board systems such as those operated by santa monica or by libraries;they are characterized as being generally small in scale (compared to the internet)and have a populist flavor.session 4šmapping different network services onto different metaphorschair: anne wells branscombpresenters:davis foulger (ibm)david johnson (wilmer, cutler, and pickering)henry perritt (villanova university)a number of metaphors (e.g., printing presses, corner soapboxes,telephones) have been used to describe electronically networkedcommunications. but all such metaphors break down at some point. this sessionaddresses what is special about electronic communication and how the metaphorsgenerally used to understand electronic communication succeed and fail.session 5šcontent, censorship, accuracy, defamationchair: george perrypresenters:sara kiesler (carnegie mellon university)carl kadie (university of illinois, urbanachampaign)allan adler (cohn and marks)jean polly (nysernet)appendix b139rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.questions to be addressed in this session: given the global but largely selective reach of networks, whatcharacterizes the judgments of a given networked community regardingcontent? on what basis are policies regarding acceptable use formulated? what policies, laws, and ethical standards establish acceptable content? what is the impact on various stakeholders of violating acceptable usepolicies? what isšand should bešthe operator's responsibility for user violationsof acceptable use policies?session 6šprivacy and proprietary interestschair: dorothy denningpresenters:william a. bayse (federal bureau of investigation)steven metalitz (information industry association)lance rose (attorney)alan westin (columbia university)marc rotenberg (computer professionals for social responsibility)questions to be addressed in this session: what is the nature of the proprietary interests held by the variousstakeholders in networked communities? what considerations should be taken into account to determine thelegitimacy of asserted proprietary interests? how can these proprietary interests be protected? how have different networked communities acted to safeguard or denythese interests? what are the responsibilities of a service provider to protect the privacyand proprietary interests of the users? what should be the obligations of providers (or communities) to assistlaw enforcement or other officials (with or without court orders) inproviding access to electronic communications (contents, addresses, andso on)? what government controls, if any, should be placed on the use ofcryptography?appendix b140rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.session 7šsummary and wrapupsince this workshop will provide the intellectual underpinning for the nextevent (i.e., the forum in spring 1993), it will be important to summarize what thegroup learned during these two days and what types of questions would berelevant for the forum. the committee chair will summarize key points and theninvite discussion from committee members and other workshop participants.appendix b141rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cforum statement of purpose and agendastatement of purposeparticipation in electronically networked communities is growing by leapsand bounds. the environments for networking include the internet, commercialnetwork service providers, local bulletin boards, and both intra and interenterprise networks. networkbased businesses are proliferating and growing, andnonprofit networks, particularly those that serve the research and educationcommunities, are rapidly expanding their services.growth in electronic networking raises many policy issues. how much, if atall, can network service providers restrict access to or specific uses of theirservices? how much, if any, responsibility do network service providers have tosafeguard the privacy or proprietary interests of their users? how do theexpectations of individual and corporate network users accord with existing laws?the responses of the general public, private organizations, and government tothese questions will shape the progress and impact of electronic networking inu.s. society.building on its historic concern for nationwide information infrastructure,the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) chose to focus itssecond strategic forum on key policy issues associated with the conduct ofelectronic networking activities. it appointed a steering committee chaired by dr.dorothy denning toappendix c142rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organize the project's activities. as a first step, cstb hosted a small workshop innovember 1992. prominent researchers and policy analysts were invited to airtheir views in a roundtable discussion on a variety of questions concerning rightsand responsibilities in networked communities.the present strategic forum builds on the november workshop discussionsand expands the dialogue to a wider community. to achieve this broaderdiscussion, forum panelists and moderators will explore several scenarios thatillustrate the kinds of questions, issues, and choices that must be made inoperating, managing, and setting policies for networked communities. thescenarios for panel discussions are described at the end of this program.agendathursday, february 18, 19935:00 p.m.registration and reception6:00dinner7:00 p.m.welcome to the academy by philip m. smith, executive officer keynote speech by congressman edward markey, chair, housesubcommittee on telecommunications and financefriday, february 19, 19937:30 a.m.registration and continental breakfast8:30welcoming remarks frank press, national research council chair dorothy denning (georgetown university), forum chair8:45setting the stage technical tour through cyberspaceš mitchell kapor (ontechnology) the legal landscape of cyberspaceš anne wells branscomb(harvard university) the legislative and policy context of cyberspaceš richard wiley(wiley, rein, and fielding)10:15 breakappendix c143rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10:35free speech  henry perritt (villanova university school of law), moderator allan adler (cohen and marks) george perry (prodigy services company) reid crawford (iowa state university) david hughes (old colorado city communications) lawrence lessig (university of chicago)11:45 a.m.lunch with special presentation by john perry barlow (founder,electronic frontier foundation) 1:00 p.m.electronic vandalism oliver smoot, jr. (computer and business manufacturersassociation), moderator kent alexander (king and spalding) scott charney (department of justice) michael godwin (electronic frontier foundation) thomas guidoboni (bonner and o'connell) mark rasch (arent, fox, kintner, plotkin, and kahn) 2:00protection of proprietary interests david johnson (wilmer, cutler, and pickering), moderator nancy cline (pennsylvania state university) karen hunter (elsevier science publishing company) peter martin (cornell law school) alan mcdonald (federal bureau of investigation) ronald plesser (piper and marbury) pamela samuelson (university of pittsburgh) robert simons (dialog information services) 3:00break3:20privacy alan westin (columbia university), moderator ann harkins (senate judiciary subcommittee on technology and thelaw) kenneth raymond (nynex telesector resources group) marc rotenberg (computer professionals for social responsibility) james tobin (american express company)appendix c144rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4:30synthesis and concluding remarks by the forum steering committee dorothy denning (georgetown university), forum chair anne wells branscomb (harvard university) mitchell kapor (on technology) stephen kent (bolt, beranek, and newman) george perry (prodigy services company)5:00 p.m.adjournappendix c145rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix dkeynote speech: networked communitiesand the laws of cyberspaceedward markeychairman, house subcommittee ontelecommunications and financeas many of you are aware, we are in a time of transition. as of last night,the clinton administration has begun the political transition from 12 years ofrepublican economic policies, launching the nationally televised ''airwave"assault of operation shared sacrifice with an address to congress. the "groundwar," wherein we get into the nitty, gritty details of legislation, will come laterthis spring.although it is an ancient chinese curse to live in interesting times, it's anexciting time to be here in washington because of all the transition and thechange.everyone is throwing out the old speeches about gridlock and dividedgovernment, the misguided regulatory state, and the lack of vision. and youshould see what the democrats are doing. new material is being written all overtown. gone are the jokes about george bush and grocery scanners. tough to get asmile with a line about dan quayle or anything these days. if he were stillaround, somebody could crack a joke about vice president quayle, as head of thespace council, proposing that the country build a "cyberspacenote: speech delivered on february 18, 1993, for the cstb strategic forum. theversion here was transcribed from a tape of the speech, supplemented with the printed textof mr. markey's speech.appendix d146rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.station" before the japanese do. but he's not around, so we won't use any of thosejokes.it is a good time, instead, to talk of technological transition and the change itis spawning throughout industries and indeed, throughout american society. asall of you know, technologies are moving increasingly from analog to digitalforms of communication, and whole industries are undergoing a transition beingwrought by the convergence, or growing together, of digital technologies.this technological transition or convergence is leading inexorably towardthe creation of a new megaindustry: the information industry. comprisingcomputer companies, software houses, telephone and cable companies,manufacturers of wireless gadgets, and others, the development of this megaindustry and its harmonization of what we more often think of as diversetechnologies and distinct industries are taking place at a heady pace.a quick look around at what is happening out there can astound even thosewho follow such developments, as i do, rather closely. for instance: hollywood is going digital. new computercontrolled special effects like"morphing," which allowed villainous characters in terminator 2 toconstantly change form, digitized movies, and computersimulatedprescreening, which saves producers thousands of dollars, are becomingcommonplace. the "hightech" efforts of today are allowing "digitalactors" from yesteryear, like humphrey bogart or groucho marx, tocome alive again on the screen, or to dance with paula abdul in softdrink commercials. columbia has talked about releasing its movies andinteractive video using digital distribution over telephone lines and cabletv to homes and theaters. in health care, a recent study by arthur d. little concluded thatadvanced telecommunications could help cut the cost of health caredelivery in this country by $36 billion annually through "telemedicine,"remote video doctorpatient consultations, and electronic filing ofclaims. in education, the advent of digital communications in the classroom, fromisdnbased distance learning projects to interactive media as a new toolin teaching, could help make the telecommunications infrastructure oftomorrow the "great equalizer" in u.s. education by linking resourcesand students, rich and poor, urban and rural, and by giving everyoneaccess to the information age. in manufacturing, the agile techniques that telecommunicationsconversant ceos employ could mean that the "virtual corporation" mayhelp bill clinton achieve a "virtual economic recovery."appendix d147rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in short, the rapid technological change and the new networks beingcreated will increase efficiency and create thousands of jobs.all of this excites the imagination. and i'm excited to have a "front rowseat" to it all as chairman of the house subcommittee on telecommunicationsand finance, which oversees and legislates in the area of telecommunications. atits heart, it's the subcommittee of mtv and hollywood, of telephone networks,cable companies, and computers.historically, though, policymakers and regulators have tended to look at thetelephone industry, the cable industry, or the television and broadcast industriesas distinct entities defined by their technologies. we speak of wires and switches,antennas and cables, regulated services and tariffs. often, policy debates revolvearound intraindustry or interindustry tugs of war, with legislators and regulatorsfeeling a little like the mythical creature of dr. doolittlešthe "pushmepullyou"ša llama with two heads facing in opposite directions. policy stasis wasfrequently the result. in such scenarios, creating a national network andarticulating overarching policy goals for the country can be an arduous task.i do feel, however, that this year we are on the cusp of dramatic change thatwill bring success. with bill clinton and al gore, along with ron brown at thecommerce department, we have an administration that understands the nature oftechnology and the economic role it can play. moreover, they are also people whounderstand the "smalld" democratic potential of these new information networksand place more importance, i believe, on some of the basic principles of personalprivacy that we should all be vigilant in protecting. we've gone from a presidentwho didn't know about grocery scanners to one who not only knows what a"pbx" is, but knows the capacity of the one in the white house and is unhappywith it!tonight's forum, where we talk of the nature of "community" in a networkedworld and the rights and responsibilities of the members of that community, getsus beyond the wires and the switches to the electronic culture that exists on theends of the line and between the wiresšthe amorphous, borderless world of"cyberspace." although cyberspace existed before author william gibson coinedthe term in his book neuromancer, word of this new realm, this electronicfrontier, has only begun to capture the imagination and attention of the generalpublic recently.of course, appearing on the cover of time magazine helps to get the wordout. (so, "cyberspace" does have newfound name recognitionšalthough it wouldprobably have to make some rounds at manchesterappendix d148rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.coffeehouses before it would be a top votegetter in the new hampshireprimary.)what happens in cyberspace, and what its popular emergence portends forour society, is what i'd like to talk about tonight. i want to step back andhighlight some of the tough issues that lurk just over the horizon of our electronicfrontier. it is important to raise the issues now. this is a new arena forcommunications and law. conferences like this one provide a great service bysharing information and perspectives and by troubleshooting potential problems.in short, when we begin to address the rights and responsibilities of cyberspace,we will be boldly going where no policymakers have gone before.before we can discuss "communities" in a networked worldšbefore we getto the larger, national networkšwe must first look at an individual human beingand that individual's relationship to the technology.when harvard's mark 1 computer and the eniac computer were beingbrought online back in 1944 and 1945, the budding dream of many a computerscientist was to create ever more complex machines. the ultimate goal was tocreate a machine that could think like a human being, to move beyond the simplelogic, the programmed syllogisms, the endless zeros and onesšto artificialintelligence and thought processes that would mimic and indeed rival humans.science fiction novelists have long written of such machines and robots. theambition was to have machines play an integral role in human society. theparadigm has changed in recent years. ironically, today we talk of what rolehumans can play in an interconnected network of machines.the culture that develops in cyberspace will have both good and badelements, analogous perhaps to the "thinking machines" dreamt of in sciencefiction, which sometimes acquired human qualities we ourselves would often liketo forget. think of "hal," the onboard computer that took over control in themovie 2001: a space odyssey, and one is reminded that there can be less thanbenevolent consequences from technological advances.ironically, after world war ii, as computers began to evolve and becomemore sophisticated, a debate was also raging in the field of human psychologyšthe behavioralist school was maintaining that humans were actually more"computerlike," in the sense that human actions and behavior stemmed frompredictable logic or conditioned behavior. hungarian writer arthur koestler,more famous perhaps for writing the antitotalitarian classic darkness at noon in1941, wrote another novel, ghost in the machine, in 1967 in reaction tobehavioralist psychology.appendix d149rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.koestler's almost visceral defense of distinctly human qualities of emotionand judgment foreshadow some of what we may encounter when trying tounderstand the dual nature of cyberspacešboth the mechanical and humanaspects of it. because it is a human creation it will embody all of theeccentricities, judgment, reason, sense, and dreams we consist of ourselves alongwith our flaws, weaknesses, and prejudices.almost 25 years ago, shortly after koestler's novel was published, robertkennedy went to detroit, a city that had recently been torn apart by a riot, and hespoke to how we measure the wealth of a community and the difficulty inquantifying intangible assets or values. he said,we cannot measure national spirit by the dow jones average nor nationalachievement by the gross national product.for the gross national product includes air pollution and advertising forcigarettes, and ambulances to clear our highways of carnage. it counts speciallocks for our doors and jails for the people who break them. – the grossnational product swells with equipment for the police to put down riots in ourcities. and though it is not diminished by the damage these riots do, still it goesup as slums are rebuilt on their ashes.and if the gross national product includes all this, there is much that it doesnot comprehend. it does not allow for the health of our families, the quality oftheir education, or the joy of their play.– the gross national product measures neither our wit nor our courage,neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither our compassion nor our devotion tocountry. it measures everything, in short, except that which makes lifeworthwhile; and it can tell us everything about americašexcept whether we areproud to be americans.similarly, we can look at the speeds of our telecommunications networks,the millions of miles of cable, fiber, and copper, ascertain the processing powerof advanced computers, and measure their memory capacities. we can look, too,at the profit margins of software providers, movie studios, and record companies.in the final analysis, we can tell people everything about the state and quality ofour network except those things that make use of such a network worthwhile.whether the "console community" that is developing in cyberspace is one ofenjoyment and wonder or the potential domain of digital derelicts who maypillage our community with acts of "electronic wilding" is the question robertkennedy would ask today.we all have to remain cognizant of the fact that for all the glitter and goldout there on the frontier, there is, existing simultaneously, aappendix d150rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sinister side to cyberspace. it is an aspect of life that every community, whetherreal or virtual, has to deal with. so even as we look to the network and to the firstcolonies on the electronic frontier to empower human beings with the tools of theinformation age, to improve people's lives, and to provide entertainment andenjoyment, the potential for harm in the networked community may become morethan a "virtual reality"; it may become a real reality.in 1989, i requested a comprehensive report from the general accountingoffice (gao) on how federal agencies use, obtain, verify, and protect personalinformation; how individuals are made aware of information collected aboutthem; and what telecommunications and network facilities agencies' systems useto transmit data. the gao reported that personal information at the federal levelis maintained in about 2,000 program management, payroll, personnel, financial,and other types of systems. data in these systems included social securitynumbers, names and addresses, and financial, health, education, demographic,and occupational information. the gao reported that although data in about 91percent of the systems were covered by the privacy act, many agencies still sharethe personal information they maintain with other federal, state, and localagencies, as well as with the private sector.the gao study also indicated that the government obtains informationelectronically from thirdparty sources. twenty percent of the agencies surveyedreported that they collected personal information electronically from thirdpartysources, such as credit bureaus, state divisions of motor vehicles, and insurancecompanies. this study raises two issues for us. one, how does the governmentcontinue to protect the integrity of information collected about us for legitimatepurposes? and two, is the government collecting only the needed information?the same gao report noted that some of the government's largest databasesof personal information are accessed remotely and electronically. fortyfivepercent of the databases surveyed were accessed through the public switchednetwork, such as through at&t or mci, or through easily accessed commercialnetworks. the security of such systems is an obvious concern we will need toaddress on an ongoing basis.a more recent gao survey, one i requested just last year, had to deal with aproposal some of you may be aware of from the fbi to meet its futurewiretapping needs. in requesting the gao investigation, i wanted to ascertainwhat technological alternatives to making the entire telephone networkšincluding computer equipmentš"wiretap ready" for the fbi were available. ialso wanted to find out whatappendix d151rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exactly the fbi's wiretapping needs were and what the estimated cost would be.the study concluded that in its april of 1992 legislative proposal, the fbi did notdefine its wiretapping needs adequately. no specifics and no cost estimates wereavailable.i can't tell you what alternatives to making computers, pbx equipment, andthe telephone network "wiretap ready" may be available to the fbi because thebureau classified that portion of the gao report as national security information. iwill tell you, however, that it is my personal belief that searching for alternativesto their current proposal is where the fbi should be focusing their efforts.this is not only an issue of privacy; for u.s. manufacturers oftelecommunications equipment, the fbi proposal and the nsa [national securityagency] standard on encryption may also pose threats to the viability of theirproducts on the international market. because of my role as chairman of thetelecommunications subcommittee, i felt obligated to investigate the issuethoroughly before any legislative proposals having farreaching, or perhapsunintended, consequences moved through congress.i understand that the fbi considers wiretaps an essential informationgathering tool when fighting crime. but i am hopeful that some accommodationcan be found because i feel strongly that we need to make our networks,databases, and terminal equipment more secure, not less secure, to invisibletrespassers and others. the same is true for wireless encryption. the nationalsecurity agency wants the industry to accept a standard that many believe is tooeasy to decode. as the telecommunications revolution goes wireless andtelephone conversations, computer data, and business information increasinglytravel through the air, we need to make sure privacy and confidentiality areprotected to the maximum extent possible.let me get away from the government's side of cyberspace to some of thethreats to personal privacy as they arrive from the private sector or from privateindividuals.first, private industry. erik larson published a book last year called thenaked consumer. in it, he unveils some of the tools madison avenue isemploying to find out more about you and, subsequently, how they direct theirsales pitch to you accordingly. new marketing technologies are being refinedusing sophisticated software that takes huge amounts of information collectedfrom various sources and combines it into a single database. larson calls thiscrossreferenced information "recombinant information." it can include courtrecords, credit card balances, bank account information, magazine subscriptions,store purchases, and a "host of personal dataappendix d152rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collected discretely by companies of all kinds and then widely, avidly, andaggressively marketed to anyone willing to pay for it."larson notes in his book, for instance, that in 1988, one longdistancecompany began trading the names of its millions of customers. anyone whorented the list could select customers who were female, who made internationalcalls, or who traveled a lot. the author relates that the longdistance companytracked customers' travels through the use of the company's telephone callingcard, designed to be used on the road.much of the collecting of personal information about americans may beoccurring anytime someone calls an 800 or 900 telephone number. unbeknownstto most americans, companies can receive the name, billing address, andtelephone number of every caller to their 800 or 900 numbers. this informationcan then be reused, bought, and sold without restriction.in the last session of congress, i offered legislation to help combat this kindof personal information hijacking. i will introduce it again this session and willpush for its adoption aggressively. it requires that recipients of personalinformation gleaned from the network during an 800 or 900 call not reuse orsell that information without receiving the affirmative consent of the caller first.i'd like to read you a short excerpt from another book, this one by jeffreyrothfeder, called privacy for sale. by reading it, i think i'll give you all somesensešif you don't have it alreadyšof how much information is readilyavailable.the author writes:i chose dan rather as my test case because i was told the stoic, tightlippedcbs anchorman has taken numerous steps to guard his personal information.with this in mind, he seemed like the perfect subject to assess the limits of the[information] underground. – but in the end, it only involved extra keystrokeson my computer and patience. i started with dan rather's credit report becausethat's the simplest bit of confidential information to obtain.but to get that i needed his complete address and preferablyšbut notnecessarilyšhis social security number. so i began by requesting from thesuperbureau rather's credit report header, which contains biographical datataken from credit bureau files and usually available by just typing in a person'sname. – once i had dan rather's address and social security number, gettinghis credit report was easy. – it's hard not to be envious of a clean credit reportlike rather's. –however, delving further into dan rather's electronic alter ego offers aslightly different perspective on him. – i obtained a list of the stores he shopsat and how much he spends. – i learnedappendix d153rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that rather doesn't spend a lot on entertainment. shopping seems to be more hisspeed. – he shopped at five clothing stores and ate at only two restaurants, bothethnic. rather spent 10 times more on apparel than on dining out."that's all i'll read to you, but you should know that it is just the tip of theiceberg of things the data superbureaus have on all of us.as you can see, the information age is about more than just information.what we're communicating is not just raw data. it's values; it's meaning. it's amessage about the very purpose of our lives. communications has the power tochange the way people live, the power to overthrow governments.as networked communities in cyberspace develop further, the rights andresponsibilities of all of its inhabitants, and all of us as well, need to reflect theunderlying power they possess, in addition to the promise the network holds forus.by looking at an individual's relationship with the machines and thenetwork, we can also try to formulate boundaries of law in the network'sborderless world that will serve well the community which inhabits it. in a sense,we begin with a sort of "technological anthropology" and work from there to themanifestation of human potentialities and needs in the technological milieu of thenetwork as a whole. john sculley of apple computer has spoken of developing"humancentric" technology to reflect his company's emphasis on development ofinformation appliances for everyday people.in 1991, professor laurence tribe of harvard law school gave an addressat the first conference on computers, freedom, and privacy, out in california,entitled "the constitution in cyberspace." the question he raised was howconstitutional protections written two centuries ago remain intact in the contextof a world, a digital world, the constitution's framers could never haveenvisioned.it is a fundamental question for us. as a policymaker at the federal level, iwill be holding hearings on these issues, especially the electronic consequences topersonal privacy in the information age. big questions loom for us to answeršquestions that will need not only legal, copyright, first amendment, orcommunications law answers, but also societal and political answers as well. wewill be breaking new ground in this increasingly interconnected world.here are some of the questions we will have to explore and attempt to findanswers to: are the fundamental values of our society so universal and enduring thatthey will not be threatened by the advent of new technologies or any newsubcultures such technologies produce?appendix d154rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. or will cyberspace become some lawless place, where the constitutionis cracked open by fiber fissures created when trying to convert a 200yearold parchment into a binary world of zeros and ones? can itcontinue to be a "living, breathing document?" or will cyberspace develop its own distinct laws? will it develop"digital vigilantes" to patrol and police the electronic bulletin boards andelectronic highways? what indigenous political institutions may developin such a vacuum? could a closed system develop in the network with its own closed valuesystem?i agree with professor tribe when he stated that science and technologyopen options, create possibilities, suggest incompatibilities, and generate threats.yet they do not alter what is "right" and what is "wrong." because in the absenceof relevant laws, egregious transgressions of what most of us perceive to be rightand wrong can occur. this includes both unauthorized electronic trespassing andinfringements upon free speech rights, as well as some of the tactics employed byhackers, "phone phreaks," and others.once we clearly define what the rules are, then we can deal with some ofthose digital desperados out there like the dark avengeršthe bulgariannotorious for spreading his computer viruses around the world. the most recentissue of discover magazine, for instance, contains excerpts from a book whichrelates how the dark avenger has developed a virus that will mutate in 4 billiondifferent ways, making it very difficult to vaccinate a system against. when thenetwork goes global, how do we protect ourselves against crossboundary accessto personal data or infringements on our community? will the privacy rules thatgovern u.s. systems be adhered to if the network or data is accessed fromabroad? we need to build in such protections sooner rather than later.i have also seen the magazines of the socalled "cyberpunk" communityšmagazines like 2600: the hacker quarterly. a recent issue, for example,contained articles on how to steal longdistance service from a pay phone, how todefeat callback verification, a program for a "simple c virus," and other articlesindicating, quite explicitly, how to operate on the margins of, or to cross, whatmost of us would consider responsible behavior. without appropriate laws thatspeak to our new, networked communities, the risk is that some of the citizensmay be lost, not knowing exactly what their rights and responsibilities are.often, when engaged in the legislative arena, i find myself exasperated byrepresentatives of certain groups or certain industries whoappendix d155rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appear to walk through life with blinders onšfailing to see the larger forces atwork or the proverbial ''big picture." similarly, there are numerous "geniuses" inthe telecommunications or computer arenašselfdescribed futurists and othersšwho appear to me to walk through life with binoculars on. they can see wayout into the distance, yet anything in the immediate future is completely out offocus.luckily there are some who do see the immediate, pragmatic steps we needto take, for the good of the network from a technical sense, but who also remaincognizant of the possible pitfalls nearby from a societal perspectivešpeople likemitch kapor and those at the electronic frontier foundation, for instance, genekimmelman and mark cooper at the consumer federation of america, and jangoldman from the aclu's privacy and technology project. and there are othersin this room as well. i look forward to working closely with all of you in thefuture on both the technical, regulatory side of cyberspace and on the societal,privacy implications as well.as i said earlier, it is important to do this now. to not look at these issues isrunning the risk of logging on one morning and entering the vast emptiness of amonadic realm that perverts our hopes for a true community with invasions ofprivacy and digitized demonstrations of injury and violence.to make our vision of a networked community a reality, we have toremember the core values behind the communications act of 1934švalueswhich apply as well in cyberspace as they did in the new deal. one value is toensure universal access to every person in our countryšrich or poor. another isto ensure diversity: that there is a multitude of "media tongues" that can speak; that you don't have to work for the biggest and most powerfulcompanies, or be a certain kind of person, to get access; that the smallest voices, those articulating creative ideas, those withinformation to communicate, have access to the telecommunicationsnetwork; that they can be free and strong and separate from the larger voice thatmay want to be more monopolistic and drown them out, and that localismcan be, in fact, fostered through this network; and that it's not just a couple of voices coming from new york or losangeles, but voices all across the country that can use thetelecommunications system.for this reason i am advocating that america needs to take an interim stepon the way to a fully functional broadband system for the country, a step that willavail a great number of people the opportunityappendix d156rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to access a little bit of the future today, through digital telephone service to thehome.the power of communications is the power to help us learn more about theworld and to bridge the gaps that separate our differences. i would like to workwith all of you to make that kind of network a "real" reality.thank you for inviting me to speak with you tonight.appendix d157rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix ebiographical sketchessteering committeedorothy e. denning (steering committee chair) is a professor of computerscience at georgetown university, where she is currently working on policy andtechnical issues relating to cryptography and wiretapping, and has served as anindependent reviewer of the government's escrowed encryption system. beforecoming to georgetown in 1991, she was a member of the research staff at digitalequipment corporation's systems research center, a senior staff scientist at sri,and an associate professor of computer science at purdue university. she isauthor of cryptography and data security and numerous papers on informationsecurity, and in 1990 received the distinguished lecturer in computer securityaward. dr. denning is chair of the international cryptography institutesponsored by the national intellectual property law institute and cochair of theassociation of computing machinery's conference on computer andcommunications security. she is past president of the international associationfor cryptologic research. she received a ph.d. degree in computer science frompurdue.anne wells branscomb is a member of the center for information policyresearch at harvard university. she is a communications lawyer with practicalexperience representing broadcasters, cable televisionappendix e158rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.companies, database providers, semiconductor chip manufacturers, andpublishers of newsletters, newspapers, and books. ms. branscomb is an honorsgraduate of the george washington university law school, holds degrees inpolitical science from harvard university and the university of north carolina,spent a year as a visiting scholar at the yale university law school, and studiedinternational relations at the london school of economics as a rotary foundationfellow. she has served as chair of the communications law division of theamerican bar association's science and technology section. she is also amember of the u.s. department of commerce technical advisory board, atrustee of educom, a member of the commission on freedom and equality ofaccess to information, a trustee of the pacific telecommunications council, and acontributing editor to the information society and the journal of communication.mitchell d. kapor is cofounder and chair of the electronic frontierfoundation, an organization that works to develop and implement public policiesto promote openness, diversity, and innovation in emerging electronic socialenvironments. he is also chair of on technology, a developer of local areanetwork applications for collaborative computing. he received a b.a.(psychology, linguistics, and computer science, 1971) from yale college and anm.a. (psychology, 1978) from beacon college, and studied management as apostgraduate at the massachusetts institute of technology's sloan school ofmanagement (1979). mr. kapor is founder of the lotus developmentcorporation and served as its chief executive officer and president (19821984),and also chair (19841986). he is the designer of lotus 123, agenda, and manyother software applications. mr. kapor is the chair of the commercial internetexchange (cix), a notforprofit association involved in the development ofarrangements and facilities that connect independent networking carriers into aglobal information infrastructure. mr. kapor served on the computer science andtelecommunications board of the national research council. he is also anadjunct research fellow at harvard university's john f. kennedy school ofgovernment in the area of information technology policy.stephen t. kent is chief scientist, security technology, for bolt, beranek,and newman inc., where he works with commercial and government clients todevelop solutions for network and computer security problems. he served as amember of the internet architecture board from 1985 to 1994, and chairs theprivacy and security research group of the internet research task force. dr.kent served on the presidential skipjack review panel and various nationalresearch councilappendix e159rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical panels, and was a member of the board of directors of the internationalassociation for cryptologic research from 1982 to 1989. he received the s.m.,e.e., and ph.d. degrees in computer science from the massachusetts institute oftechnology. he is the author of numerous articles on network security and haslectured on the topic throughout the united states, europe, and australia.george m. perry is vice president and general counsel for prodigy servicescompany, which he joined in 1984 (then called trintex); he has oversight ofissues relating to the rights and responsibilities of a commercial electronicinformation and transaction provider. he is also responsible for tracking federaland state regulatory policies as they relate to prodigy's provision ofcompetitive services and technologies. he received a b.a. (1961) from columbiauniversity and a j.d. (1964) from the university of california at berkeley. mr.perry is currently concentrating on issues and policies that impinge on thedelivery of information services to the general public in the constantly changingtechnology and regulatory environment.appendix e160