detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4815information technology for manufacturing: a research agenda192 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309051798 | doi 10.17226/4815committee to study information technology and manufacturing, national researchcouncilinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.informationtechnologyformanufacturinga research agendacommittee to study information technology and manufacturingcomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsmanufacturing studies boardcommission on engineering and technical systemsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1995information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation (under grant no.mip93/2296). any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this materialare those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the national science foundation.library of congress catalog card number 9467789international standard book number 0309051797cover: the manufacturing òwheeló shown is intended to suggest the integration through informationtechnology of manufacturing activities both among and across the four basic elements of an idealizedprocess. the concept is discussed in chapter 2 of this report.available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)b483copyright 1995 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americainformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee to study informationtechnology and manufacturingpeter will, usc/information sciences institute, chairbarbara m. fossum, university of texasdennis m. hogan, dennis m. hogan associatesneal laurance, ford motor companyken j. lindsay, northrop aircraft divisioneugene s. meieran, intel corporationraj reddy, carnegie mellon universitywyckham d. seelig, at&t network systemsgilbert s. staffend, allied signal automotiveivan e. sutherland, sun microsystems laboratories(through february 1994)louise h. trevillyan, ibm t.j. watson research centerdaniel e. whitney, massachusetts institute of technologyeugene wong, university of california at berkeleypaul k. wright, university of california at berkeleyrichard a. wysk, texas a&m universityrobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiatives,special advisorstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, computer science and telecommunicationsboardthomas c. mahoney, manufacturing studies board(through september 1994)michael a. mcdermott, manufacturing studies board(through february 1994)greg medalie, computer science and telecommunications board(through april 1994)herbert s. lin, computer science and telecommunications board(from april 1994)leslie m. wade, project assistantiiiinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boardwilliam wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles m. geschke, adobe systems inc.james gray, san francisco, californiabarbara j. grosz, harvard universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorola inc.robert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam h. press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.edward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise a. arnheim, senior staff officerherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames e. mallory, staff officerrenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria p. bemah, administrative assistantleslie m. wade, project assistantivinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing studies boardcharles p. fletcher, aluminum company of america, chairsara l. beckman, university of california at berkeleyleslie a. benmark, e.i. du pont de nemours & co. inc.steven j. bomba, johnson controls inc.brian e. boyer, northrop aircraft divisiongary l. cowger, general motors corporationharold e. edmondson, hewlettpackard (retired)thomas g. gunn, gunn associates inc.alistair m. hanna, mckinsey & co. inc.george j. hess, the ingersoll milling machine co.charles w. hoover, jr., polytechnic universitystephen c. jacobsen, university of utahramchandran jaikumar, harvard universityj.b. jones, virginia polytechnic institute and state universitydonald kennedy, international association of machinists and aerospaceworkersthomas l. magnanti, massachusetts institute of technologyjoe m. mize, oklahoma state universityjacob t. schwartz, new york universityherbert b. voelcker, cornell universitypaul k. wright, university of california at berkeleyrobert schafrik, acting directorvinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement ofscience, vice chairstephen l. adler, the institute for advanced studysylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologysusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, rutgers universitykenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatoryhans mark, university of texas at austinthomas a. prince, california institute of technologyjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesl.e. scriven, university of minnesotaa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratoryshmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, the mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorviinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on engineering and technical systemsalbert r.c. westwood, sandia national laboratories, chairh. kent bowen, harvard universitynaomi f. collins, nafsa: association of international educatorsnancy r. connery, consultantrichard a. conway, union carbide corporationsamuel c. florman, kreisler borg florman construction companytrevor o. jones, libbeyowensford companynancy g. leveson, university of washingtonalton d. slay, slay enterprises inc.james j. solberg, purdue universitybarry m. trost, stanford universitygeorge l. turin, teknekron corporationwilliam c. webster, university of california at berkeleydeborah a. whitehurst, arizona community foundationrobert v. whitman, massachusetts institute of technologycharles e. williams, toll road investors partnership iiarchie l. wood, executive directorviiinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection ofits members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibilityfor advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. robert m. white is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academyof sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professionsin the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering inproviding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robert m. white are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceat the request of the national science foundation, the national researchcouncilõs computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) and manufacturing studies board (msb) formed the committee to study informationtechnology and manufacturing in april 1993. the committee of 16 individualsfrom academia and industry was charged with determining the computer scienceand engineering research needed to support advanced manufacturing.in preparing this report, the committee reviewed and synthesized relevantmaterial from recent reports and initiatives, interviewed a number of researchersand practitioners in the field, and met five times to discuss the input from thesesources as well as the independent observations and findings of the committeemembers themselves. (contributors to this report are listed in appendix a.) itshared its preliminary thinking with a broad community in an interim report.1reviewers of that document noted a number of issues as deserving of furtherstudy that are addressed in this final report. the committee included experts fromthe information technology (it) and the manufacturing domains, individuals involved in research and development as well as implementation, and individualsexperienced in the manufacture of mechanical and electronic products.2 in short,ix1 computer science and telecommunications board and manufacturing studies board, nationalresearch council. 1993. information technology and manufacturing: a preliminary report onresearch needs. national academy press, washington, d.c.2 in the interests of keeping this project manageable, the committee concentrated on discretemanufacturing. it did not address continuous manufacturing (the production of substances andmaterials) to any significant degree.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee was by design highly heterogeneous, a characteristic intended topromote discussion and synergy among its members.the committee focused on articulating a vision of itenabled manufacturingin the 21st century, identifying the obstacles to achieving the vision, and identifying research topics that address the obstacles. its deliberations centered on thethree thrusts outlined by the former federal coordinating council for science,engineering, and technology in its advanced manufacturing technology initiative:¥òintelligentó manufacturing equipment and systems;¥integrated tools for product, process, and enterprise design; and¥advanced manufacturing technology infrastructure.since these thrusts were outlined, the present administration has emphasizedto a much greater degree the importance of a national information infrastructurethat would support many activities of national importance, including manufacturing. that issue was considered by the committee as well.the range and combination of research topics recommended by the committee are an essential feature of this report. some of the topics chosen by thecommittee have been proposed by others in prior reports; the need for work insome areas is enduring. some topics fall into areas of longstanding need but areadvanced with new emphases. because of limited time, the committee wasunable to assess in depth the topics it identified. moreover, it did not specificallyaddress areas other than information technology that might prove beneficial tomanufacturing; such areas include new physical processes that might be developed to shape and fabricate discrete components. in preparing this final report,the committee drew heavily on the preliminary report it issued in late 1993. itsefforts in subsequent meetings served to develop more fully, validate, and complement the ideas presented in that earlier report. a site visit to an engine plant inmarch 1994 (described in appendix b) provided a firsthand demonstration of theproductive use of current information technology in manufacturing. in addition,a national science foundation workshop in may 19943 (attended by some committee members) helped to crystallize some of the ideas presented in the materialon the design process.the cstb and msb are grateful to the national science foundation, tothose who made presentations and/or submitted written material to the committee, and to those who reviewed this report and its predecessor. cstb will be gladto receive comments on this report. please send them via internet email tocstb@nas.edu, or via regular mail to cstb, national research council,2101 constitution avenue nw, washington, dc 20418. the committee, ofcourse, remains responsible for the reportõs content.xpreface3 see mukherjee, amar, and jack hilibrand (eds.). 1994. new paradigms for manufacturing.nsf 94123. national science foundation, washington, d.c.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11vision and recommended areas of research12introduction, 12information technology and the increasing complexityof manufacturing, 13purpose, scope, and content of this report, 15flexibility for the future, 16recognizing information technologyõs increasing capability in achanging world, 17balancing current needs and the development offuture capabilities, 23looking ahead, 25the potential impact of information technology on themanufacturing enterprise, 26the broad vision, 26nearerterm prospects for improvement, 28product and process design, 28shop floor production, 30business practices, 33new manufacturing styles, 34the virtual factory, 35the programmable or reconfigurable factory, 36the networked factory, 38microfactories, 39xiinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentsgetting from here to thereñthe need for balance and aconsidered approach, 40the research agenda, 42technology research, 42product and process design, 42shop floor control, 43modeling and simulation, 45enterprise integration and business practices, 47nontechnology issues, 472manufacturing: context, content, and history49the economics of manufacturing, 49the nature of manufacturing, 50the historical context of manufacturing, 56early paradigm changes, 56recent changes and their effects, 583integrated product and process design60introduction, 60design paradigms, 62electronic design, 62application to mechanical design, 65needs and research for mechanical design, 66research for product description, 70research for process description, 76research for tools to support integrated product andprocess design, 79research areas not specific to manufacturing, 80geometric reasoning, 80knowledge and information management, 81specific research questions, 824shop floor production84introduction, 84scheduling factory activities, 85centralized control, 85decentralized control, 92autonomous agents, 92work and logistics flow, 94controlling individual factory activities, 95equipment controllers, 96sensors, 102information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiiifacilitating continuous improvement, 105controlling and managing product configuration, 106specific research questions, 1075modeling and simulation for thevirtual factory109introduction, 109considerations in the development of virtual factories, 110learning from past problems, 110determining the requirements for effective factorymodels, 111modeling technology, 113representing and capturing manufacturing expertise, 116research areas not specific to manufacturing, 1186information infrastructure issues119introduction, 119architectures and standards, 121integration, 123redesign of business practices, 123intraenterprise integration, 124interenterprise integration, 128nonmanufacturingspecific research, 130information retrieval systems, 131software engineering, 132dependable computing systems, 134collaboration technology and computersupportedcooperative work, 1357organizational and societal infrastructure136targeting the decision maker, 137motivating technology transfer and academicindustrialinteraction, 137motivating introduction and implementation of informationtechnology, 142understanding organizational issues, 142human resources, 142communications, 143organization for ad hoc tasks, 143informal hierarchies of status, 144overcoming history and managing risk, 144providing for technology demonstrations, 147stimulating the adoption of open standards, 149information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentsdeveloping better metrics of performance, 151developing new models for accounting and valuation, 152emphasizing education, training, and retraining, 153bibliography156appendixesalist of contributors163bsite visit to romeo engine plant, march 23, 1994165cillustrative advanced longrange technology demonstrations169information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvinformationtechnologyformanufacturinginformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarya manufacturing business is devoted to the production of tangible objectsthat are high in quality and competitive in cost, meet customersõ expectations forperformance, and are delivered in a timely manner. finding and achieving theappropriate balance among these attributesñquality, cost, performance, and timeto marketñchallenge all manufacturing businesses. those companies that aresuccessful in meeting that challenge remain in business; those that are not usuallydisappear.in a manufacturing environment that is perhaps changing more rapidly nowthan during the industrial revolution, competing successfully will require thatu.s. manufacturers increasingly provide customers with shorter times betweenorder and delivery and between product conceptualization and realization, greaterproduct customization, and higher product quality and performance, while meeting more stringent environmental constraints. accomplishing these goals willrequire major changes in current manufacturing practices; such changes includethe use of new and/or more complex manufacturing processes, greater use ofinformation to reduce waste and defects, and more flexible manufacturing styles.this report outlines a broad research agenda for applying information technology (it)1 to improving the manner in which discrete manufacturing processeswill be carried out in the 21st century. these processes include the design of1 it includes the hardware that computes and communicates; the software that provides data,knowledge, and information while at the same time controlling the hardware; and the interfacesbetween computers and the tools and machines on the manufacturing shop floor.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2information technology for manufacturingproducts and processes (e.g., converting customer requirements and expectationsinto engineering specifications, converting specifications into subsystems), production (e.g., moving materials, converting or transforming material properties orshapes, assembling systems or subsystems, verifying process results), and manufacturingrelated business practices (e.g., converting a customer order into a listof required parts, cost accounting, and documenting of all procedures). thisreport also discusses the need for nontechnology research to better understandhuman resource and other nontechnical aspects of manufacturing.the potential of information technologyin manufacturingan enormous amount of information is generated and used during the design, manufacture, and use of a product to satisfy customer needs and to meetenvironmental requirements. thus it is reasonable to suppose that the use ofinformation technology can enable substantial improvements in the operation,organization, and effectiveness of informationintensive manufacturing processesand activities, largely by facilitating their integration (figure es.1). equipmentand stations within factories, entire manufacturing enterprises, and networks ofsuppliers, partners, and customers located throughout the world can be moreeffectively connected and integrated through the use of information technology.information technology can provide the tools to help enterprises achievegoals widely regarded as critical to the future of manufacturing, including:¥rapid shifts in production from one product to another;¥faster implementation of new concepts in products;¥faster delivery of products to customers;¥more intimate and detailed interactions with customers;¥fuller utilization of capital and human resources;¥streamlining of operations to focus on essential business needs; and¥elimination of unnecessary, redundant, or wasteful activities.the development and implementation of new information technology tomeet these goals will be shaped by organizational, managerial, and human resource concerns that have prevented manufacturers from exploiting fully eventhe technology that exists today. sensitivity to these concerns will be essential tothe successful development and implementation of the information technologyassociated with visions of manufacturing for the 21st century.information technology can be used to meet a range of needs of manufacturing decision makers (box es.1). these needs suggest a research agenda withboth technological and nontechnological dimensions; the primary targets of thisresearch agenda include:information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3integration throughinformationtechnologiesbusinessdesignproductsmarketingtaking ordersdocumenting proceduresdistributioncost accountingproductionreceiving work ordersschedulingmoving materialassembling productsgathering product dataconverting customer requirements to engineering specificationsconverting specifications to subsystemsverifying designstesting fabrication processesfigure es.1 information technology as a means to integrate various basic manufacturing activities.¥operational control of factories and their suppliers,¥tools for product and process design,¥modeling and simulation of the entire spectrum of factory operations(virtual manufacturing), and¥enterprise integration and use of other capabilities provided by the evolving national information infrastructure to support 21stcentury manufacturing.other aspects of manufacturing, specifically physical processes, are not addressedin this report except as they relate to information technologyõs potential role incontrolling them.key findingsthe key findings of this report are the following:finding 1: information technology has a major role to play in the manufacturing environment of the future. the informationintensive nature of manufacinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4information technology for manufacturingbox es.1 needs of manufacturing decision makers andexamples of how information technology couldcontribute to meeting themexample of informationneedtechnologyõs contributionsituational awareness. both whitecollar andto promote and enhancebluecollar personnel must be informed aboutsituational awareness, anevents in the manufacturing environment. anitbased factoryunexpected event may be anything from theinformation system couldbreakage of a tool or the delay of a shipment to adisplay the status ofdesign change made to a product.various tools and machineson the shop floor.diagnosis of problems. decision makers need toto assist in problemidentify the nature and extent of problems.solving, diagnostics aboardunexpected events can have a variety of causes.a tool could be transmittedfor example, a tool may cease functioningto a shop steward in realbecause it blew a fuse, because the bit broke, ortime.because the motor seized due to a lack oflubrication. the stoppage could also have beenthe result of another error or problem somewhereelse on the shop floor. knowing what caused theproblem is key to fixing it.analytical tools. decision makers need toto enhance analyticalevaluate and test various problemsolvingcapabilities, informationapproaches and strategies. for example, atechnologybaseddecision maker may need to choose betweensimulations could helpallowing a cell to operate at reduced speedfactory managers(lowering the throughput but also the risk ofunderstand thedamage) or operating it at full speed (increasingconsequences of differentthe likelihood that the tool will have to be shutcourses of action.down entirely for repairs).dissemination channels. solutions to problemsto enable timelymust be disseminated. for example, informationdissemination of solutionsabout the appropriate speed choice for the toolto problems, informationdescribed above is needed both by the onsitetechnology networks cancrew and by the machineõs manufacturer.be used to provide relevanttext and graphics to allaffected sites.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5turing across all component activities will place everhigher premiums on thefaster, more accurate, and more useful presentation and analysis of the information streams associated with these activities. more, and more timely, informationwill be needed for decisions on the shop floor and in executive suites alike;informationintensive programmable processes and automated online controlcan improve product quality and manufacturing flexibility; greater integrationamong design, production, and marketing will lead to a greater need to shareinformation. only by judicious use of information technology will manufacturing personnel from chief executive officers to factory floor workers be able toassimilate and use these streams of information.at the same time, information technology is only one dimension of enhancedfuture manufacturing operations; other important dimensions range from a betterunderstanding of basic science and engineering phenomena in various domains toinsights into the organizations and institutions that will be the users of advancedinformation technology. progress in these other dimensions is also needed.finding 2: current information technology is inadequate to support themanufacturing styles and practices that will be needed in the 21st century. moreover, although individual demonstrations in particular manufacturing activitiestoday hint at the potential impact of information technology, high degrees ofintegration have not yet been achieved. open architectures and standards (currently absent) are needed to attain higher degrees of integration, because as thecapabilities and applications of the national information infrastructure increase,the penalties associated with closed or proprietary manufacturing systems willonly grow. better information technology will also contribute to major improvements in product and process design and to more efficient and flexible shop flooroperations, as well as to the planning and business capabilities of factory managers. research on information technology in a manufacturing context is needed toenlarge the flexibility available in the future for manufacturing managers.finding 3: exploiting the full potential of information technology to improve manufacturing will require addressing many nontechnological matters, aswell as the technical areas. for very good reasons, manufacturing managers arecautious about the promises of information technology and concerned about underestimating the potential risks of investing in it; these managers will requireinformation technology that meets their needs as they understand those needs.questions of technological risk, work force adaptation, and organizational resistance cannot be dismissed; if information technology developments are to beviable and acceptable in the factory environment, such questions must be directlyaddressed and resolved.the potential benefits of improving manufacturing performance are enormousñthey relate to the basic good health of the domestic and internationaleconomies. on the other hand, the risks are significant; the business landscape islittered with the hulks of companies for which the use of technology did not solvedeeply rooted problems. this report seeks to identify research directions ininformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6information technology for manufacturinginformation technology that can help to support and sustain a vibrant u.s. manufacturing enterprise.recommendationsthe committeeõs recommendations for research fall into two broad categories: those related specifically to increasing the sophistication with which it ispossible to apply information technology to manufacturing needs (a technologyresearch agenda) and those related specifically to increasing the likelihood thatsuch technologies will indeed be used appropriately in future manufacturingendeavors (a nontechnology research agenda). given the charge of the committee to focus on a technology research agenda, recommendations related to thefirst category are emphasized. in many respects, however, the nontechnologicalareas require more attention, since such areas are usually the most difficult inwhich to effect change.a technology research agendathe ultimate goal of the information technology research agenda outlined inthis report is to expand the envelope of technological options and capabilities formanagers of 21stcentury manufacturing businesses. but it is reasonable to separate research efforts that can have an incremental impact on actual manufacturingoperations in the nearer future from those that may have a revolutionary impact inthe farther future. research that is likely to have an impact in the shorter term ismost likely to benefit from awareness of social and organizational issues.with this perspective in mind, the research areas relevant to product andprocess design (chapter 3) and shop floor production (chapter 4) appear mostpromising in the nearer term. factory modeling and simulation (chapter 5) arefartherterm, higherpayoff research areas. nevertheless, it must be recognizedthat manufacturing is òan indivisible, monolithic activity, incredibly diverse andcomplex in its fine detail . . . [whose] many parts are inextricably interdependentand interconnected, so that no part may be safely separated from the rest andtreated in isolation, without an adverse impact on the remainder and thus on thewhole.ó2 this fact largely precludes the identification of specific òsilver bulletsóout of which all other progress in the field would flow.integrated product and process designin the area of integrated product and process design, the following questionswarrant attention:2 harrington, joseph. 1984. understanding the manufacturing process: key to successful cad/cam implementation. m. dekker, new york.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7¥ how should the information associated with products be captured andrepresented? issues relevant to this question include the representation ofhighlevel functions for manufactured mechanical or electromechanical products, the creation of abstractions that contain the right amount of detail fortheir use at different points in the design process, formalisms for the representation of both domainindependent and domainspecific information, theinterchangeability of product data models for use by different parts of themanufacturing operation (e.g., design, fabrication, test, maintenance, upgrade), and the relationships between highlevel function abstractions andthe physical reality of geometry and materials.¥ how can manufacturing processes be represented? process descriptioninvolves languages for description and models of specific manufacturingprocesses, both as they actually exist and as they might be improved. languages will have to express in compact form not only nominal process behavior but also variant behavior. they should have features that supportchecking for correctness and completeness and should be translatable acrosstechnical domains. models of specific processes must include the information necessary to support dynamic control of individual operations and totake local environmental conditions into account, and they must faithfullyrepresent real manufacturing processes as they exist.¥ how should tools be constructed that support product design? an integralaspect of product design is how to make tradeoffs (e.g., among cost, performance, and reliability; between alternate space allocations; between makingor buying a component; between longterm operating costs and initial costs;and so on). designers would benefit greatly from tools that would help themevaluate these tradeoffs in a rigorous and systematic manner. presentationand display tools for visualizing different design alternatives would alsosupport the product designer. finally, it will be essential to develop toolsthat support analysis of the òoffnominaló behaviors that result from manufacturing inaccuracies or deliberate variations introduced into a generic design.shop floor productionin the area of managing shop floor production, the following questions warrant attention:¥ how should shop floor tools be controlled? machine controllers are thefundamental interface between a factory automation system and the fabrication or assembly tools themselves. research is needed that will result in aninformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8information technology for manufacturingopen architecture for machine controllers and in a good language for describing unit processing operations.¥ how should shop floor operations be scheduled? effective realtime dynamic scheduling of shop floor operations is central to ensuring the efficientuse of shop floor resources. effective realtime scheduling requires continuous tracking of the status of jobs, work cells, tooling, and resources andshould support reactive scheduling and control (e.g., rerouting work flows tocompensate for a problem or exploiting fortuitous windows of opportunity inindividual work cells). in addition, realtime schedulers must give humandecision makers convenient and transparent access to relevant informationand tools enabling them to make tradeoff decisions regarding release, reordering, sequencing and batching, and other matters. finally, new productionplanning and scheduling optimization techniques are needed.¥ how should sensors be integrated into the shop floor environment? sensors provide accurate realtime information on what is happening on the shopfloor and at individual work cells that is not available through other means.such information is needed to guide unit processes as well as to providestatus information and situational awareness at higher levels of authority(whether automated or human). the future manufacturing facility will usemany different types of sensors, creating a requirement for a standardizedcontrol system into which sensors can be plugged with minimal bother.reliable operation will also be at a premium.factory modeling and simulationin the area of factory modeling and simulation, the following questionswarrant investigation:¥ how can an individual production line be simulated? although it will notbe possible to fully simulate even a modest factory for many years, it may bepossible to simulate individual production lines. research in this area wouldbuild on the singleactivity models already in use in manufacturing to integrate their functions and to provide a comprehensive overview of the production line.¥ how can virtual factory simulations be validated? a key question in anysimulation is the extent to which it provides an accurate representation ofreality. simulations can be tweaked and otherwise forced to fit empiricaldata, but since the purpose of a factory simulation is to make reliable predictions about a factory operation for which there are no empirical data, managers will need strong assurances that a simulationõs prediction of a new facinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9tory configuration faithfully reflects what would actually occur. research isneeded to develop methods of validation that provide such confidence.¥ how is the complex and voluminous information associated with a factorybest presented to users? user perspectives and needs are not homogeneous,yet the information presented to different users will all be derived from thesame data sources, whether a factory model is operating in control mode orsimulation mode. the visibility and transparency of activities to all relevantusers across the enterprise are prerequisite to achieving effective control.¥ how can the consistency and accuracy of concurrently used models beguaranteed? a factory model is most likely to be some aggregation ofsmaller models, each built to represent or simulate or control some singlefactory activity. ensuring that the assumptions underlying these models andthe data streams driving them are consistent across the board will be a majorchallenge.¥ how should dynamic interactions among these interconnected and interrelated models be understood? as smaller models are aggregated into a largefactory model, it is inevitable that they will interact with each other (since theprocesses and products they represent also interact with each other). understanding the nature and scope of these interactions will be a major challengewith important implications for ensuring model fidelity and validation.information infrastructure to support enterprise integrationelectronic networks and related elements of information infrastructure arelikely to be the means for achieving a relatively complete integration of themanufacturing enterprise, including activities within a given firm as well asactivities undertaken by suppliers and customers outside the firm.the following questions suggest research areas relevant to enterprise integration:¥ what standards should support the passing of information between thevarious architectures and the interconnection of different systems within themanufacturing enterprise? today, incompatible representations of knowledge and information are common in computeraided design, computeraugmented process planning, and computeraided manufacturing. these incompatibilities are major obstacles to enterprisewide integration.¥ how can standards be made to accommodate some upgrade capability? inthe absence of an upgrade capability, technology vendors worry about preinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10information technology for manufacturingmature freezing of technology and customers worry about intrinsic obsolescence.¥ how should realtime communications architectures be implemented?robust realtime control systems for tools such as cutters will demand network architectures that can tolerate dropped messages or delayed messagearrival. thus research is needed to formulate the principles for constructionand operation of networks that can support timecritical message delivery ina context of interconnecting, multipurpose networks.¥ what tools and capabilities are needed for human and machinebasedinformation and resource searching? these essential capabilities shouldbecome part of the underlying network service infrastructure in order toincrease network performance and efficiency.a nontechnology research agendathe issues relevant to exploiting the full power of advanced informationtechnologies go beyond traditional engineering research. researchers in economics, organizational studies, and management science may contribute a greatdeal to understanding how manufacturing enterprises can actually make use ofsuch technology. nontechnical problems are often exacerbated, for example, bythe globalization of industry, in which the relationships with suppliers, customers, design centers, and factories are increasingly distributed over a wide band ofcultures, time zones, and expertise. those wishing to accelerate the adoption ofadvanced information technology for manufacturing must ensure that human,organizational, and societal factors are aligned so as to support its acceptance andmaximize its benefits. many mechanisms can facilitate such alignment, including sabbatical programs for industrialists and academics in each otherõs domain,teaching factories created to prepare future manufacturing specialists, and advanced technology demonstrations that illustrate the benefits of information technology for factory performance.in addition, considerable research in social science will be necessary tofacilitate the largescale introduction of information technology into manufacturing. new technologies generally require new social structures if those technologies are to be fully exploited. innovators will have to confront issues such as thedivision of labor between human and computer actors, the extent and content ofcommunications between those actors, and how best to organize teams of humanand computer resources. continual upgrading of skills and intellectual tools willalso be necessary at all levels of the corporate hierarchy.a particularly important step in supporting 21stcentury manufacturing willbe to develop accounting and financial schemes that enable manufacturers toaccount for their increasingly critical intellectual and information assets in theinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11same way that the generally accepted accounting principles of today allow themto treat building and pieces of equipmentñas capital expenditures (i.e., expenditures that relate to the longterm value of a company).finally, standards and metrics are a mix of both technical and nontechnicalissues. standards are needed to support and facilitate interoperability and openarchitectures and systems, while metrics are needed to determine the impact ofinformation technology on various dimensions of manufacturing. the technicalwork required in both areas is substantial, but the organizational and social issuesthat need resolving before appropriate standards and metrics are in common usealso deserve much more attention than has been given to date.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12information technology for manufacturing121vision and recommendedareas of researchintroductionthe manufacturing sector is the crucible in which many technologies arerefined and fused for the purpose of making things that people need or want. in1993 manufacturing accounted for 18 percent of the $6.4 trillion gross domesticproduct and for nearly 18 million jobs in the united states (u.s. department ofcommerce, 1994; council of economic advisors, 1994). broadly defined, manufacturing includes all of the activities involved in determining the needs of potential customers, conceiving and producing products to meet those needs, and marketing and delivering those products to the ultimate customer. money is madeand needs are satisfied by meeting quality, cost, performance, and timetomarketgoals for the product being manufactured. these attributesñquality, cost, performance, and time to marketñmay be taken to be the yardsticks against whichany new advance must be measured.given that u.s. leadership in certain areas of manufacturing is no longer therule, it is reasonable to ask what needs to be done to regain international leadership in manufacturing. suggestions abound, but in the absence of a clear strategyin this area, federal decision makers have struggled to find the right mix ofinvestment in manufacturing research.this quandary has extended beyond the funding agencies to the universitiesand to academic research. there are few departments of manufacturing at u.s.universities because many academics do not believe that manufacturing is anacademic discipline. moreover, the disciplines basic to making progress in manufacturing belong not only in the òhardó sciences and engineering in physics,information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research13mathematics, mechanical and electrical engineering, industrial engineering, computer science and engineering, chemistry, and materials science but also in theòsofteró sciences of sociology, psychology, management science, and economics.even though these separate disciplines are individually supported by fundingagencies and universities, there is a lack of focused attention on how to integratebasic knowledge from many disciplines into knowledge that furthers manufacturing goals.information technology and the increasingcomplexity of manufacturingat the same time that this lack of strategy is apparent, all dimensions ofmanufacturing (e.g., products, markets, processes) are becoming more complex,diverse, and international. indeed, common products such as automobiles canhave thousands of parts, and modern aircraft and integrated circuits include millions of parts or active elements. each of these products takes years to design,requiring the effort of hundreds or even thousands of people worldwide. complex new products based on information content and their accompanying informationdominated design and manufacturing methods already require us to dealwith entirely new scales of complexity.1 some products require such levels ofprecision, delicacy, or cleanliness that people can no longer make or assemble theparts; in some cases, they cannot even see them.to realize these and other products, manufacturing firms must cope withdesign processes (e.g., converting customer requirements and expectations intoengineering specifications, converting specifications into subsystems), production processes (e.g., moving materials, converting material properties or shapes,assembling products or subsystems, verifying process results), and business practices (e.g., converting a customer order into a list of required parts, cost accounting, and documentation of procedures). the illustration on the cover indicatesthe relationships among these various elements of manufacturing and the role ofinformation technology (it; box 1.1) in integrating them (see also figure 1.1).by providing ways to facilitate and manage the complexity of these informationintensive processes, as well as to achieve integration of manufacturing activitieswithin and among manufacturing enterprises, information technology will playan increasingly indispensable role in supporting and even enabling the complex1 a case in point is very large scale integrated (vlsi) chips. a single vlsi chip may have severalmillion transistors with submicron feature sizes. a complex system may have hundreds of chips andtens of millions of transistors. logic design, functional tests, fault tests, timing, placement, andwiring data run to gigabytes per chip. validation of a design may involve many millions of simulated test cases. finally, different aspects of chip design are coupled, so that changes required in thelogic design (for example) often affect the analysis of derived fault, timing, and place and wire viewsof the logic. similar observations apply to airplanes, ships, and cars.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14information technology for manufacturingbox 1.1 information technology for manufacturingñdefinition and elementsalthough there are many definitions of information technology (it), this reportdefines it as encompassing a wide range of computer and communications technologies. it includes the hardware that computes and communicates; the software that provides data, knowledge, and information while at the same time controlling the hardware; and the robots, machinery, sensors, and actuators oreffectors that serve as the interface between computers and the outside world,specifically the manufacturing shop floor. note also that the effective use of information technologies demands considerable investment in training and maintenance. examples of it include the following:¥ computersworkstationmainframeserverpersonal digital assistant¥ communications devices and infrastructuretelephonelocal area networkwide area networkwireless network¥ softwareoperating systemartificial intelligence expert system for product configurationcomputerassisted design packageanimation and simulation softwarevirtual reality simulationssoftware for total quality management and inventory controlscheduling package¥ sensorsmachine visiontactile and force sensorstemperature sensorspressure sensors¥ actuators or effectorsrobot armautomated ground vehiclenumerically controlled cuttermicroactuatorsinformation technologies are focusing to an increasing degree on knowledgeand information rather than data alone. that is, advances in information technologies over the last 40 years have enabled the manipulation and processing ofincreasingly abstract and higherlevel forms of information. for example, industries cannot rely only on postmortem quality control data to detect product defects:modern quality assurance requires that potential problems be traced back throughthe manufacturing system for highlevel analysis at each manufacturing unit. itthat is used in support of such an approach depends as much on knowledge anddiagnosis as on simple data gathering.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research15integration throughinformationtechnologiesbusinessdesignproductsmarketingtaking ordersdocumenting proceduresdistributioncost accountingproductionreceiving work ordersschedulingmoving materialassembling productsgathering product dataconverting customer requirements to engineering specificationsconverting specifications to subsystemsverifying designstesting fabrication processesfigure 1.1 information technology as a means to integrate various basic manufacturingactivities.practice of manufacturing. in the decades to come, information technology mayhave an impact on manufacturing performance and productivity comparable tothat of mass production.purpose, scope, and content of this reportthis study was conducted to identify areas of information technologyrelatedresearch needed to support future manufacturing. the committee chose to definemanufacturing broadly as the entire product realization process, from specification through design and production to marketing and distribution. although itbelieves that information technology has important applications to both continuous and discrete manufacturing, the committee focused on discrete manufacturing as the type in which the problems of applying information technology aremost pressing. it did not include in its deliberations such important dimensionsof manufacturing as the study of physical processes in manufacturing, although itdid address information technology as it might be applied to controlling theseprocesses.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16information technology for manufacturingchapter 1 of this report outlines some of the technical and other challengesconfronting the manufacturing enterprise at the outset of the 21st century, expresses a vision of future manufacturing based on what is known today and whatmight be expected from information technologyrelated r&d efforts in the future, and recommends a research agenda aimed at achieving this vision. chapters2 through 7 elaborate on the contents of chapter 1. chapter 2 presents the contextfor manufacturing. the r&d agenda implied by the vision of chapter 1 is thesubject of chapters 3 (product and process design), 4 (shop floor production), 5(factory modeling and simulation), 6 (information infrastructure issues), and 7(nontechnology issues). chapters 3 through 7 explore in more detail the researchquestions that must be answered successfully if the vision of a robust and internationally competitive 21stcentury manufacturing enterprise is to be achieved. alist of contributors to the report, a description of an engine plant visited by thecommittee, and sketches of possible advanced longrange technology demonstrations are given in appendixes a, b, and c, respectively.flexibility for the futurein the manufacturing environment of the 21st century, several trends willplace increasing pressure on manufacturers:¥larger numbers of product variants will be required to meet user demandsfor greater product customization. this will lead to pressures to reduce production lot sizes while maintaining unit costs at an economic level. manufacturerswill need production facilities that are economic and profitable at very low volumes and that have low òfixedó costs.¥increasing dispersion of manufacturing operations is likely. successfulmanufacturing companies will be forced to develop effective global manufacturing networks, òknitting togetheró the skills and capabilities of individual unitslocated around the globe to create a seamless international production capability;organizationally, the factory floor will see selfdirected work teams òmanagingóthe daytoday operations of the firm with minimal realtime supervision, withwhitecollar labor focusing much more on the creation of new and improvedproducts. these trends will almost certainly lead to a reduction in the averagesize of manufacturing facilities, the increasing use of òtemporaryó assets (vialeasing or other costsharing arrangements), and the development of commonprocesses so that manufacturing activities can be moved rapidly to locations thatneed increased production.¥shorter time to market will become even more important than it is today.one aspect of this issue will be the ability to deploy technology rapidly. anotherwill be the ability to execute customer orders rapidly. manufacturing concernswill emphasize work force skills and empowerment in order to meet marketplaceneeds for speed.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research17¥global environmental concerns seem certain to motivate the developmentof ògreenó and recyclable products and manufacturing systems that use fewermaterial resources.2 manufacturing systems should be able to accept òusedóproducts that they have fabricated, disassemble the received items into component parts, and determine which parts are reusable or which are convertible intorecyclable raw material with the ultimate goal of a product that leads to zero scrapmaterial. of course, products will need to be designed with such goals in mind.responding to these challenges will require unprecedented flexibility. flexibility in manufacturing is associated with rapid responses at the appropriate levelto new information and constraints, which may range from changes in consumerpreferences or international trade regulations or union requirements to a temporary fault in a crucial piece of machinery on the factory floor. whatever thesource of change or constraint, information systems in the factory must enable anappropriate response. information technology will enable better planning andorganization as well, helping to control the events to which responses are needed.recognizing information technologyõs increasingcapability in a changing worldthe role of information technology in manufacturing can be seen in theincreasing use of computers to underpin product design and fabrication processesand to support related business processes such as sales and distribution. to date,the primary uses of information technology in manufacturing have been to control machinery and tools on the shop floor, to assist with administration in areassuch as accounting and bookkeeping, to speed the transfer of information, and tosupport the management of product and process complexity (e.g., through computeraided design (cad) or manufacturing resources planning). table 1.1 compares past and present characteristics and roles of it in manufacturing.although these roles will continue to be important, the committee believesthat information technology will become an increasingly significant source ofsupport for different types of decision making needed in manufacturing (box1.2). this belief in the benefits of information technology is based on threepremises:2 a recent agreement between two european auto manufacturers establishes a recycling networkaimed at decreasing waste. it has begun to increase awareness of the importance of creating environmentally correct products for sustainable development around the world. in other cases, the producers of tires and batteries have been challenged to produce a product that can be disposed of withoutlandfills. taxes have been imposed on the purchase of new batteries and tires to help offset the costof disposal. yet such efforts are still the exception given the scope of manufacturing worldwide.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18information technology for manufacturingtable 1.1 past and present information technologies and their roles indevices and activities integral to manufacturingpastpresentinformationtechnologycomputingmainframe computerspersonal computers and workstationsplatformfor most computingdatabasesmostly paper records,large amounts of business datastored in file cabinetsresident on electronically searchable,remotely accessible databasesinformationhuman informationdatabase retrieval systems now theretrievalspecialists (e.g., public andbasis for managing complex problemsprivate librarians andinvolving more subassemblies andcorporate informationmore interactions with suppliersexpediters)data300 bits per second; hence,1 to 10 megabits per second, oftencommunicationmajor restrictions on thecarried over local or wide areasize, complexity, andnetworks. hence, large models (e.g.,usefulness of the itemsaircraft or automobile bodies) sentcommunicatedquickly, permitting designers states orcontinents apart to collaborate moreeasilymanufacturingtechnologysensorsmostly analogheavily digitalrecordingchart recorderscomputerreadable mediamediacontrol logicmostly classical controlclassical control theory still used;and machinetheory (as exemplified bymodern control theory (state spacecontrollerthe proportionalintegralanalysis), fuzzy logic, and neuralderivative controller);network controllers more commonmachine controllers usingmany subsystems basedon programmable logiccontrollersinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research19table 1.1 continuedpastpresentcontrolanalog amplifiers,personal computers. paper tape largelysystemselectromechanical relays,replaced by computercontrolledand pneumatic and hydraulicmachines operating on cldata; dataactuators; automatedsometimes received through amachining operationscomputer network. programmableperformed using apttechnology enabling faster and moreprogramming that generatedaccurate control, with the end resultcutter location data (cldata)that much more complex parts can beon paper tapemade much more quicklyengineeringpracticeanalysisrelatively minimal; manualextensive and computersupported to aprocesses; based largely onlarge degree (computeraided design topast practiceñknowledge ofrepresent solid geometry of parts andwhat did and did not work inassemblies, kinematic motions ofthe pastparts, and some of the machinery usedto make and assemble them);computeraided engineering models ofmechanical parts and assemblies usedto simulate kinematic analysisdesign forproducts largely standard,higher degree of variety andproduct varietywith few options for buyerscustomization possibleproduct testingexhaustive testing ofcomputerized simulation andphysical modelsengineering analysis as substitutes formuch physical testing; physical testingnow used primarily as a finalverification of designengineeringòoverthewalló engineering,concurrent engineering (working onstylewith market research,requirements, design, and productionproduct design, andsimultaneously) increasingly recognizedproduction working inas important and slowly becoming aisolationcommon organizational objective,although not by any means the normtodayproblemlong facetoface meetingselectronic conferences, either byresolutionbetween participants totelephone alone or with video support,address problems requiringto address problems; meetings andattention by more than onemeeting overhead thus reduceddepartment in a companycontinuesinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20information technology for manufacturingproductionoperationsproduct dataalmost entirely paperelectronic form for many typesrecording andrecords and engineering(especially for product or componentusedrawingsshape and geometry)schedulingscheduling to maximize thescheduling to balance high levels ofphilosophyuse of (expensive) machinesmachine and personnel use and lowand people and to maximizelevels of inventory (minimizing wip)work in process (wip)contingencyscheduling softwaresoftware giving many shop floormanagementtaskoriented and notpersonnel access to constantly updatedresponsive to contingencies:information on status of machines,software told what was tolocation of breakdowns, and schedulebe done, and the humanrealizationoperator was expected tocarry out the taskrelationshipsystems completely separatesystems still separate, but operatingbetweenand functionedconcurrentlyproductnonconcurrentlyengineeringand productreleaseinformationpaper traveled with thein many factories, barcodeflowproduct through assemblyidentification of parts moving throughlinesproduction that keep track of theirpositions and tell machinery whichsteps to perform; bar codes, coupledwith digital status keeping, often usedto develop systems that minimizeòguess workó on inventory levels andimprove use of assetstable 1.1 continuedpastpresent¥information technology will facilitate appropriate reuse of knowledge(e.g., reusing the design of a previously produced part rather than designing anew one from scratch), thus enabling decision makers to build on precedents andpast decisions that have subsequently been validated by experience.¥information technology will enable a high degree of integration amongthe various processes of manufacturing: product design and process design, shopinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research21box 1.2 needs of manufacturing decision makers andexamples of how information technology couldcontribute to meeting themexample of informationneedtechnologyõs contributionsituational awareness. both whitecollar andto promote and enhancebluecollar personnel must be informed aboutsituational awareness, anevents in the manufacturing environment. anitbased factoryunexpected event may be anything from theinformation system couldbreakage of a tool or the delay of a shipment to adisplay the status ofdesign change made to a product.various tools and machineson the shop floor.diagnosis of problems. decision makers need toto assist in problemidentify the nature and extent of problems.solving, diagnostics aboardunexpected events can have a variety of causes.a tool could be transmittedfor example, a tool may cease functioningto a shop steward in realbecause it blew a fuse, because the bit broke, ortime.because the motor seized due to a lack oflubrication. the stoppage could also have beenthe result of another error or problem somewhereelse on the shop floor. knowing what caused theproblem is key to fixing it.analytical tools. decision makers need toto enhance analyticalevaluate and test various problemsolvingcapabilities, informationapproaches and strategies. for example, atechnologybaseddecision maker may need to choose betweensimulations could helpallowing a cell to operate at reduced speedfactory managers(lowering the throughput but also the risk ofunderstand thedamage) or operating it at full speed (increasingconsequences of differentthe likelihood that the tool will have to be shutcourses of action.down entirely for repairs).dissemination channels. solutions to problemsto enable timelymust be disseminated. for example, informationdissemination of solutionsabout the appropriate speed choice for the toolto problems, informationdescribed above is needed both by the onsitetechnology networks cancrew and by the machineõs manufacturer.be used to provide relevanttext and graphics to allaffected sites.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22information technology for manufacturingfloor operations, and business practices, thereby increasing the ease with which aproduct can be brought to market and reducing costs.¥ information technology will increase the opportunity for human decisionmakers to think about the products and processes of manufacturing in abstract,higherlevel terms without focusing on lowerlevel and repetitive details, therebyincreasing the speed with which decisions can be made and implemented andimproving the quality of those decisions. this premise is perhaps the mostcontroversial of the three.these premises have been articulated and tested before, with varying degreesof success. what is it that gives rise to the committeeõs belief that informationtechnology will be the basis of the next paradigm shift in manufacturing and asource of enhanced productivity?the most straightforward answer is that the world has changed. the costperformance relationship for information technology has improved so much overthe last decade that it now seems feasible to devote many more computationalresources to problem areas that were previously starved for such resources. moreimportantly, social and technological factors relevant to the successful implementation of it in manufacturing are now much better understood. concertedattention to these factors will dramatically improve the prospects for using itsuccessfully in manufacturing in the future.for example:¥socially, the culture of manufacturing is, for many good reasons, highlyconservative, whereas it is an enabler and facilitator of radical change (althoughsuch changes may take place over time). moreover, although manufacturing ishundreds of years old, computers have been available for use in factories for onlyabout 40 years and thus have not yet been fully integrated into the factory.(social dimensions of the resistance to it are addressed further in chapter 7.)¥technologically, early ventures in applying it to manufacturing reachedtoo far too fast. in contrast to the japanese approach that blended it applicationsin manufacturing with existing work forces, the u.s. approach was capitalintensive and tended to downplay operations and maintenance issues. in addition, thesuccess of it in many individual aspects of manufacturing has not been reflectedin the integration of these applications into a smoothly running system, and suchintegration has been (and continues to be) quite difficult. in the absence ofintegration, it is difficult or impossible for different computer manufacturingapplications to exchange information, and the result may be as cumbersome ashaving no automation at all (box 1.3 describes a notatypical experience in todayõsfactories).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research23balancing current needs and the development of future capabilitiesat the same time that it acknowledges itõs promise, the committee alsorecognizes very clearly that for good and proper reasons, managers of manufacturing enterprises are much more concerned about turning out products todaythan about improving their operations tomorrow. in particular, they regard newtechnology as beneficial only insofar as it can help them to achieve their tacticalbox 1.3 elements of a nonintegrated computing environmentfor manufacturing, circa 1990applicationcomputing environmentcomputer numericallyapt running on closed architecturescontrolled machine toolsrobotsmachinespecific languages such as valiior amldaybyday scheduling of ordersibm personal computers running dos;applications programmed in basicproduction planningmore powerful unixbased workstations;applications programmed in c++ibm personal computers with dos and basicsymbolics machines and applications in lispfor sophisticated constraintbased reasoningcomputeraided product designunixbased sun, dec, or hp workstations;applications programmed in c. iris silicongraphics machines for viewing of solidmodels. international graphics exchangestandard applications running on thesesystems are difficult to exchange.sales, marketing, andapple iic computerssecretarial functionspayrollibm 3000 series running vm/cms operatingsystem and cobolfinancial planningibm personal computers and lotus 123result: each computer system is considerably different from its neighbors; eachresponds to local events but is not open and/or cannot communicate well outsideits domain.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24information technology for manufacturinggoals of meeting schedules and generating revenue for next quarterõs balancesheet. thus, it is not surprising that many manufacturing managers, especiallythose who have a great deal of practical experience with the daytoday problemsin manufacturing, make an argument that goes something like this: òwe havereal and immediate problems in u.s. manufacturing today that need to be solvedif we are to compete successfully in the future. these immediate problems arethe ones that should be given the highest priority for the near future, and researchon advanced information technology whose payoff lies decades in the future, ifever, is a poor use of todayõs limited resources.ó in the absence of an explicationof the detailed benefits of new technology, in particular information technology,and the impact of those technologies on the bottom line, a plant manager mayquite reasonably adopt a òshow me first before you think of modifying myfactoryó attitude.3the committee recognizes the existence of substantial tension between theconservative nature of manufacturing as an activity and the radical change implied by it in the long term. clearly, the immediate problems of manufacturingwarrant attention; if u.s. manufacturers do not survive because they are unable tosolve todayõs immediate problems, all of our investments in technology researchwill go for naught. much of what is needed today must be delivered today bytodayõs suppliers; research (i.e., longterm work) holds promise only for thelonger term.yet some degree of investment for the longerterm future is warranted, andinvestments made today in it research for manufacturing may have high payoffin the future. indeed, the committee believes that pursuit of a coherent researchagenda in this area would exploit u.s. strengths in computing and communica3 such concerns are buttressed by the history of the first wave of computerintegrated manufacturing (cim). cim, a concept advanced in the late 1960s for efficient factory production, encompasseda number of different visions of manufacturing under computer control and had both proponents anddetractors in various segments of the manufacturing community. in its first decade or so, the strategic advantage of cim was seen to be the considerable reduction of òbluecollar labor costs.ó strategic planners hoped that u.s. products would then be made and assembled as cheaply as those in thenewly industrialized countries where labor costs were relatively small. the capabilities and implications of the technology were overstated by the strategic planners of the time, and they did notrecognize the sea change in the nature of business operations as corporations became moretransnational and the idea of simply using cheap labor was already fading. in this context, both thebenefits and failures of cim were obscured.in concrete terms, the outcome of the first wave of cim was mostly the installation of computerized machinery and robot arms on the factory floor, often in inappropriate applications or without thenecessary expertise to use these systems. much of the initial cim investment provided a poor return,and today true computerintegrated manufacturing is far from commonplace in u.s. factories (asdescribed in box 1.3).for more discussion of cim, see merchant (1971), bjorke (1979), and harrington (1984). forreference to the increasing transnationality of manufacturing, see bartlett and ghoshal (1992).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research25tions and enable the united states to regain a role in setting the world standard inmanufacturing. further, since technology is relatively easy to diffuse over national borders (and competitive advantages due to the possession of a giventechnology thus tend to be transient), a continuing role for research on it relatedto manufacturing should be anticipated by policymakers and manufacturing managers.resolving the tension between taking care of immediate needs and investingin research with longerterm payoffs will require managers to understand thestrategic importance of new technology even as they are enmeshed in their tactical environment, and technologists to develop new technologies with businessgoals in mind.looking aheadthe committee fully recognizes that it by itself is not a panacea. forexample, a study of the auto industry by the massachusetts institute of technology found that highly automated auto plants achieved only average productivity,and even though the automation was capable of substantial flexiblity, these plantsproduced only two body styles of one product.4 but even in the research domain,research to fill the gaps in the nonitrelated scientific and engineering knowledge about products and processes to be supported by information technology isessential if the promise of it is to be exploited fully. for example, a deeper basicunderstanding about materials and fluid behavior may be needed to support newfabrication processes or to improve old ones.5 a deeper basic understandingabout fatigue and corrosion may be necessary to support product designers attempting to reduce maintenance requirements. a deeper basic understanding ofrelations between tolerances and function may be key to developing new assembly and shaping processes to be controlled by it.a critical concern for developers of technology should be identification ofthe decision maker who will decide whether or not to adopt a given informationtechnology innovation. such decision makers are found at nearly all levels in acompanyõs hierarchy, but they have different concerns depending on where theysit, and they look to new technologies to answer different questions (see chapter7, figure 7.1, which indicates the types of questions that may be asked at variouslevels of an organizationõs hierarchy, the relationships between the various levels4 see dertouzos (1989). similar examples in which the use of information technology does notcorrelate with marketplace success have been found in the service industries as well; see cstb(1994a). the lesson is clearñcompanies (either manufacturing or service) that use informationtechnology inappropriately are not likely to reap significant advantages from such technology.5 new processes may include laser processing, waterjet cutting, and depositionbased fabrication.chemical vapor deposition is an example of a process that was introduced only recently but is nowcommon.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26information technology for manufacturingof the hierarchy, and the need for consistency and coherency throughout theenterprise). while the identification of these basic concerns is not it research perse, technology researchers who wish their innovations to be adopted must craftand present their research in ways that address the needs and business aspirationsof the decision makers in manufacturing. without solving problems relevant tochief executive officers, technology researchers will seldom see their creationsadopted.finally, in considering itõs potential for contributing to improvements inmanufacturing, time line is a concern. the committeeõs vision is based on projections of how what is known today in it and its applications to manufacturingmight plausibly develop in the future. but forecasting time lines is difficult, andcommittee membersõ views on this issue reflect a spectrum of opinion. evenunder the most optimistic view, it is not really plausible that most manufacturers,especially smaller ones, will have achieved this vision by 2010. however, it maybe that major parts of it will have been achieved by a number of large manufacturing concerns, and that smaller firms will be learning how to use new information technology (or at least that they will be learning how to conduct their business in an itrich environment). under a more pessimistic view, largescaleadoption may not happen until much later.the committee emphasizes that its admittedly expansive vision for it infuture manufacturing should be recognized as just thatña visionñrather than asa definite prediction for the future. it is a vision driven both by threat (in that thevast power of informationdriven manufacturing is increasingly recognized inother countries) and opportunity (in that the capabilities of information technology are growing at a rapid rate and that it itself represents an area of u.s.comparative advantage), and describes the areas that are most likely to be essential to achieving a competitive (or indeed a leading) position in informationdriven manufacturing.the potential impact of information technologyon the manufacturing enterprisethe broad visionin a future manufacturing enterprise characterized by ubiquitous and integrated computing, it will be important in every aspect of manufacturing. computers will be everywhereñon factory floors, in products, in offices, in wholesale and retail outlets, in homes, and on the street. computers will be embeddedinto products as invisibly as electric motors are today. familiarity with personalcomputing and use of a national information infrastructure will be widespread,and the intimidation factor that currently often prevents the consideration of itsolutions will be greatly reduced. manufacturing decision makers will use it tomake realtime determinations of, for example,information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research27¥how best to respond to customer demand (e.g., corporate officers);¥which process flow path to follow and when (e.g., area supervisors);¥how to respond to outofcontrol systems (e.g., area process engineers);¥what material requirements exist (e.g., equipment operators);¥what optimal inventory levels to maintain (e.g., corporate managers andfactory managers);¥how production activities are performing (e.g., factory managers); and¥what the project and unit cost will be (e.g., corporate managers andfactory managers).in addition, the it supporting diverse queries will be seamlessly integrated,so that information needed from one part of the enterprise by another part will betransported with minimal difficulty. for example, in the manufacturing enterprise envisioned by the committee, plans for new processes or products will betransferred electronically from development into production, significantly reducing the interval between the design and realization of a process or product. simulation models at various levels of detail (from floor operations to strategic planning) will couple to each other, so that results of one simulation model can serveas input to another.if this vision of itenabled manufacturing comes to pass, future manufacturing operations will realize many further and significant improvements in:¥time to market, through the analysis and use of appropriate òwhat ifóscenarios;¥factory layout, through the use of virtual factory models;¥capacity and asset utilization, through the use of intelligent schedulersand rapidly reconfigurable factories;¥yield, through the use of adaptive process control;¥times for product and process transfer, through the direct transfer ofdesign information to the production process;¥matching product features and capabilities to customer needs, throughincreased customization and feasibility of economic smalllot production;¥handson training, through the use of realistic models;¥equipment performance, through use of expert systems and artificial intelligence technology; and¥reduction in inventory and working capital, through better schedulingand forecasting algorithms.improvements in the areas above through the use of it would represent afundamental paradigm shift from todayõs manufacturing enterprise, one that mayalready be under way (as suggested by appendix b). the following sectionselaborate the committeeõs vision of how various dimensions of manufacturing(product design, process design, production, and business processes) may beinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28information technology for manufacturingtransformed by information technology; a further discussion of these dimensionsthemselves is found in chapter 2.nearerterm prospects for improvementproduct and process designproduct design has expanded in scope in recent years. it has been traditionally understood as the collection of geometrical, material, and system specifications that achieve functional performance as a finished product that meets customer perceptions of need; today it also includes attention to manufacturability,usability, and environmental concerns. thus, a designer may well choose aproduct design with inferior performance characteristics in certain noncriticalaspects that is much simpler to produce than the alternative. to a much greaterextent than is true today, 21stcentury design will address product design aspectsthat are not often associated with traditional design at all, such as designing sothat servicing a product will be easy and errorfree or so that a robust finalproduct can be made from parts obtained from many different sources. differentdimensions of product design will thus need to be integrated to an unprecedenteddegree.it will continue to help to improve the quality of designs and reduce the costand time needed to produce them. in particular, the 21stcentury design environment envisioned by the committee would allow product designers to create aòvirtualó product and make extensive computer simulations of its behavior without supplying all of its details, and then òshowó it to the customer for rapidfeedback. the ability to undertake rapid electronic prototyping of designs wouldincrease the ease of revising them, resulting in fewer design compromises andlower costs for making those changes. product data would be represented in auniform manner and would include information on all variants. simulationswould also enable the exploration of all of a productõs behavior modes, includingnominal behavior and major offnominal variant behaviors that might affect performance, product quality, environmental quality, manufacturability, or usersafety. the product design environment would provide computer assistance thatwould build on existing design knowledge and even existing designs but thatwould also be flexible enough to accommodate design innovation.the designer would be able to specify a product in terms of function andperformance rather than in terms associated directly with the production process(e.g., shape, tolerances, electrical inputs). for example, the designer of a motorwould be able to use functionrelevant parameters, such as the load capacity andlife of a bearing or the allowed vibration frequencies and minimum fatigue resistance of a shaft. in addition, he or she would be able to express the desiredfunctions of the product in a translatable and analyzable format that would permitinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research29decomposing a given design into functions and subfunctions and mapping theseinto engineering assemblies and subassemblies.whereas todayõs product designer builds a physical prototype or uses physical construction aids in the design process, tomorrowõs product designer willcertainly make extensive use of computerbased models. the construction of aphysical prototype for use in testing a function or developing a tool necessarilyfreezes the design at the moment of construction and often leads to a loss ofsynchronization between model and product design when the design is alteredafter the prototype is built. an example of a more flexible approach to design isprovided by the boeing 777 airliner, whose computerbased design was undertaken by boeing using a threedimensional representation of a solid model. thisapplication eliminated most paper documents and dramatically reduced designerrors as measured by changes and corrections required to engineering drawings.engineers were able to test small parts and whole sections of the fuselage todetermine, long before these components were built, whether they would fittogether properly on the factory floor. the capability for testing clearancesbetween subassemblies to ensure human access was especially useful. onceconceptualized, changes to the virtual 777 could be realized immediately andcommunicated to all individuals interacting with the model, including distantcontractors responsible for building components and subassemblies.another advantage is that these computerbased models often can enabledifferent aspects of a product to be developed simultaneously. in the design ofprogrammable electronic systems, for example, a linked productandprocessdesign environment would allow the supporting software to be tested on hardware simulators before the completion of hardware development. since softwaredevelopment is often at least as timeintensive as hardware development, the useof simulators could cut overall development time by as much as a factor of two.extensive computational support would enable designers of manufacturingprocesses to explore, trace, and compare the production cost, quality, performance, safety, maintenance, and environmental implications of design decisions.the process designer would be able to specify a manufacturing process unambiguously and in ways that would yield information about, for example, its efficiency in advance of its actual deployment. information technology would enable the process designer to identify the right manufacturing, assembly, and testprocesses for creating and verifying the elements of a product and matching themto specifications for functional behavior. he or she would also be able to developmodels that could predict the expected results of variations implemented duringdesign of a process. such activities, which might be undertaken concurrently,could result in fewer errors, fewer repairs, shorter times to market, and lowercost. for example, flows of material through a production facility might beimproved by evaluating various factory equipment layout conceptsñto reducethe distance a product must travel before its completion or the number of handoffs between process steps, or to allow people to perform more efficientlyñor byinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30information technology for manufacturingevaluating different materialhandling modes (e.g., whether or not to dedicate anautomated guided vehicle to a particular process).in computationally supported manufacturing, process design models wouldcouple to production line implementations of those simulations. for example,code to control tools on the shop floor (e.g., numerically controlled machines,robots, and transfer systems) would be generated through simulations. if aproductõs specifications changed, the process model would be refined by theprocess designer, and such refinements would be reflected in the production line.when necessary, process designers would be able to modify manufacturing processes adaptively, taking advantage of the knowledge available at every step in afactoryõs entire manufacturing process in order to improve yield at a subsequentor preceding step. for example, detailed realtime knowledge of the status ofeach piece on the shop floor (both unfinished product and equipment) mightenable managers to optimize equipment use and/or lot movement globally, ratherthan locally improving each step but possibly reducing overall factory performance.with product design and process design coupled electronically, new processes or products would go directly from electronic blueprint or simulation toproduction; use of the process model as the blueprint for process transfer wouldsignificantly reduce process or product transfer times.the common theme in all these design applications is that the manipulationof information (in the form of design simulations and the like) is likely to bemuch cheaper and faster than real experimentation within an operating manufacturing facility. as a result, the design space within which it is feasible to explorealternatives is much larger, giving designers more options for how to craft aproduct that will meet user needs.shop floor productionin the 21st century, orderdriven production (box 1.4) will increase compared to todayõs forecastdriven production (i.e., production volume sized inaccordance with a forecast of what the demand for the product is likely to be),which runs a significant risk of overproduction (with the unsold products incurring carrying costs charged to the producer) or underproduction (in which caseproduction must be ramped up at great expense on an emergency basis). under aòbuildtoorderó strategy, production volume is much more closely correlatedwith orders, thus reducing the risk of production that does not meet demand andproviding considerable flexibility in changing production priorities.66 of course, when a customer needs an order filled in less time than it takes to produce a singleitem, òbuild to orderó in a literal sense is not realistic. thus, in practice, both forecasts and orderswill influence production. nevertheless, a production process can be configured to increase flexibility so that, for example, generic items can be produced in reasonable quantity and then customizedon demand, thus reducing the time between customer order and fulfillment.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research31factories in the future will continue to use a variety of technologies andprocesses and varying levels of automation. however, with the help of it,fabrication of unique items could be more convenient and less expensive, andproducts could be manufactured economically in smaller lot sizes than is characteristic today and with greater ease of production changeover (smaller setuptimes). scheduling of people, machines, and plants would be based on all aspectsof an enterpriseõs operations, taking into account sales and market projections aswell as work in process and capital utilization to dynamically schedule operationsfor the best profit. scheduling would optimize overall factory performance,rather than the performance of local area functions as it does today.in the 21stcentury production environment foreseen by the committee, thenew devices and processes used would result in very little material waste, withshaping and assembling devices, for example, extending their reach to eversmaller spatial scales. increasingly, the materials used will be synthetics, composites, and ceramics. if used, robot manipulators would operate on eversmallerparts and assemblies. information would be embedded in parts and products andread by materialhandling, shaping, assembling, and processing equipment, further automating the flow of materials and work in process. parts would be selfidentifying not only in the production process but also throughout the life of theproduct. controllers of materialhandling equipment would be more tightlycoupled with machine controllers and orchestrated by higherlevel software inaccordance with global plant goals. new shaping and assembly devices would bebox 1.4 orderdriven productionorderdriven production is rare today, though not nonexistent. for example,copy shops that use photocopiers to reproduce sets of university course notes ondemand can be regarded as a kind of orderdriven production shop. with highspeed laser printers coupled to large storage devices, printing books on demand ispossible; a few such operations exist today, and many more are expected in thefuture.an example of research in this area is found in the textile industry (often citedas a lowtechnology industry), which is currently undertaking research in virtualreality (vr) with the intent of recovering some of its $25 billion loss yearly due toclothing inventory markdowns and liquidation. specifically, the textile industry, incooperation with the federal government, is supporting vr research that will enable customers to shop for clothing in a virtual environment in which they wouldsee virtual clothes on virtual images of their own bodies and feel how the clotheswould fit. when a customer made a choice based on this experience, the orderwould be sent to a factory that would make these clothes on demand and thensend them to the customer. vendors would benefit from a reduction in the financiallosses associated with product markdown and liquidation, while the customerwould be provided with more choices and a better fit of garment to body.for more discussion of the textiles example, see nrc (1994).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32information technology for manufacturingcapable of highprecision fabrication at unprecedented levels of repeatability.tool and equipment control strategies would involve all the control techniquesñclassical, modern, fuzzy logic, and neural network controllersñin an integratedapproach to control.production engineering would rely heavily on a reusable base of acquiredproduction knowledge. manufacturing production lines would be designed usingmodular design and control components interconnected through welldefinedinterfaces. when necessary, production lines would be reconfigured to accommodate new generations or types of products, and certain changes to the production process would be implemented in a very short time (perhaps minutes orhours) as external circumstances changed.to meet the need for replacing or upgrading equipment, the production linewould accommodate the tooling and fixturing necessary for adding new parts.programs for controlling equipment (e.g., for numerical control) and systems(e.g., for scheduling and execution) would be generated and modified to accommodate changes to product requirements, changes in the production process, andchanges in management objectives (e.g., little or no inventory, rush orders).the components that make up a production line would be structured in amanner that they could be òplugged and playedó together in a modular fashion.òplug and playó would characterize the physical connections for machines (powerand communication), the functional connections for operations, and the toolingspecific to products being produced. equipment in a production line would beeasily moved, replaced, modified (upgraded), and enhanced (adding machines),improving system flexibility and responsiveness. functional control modulessuch as scheduling procedures and planning procedures would plug directly intothe factory control system directing the operation of shop floor equipment. similarly, the modules affecting a product (e.g., tools, fixtures, masks) would beextendable to accommodate new products. changes to a production plan wouldbe possible with minimal interruption.the 21stcentury computationally supported production line would be robustin the face of an uncertain mechanical environment. detailed information onfactory and equipment status, based on data from sensors and controllers locatedon the shop floor, would be visible to managers and shop floor personnel alike.realtime control would enable dynamic rerouting and reconfiguration of workflows to bypass problem areas in the production facility with minimal disruption;in worstcase situations, a production facility would exhibit graceful rather thancatastrophic degradation. the ability of automated shop floor tools to undertakeselfdiagnosis and selfcorrection of routine problems would improve reliabilityand reduce the need for people to tend such tools. the extensive simulationcapabilities of detailed factory models would enable companies to design facilities that incurred minimal operational difficulties and to train new employees inthe use, maintenance, and repair of complex equipment without risking the cessation of factory operations.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research33finally, the time needed to fabricate and deliver products would be significantly improved. customized products would be delivered to consumers muchmore rapidly than today because of reductions in the time needed to make andassemble the various components of the product and in the time spent in waitingfor processing by various components.7business practicesinformation technology could enable a high degree of integration betweenfuture manufacturing enterprises and their customers and suppliers. workingclosely with a manufacturer via tieins to the manufacturerõs information systems, for example, suppliers would know when to deliver supplies and wouldhave blanket authority to deliver them as necessary. a precedent exists in certaincar manufacturing operations today: suppliers query the manufacturerõs production intentions and deliver their goods to the manufacturerõs assembly plant inline sequence order, that is, in the order that they will be used. information aboutneeded supplies is thus passed automatically, without the manufacturer having toplace an order explicitly. suppliers may even be paid only when the final productis shipped, rather than when the parts are delivered, thus providing further incentive for justintime delivery. this practice, known as òpay on production,ó isincreasingly common in the auto industry, because it lowers supply chain carrying costs that have created an artificial focus on inventory and it increases teamplay and product quality.in computerized manufacturing, a supplierõs own fabrication processes wouldeasily accommodate changes required by the manufacturer. a customerõs highlycustomized order for even a very complicated and sophisticated part (for whichthere may be many alternative choices) could be entered directly by the customerinto a manufacturerõs system: the order would be scheduled, and the customerwould receive immediate acknowledgment and a product delivery date.8 a request for material replenishment could go directly and electronically from amanufacturerõs factory floor to the supplierõs system. with protections against7 a good example is the manufacture of automobiles. the final assembly of a car takes a couple ofdays. building the various components takes several days to a week. but the time from order todelivery for most american cars is usually at least several weeks. however, certain japanese automanufacturers now use sales forecasting techniques so sophisticated that most vehicles produced in agiven production batch have a buyer by the time they come off the assembly line. in addition, themix of options (a major variable in both throughput and production time) is roughly standardized tohelp match production batches with customer orders and is kept relatively small to simplify assembly. the result is that the time from order to delivery has been reduced to well under a week for thesefirms.8 some manufacturers have begun to implement or plan such systems, although with lesscustomization of product than that envisioned in this report. see, for example, the discussion ofmotorolaõs fusion program for producing pagers in trobel and johnson (1993).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34information technology for manufacturingfraud and theft in place, the supplier would deliver the material directly to thefactory floor, where receiving activities are performed. in short, the entire enterprise would be integrated all along the supply chain, from design shops to truckfleets that deliver the finished products.hints of this vision of integrated enterprises are available today, as businesses transfer information among related business organizations through electronic design interchange protocols. some design information can be sharedthrough common cad systems or through information expressed through theinternational graphics exchange standard. suppliers to some manufacturershave been required to send progress reports of supplies in shipment and transitelectronically for many years. a variety of industryspecific standards for transferring data electronically have been promulgated in the last 20 years. an advanced national information infrastructure such as that proposed by the clintonadministration would provide a widely accessible vehicle for linking manufacturers, suppliers, and customers to achieve the kind of integration and informationsharing envisioned.factory decision makersõ use of modeling would enable them to inquireabout orders, market information, production status, product design, human resources, and financial information from a single unified source. advanced modeling and analysis tools would make possible the collection and definition of data,processes, and associated knowledge at the depth and breadth necessary to support the simulation of business processes; models would take into account theform, meaning, and content of relevant data elements and processes. dynamicsimulations of an entire business would be possible, enabling decision makers toevaluate a wide range of òwhatifó scenarios for the purpose of strategic andtactical planning. these simulations would operate much more rapidly than realtime (simulating several months of factory operations in a few minutes), and sodesigners would be able to test a large number of alternatives for improvingfactory performance.new manufacturing stylesif the nearerterm research challenges posed in this report are met fully andsuccessfully and the anticipated nearerterm advances implemented so as to enable the capabilities outlined here, the committee believes that the result will besubstantial improvement for manufacturing in cost, quality, asset utilization, productivity, environmental control, and timetomarket performance metrics.implementation of these capabilities would also have profound implications forthe workplace that would have to be addressed in a socially responsible manner.the longerterm concepts of a virtual factory and a programmable or reconfigurable factory as outlined below would embody it to such an extent that thevery character of manufacturing would be fundamentally altered. as presented,information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research35they pose targets and goals for research, whether or not they represent what futurefactories will actually be like.the virtual factorywhen a single factory may cost over a billion dollars (as is the case in thesemiconductor industry), it is evident that manufacturing decision makers needtools that support good decision making about their design, deployment, andoperation. however, in the case of manufacturing models, there is usually notestbed but the factory itself; development of models of manufacturing operationsis very likely to disrupt factory operations while the models are being developedand tested. today, decision makers have found that the use of good computermodels of manufacturing facilities can provide valuable information that mightotherwise have required timeconsuming and expensive physical experimentation. more sophisticated versions of these simulationsñwhat might be calledvirtual factoriesñcall for a distributed, integrated, computerbased compositemodel of a total manufacturing environment, incorporating all the tasks andresources necessary to accomplish the operation of designing, producing, anddelivering a product.with virtual factories capable of accurately simulating factory operationsover time scales of months, managers would be able to explore many potentialproduction configurations and schedules or different control and organizationalschemes at significant savings of cost and time in order to determine how best toimprove performance.9 since a factory model running in simulation mode wouldrun thousands of times faster than real factory operations and would likely costmuch less as well, managers would have a rapid, nondisruptive methodology fortesting various manufacturing strategies. improvements suggested by real operations could be tested without risk in the simulation. simulations could also assistin training tool operators and floor managers, who would be able to use factorymodels in simulation mode much as pilots use simulators to gain experience inflying real airplanes, especially under stressful or unusual conditions.computerbased factory models might also be coupled to real factories inwhat could be called òcontroló mode. in control mode, the factory model wouldactually control and run the operation of the real factory through manipulation ofthe objects in the virtual factory. operating procedures and scheduling protocolswould be validated in the virtual factory and then applied in or transferred to the9 factory operation model development and testing are very different from process model development and testing in the sense that the disruption of an entire factory can be catastrophic for a firmõsproductivity. it would of course be possible to build a new factory that would carry the burden ofexperimentation. but factories are capitalintensive, and few companies are in a position to risklarge amounts of money on timeconsuming, expensive, or risky experimentation.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36information technology for manufacturingreal production facility. control mode would enable the direct electronic transferof modularized capabilities from computer simulation to production line.coupled to appropriate computerbased reasoning and decisionsupport tools,a virtual factory operating in control mode would be capable of a significantamount of selfdiagnosis. driven by data from the real factory, the virtual factorywould be able to analyze the performance of the entire factory continuously todetermine the potential for optimizing operations to reduce costs, reduce production time, improve quality, or reuse materials.10 for example, the virtual factorywould be able to use the data collected by a factory monitoring system, analyzepotential and actual failures, and identify the cause of a problem. such a systemassumes the availability of a knowledge base for every piece of equipment in thefactory that, given certain monitored data, can be used in conjunction with adiagnostic system and reasoning and decisionsupport tools to identify the sourceof a problem.whether information is derived from a model run in simulation mode orcontrol mode, results from good models can be examined from various userperspectives, including those of factory managers, product planners, and processequipment operators, in order to provide solutions to various types of problemsthat manufacturing personnel with different job tasks might encounter. modelingand simulation are likely to become a basic tool used at all levels within themanufacturing environment, from senior management to equipment operator.the programmable or reconfigurable factorya programmable or reconfigurable factory is one in which most or all of theinformation necessary for producing a product is embodied in a knowledge baseand the associated programs, such that the factory can take in the information andproduce the product with minimal human intervention. in such a factory, capitalwould substitute for labor both on the shop floor (with robots or other automatedequipment undertaking many assembly and fabrication processes) and in realtime factory management (with computerbased decisionmaking functions operating on intellectual rather than physical inputs). such a factory would be capable of a significant degree of òlightsoutó operation, that is, operation withlimited human involvement. programmable or reconfigurable factories wouldalso enhance managerial capability to cope with accidents and malfunctions onthe work floor as work flow could be rerouted to bypass problem areas.10 simple versions of selfimproving factories have been demonstrated in semiconductor andchemical plants, where neural networks and/or adaptive control have been used to monitor and adjustparameters to optimize operations. although such plants differ in nature and character from thosefor assembling discrete products such as automobiles or airplanes, it may be possible to developanalogous improvements.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research37programmable factories expand the concept of the flexible manufacturingsystem, which is intended to be a set of machines and controllers that workcooperatively to manufacture similar parts in a product family in relatively smalllot sizes but at unit costs and with qualities characteristic of mass production. butthus far, most such economically successful systems have produced parts withrather small variations in style and have exhibited limited software, little sensorfeedback, and, still, relatively large lot sizes.it is clear that a programmable factory would require software capable ofoperating on the entire range of product and process information. it would alsorequire generic materials that could be used for different products made in thefactory, generic tools and fixtures, programmable machine tools, and genericsensors. while not everything could be fabricated from generic materials, itmight be possible to substantially reduce the number of different types of materials and tools needed to produce a diversity of parts. for example, it has beenestimated that in a particular factory, 2,000 tools that were being used could bereduced to fewer than 50. in another case, 500 different types of steel could bereplaced by 50 different types of steel. in a third case, 10 different types of 8bitmicroprocessors could be replaced by a single 16bit microprocessor. if moregeneric materials and tools could be used in production, highvolume purchasesof these items could drive down costs.in a programmable or reconfigurable factory, different products would beproduced by changing software. different software instructions would direct tooland machine controllers to perform different operations and to deliver differentitems to different work cells in different sequences. although a single factoryalmost certainly could not produce computers and cars on different days, a highlyprogrammable factory, in conjunction with new and more flexible fabricationprocesses, could produce cars in one week and trucks in the next week; thetoyota motor company does this in taiwan today. even without new fabrication processes, a highly programmable factory might be able to produce computers one day and defense electronics the next. such a factory would depend onproduction facilities configured in such a way that a new production operationcould be set up relatively rapidly. the ultimate goal is a paradigm known as òsellone, make one,ó as it is known in japan.in certain restricted domains, lowleadtime òreprogrammingó of a factory toproduce different products is possible today. the manufacturing facilities forbooks, very large scale integrated chips, and petroleum products produce manydifferent products (different book titles, different chips, different types of fueland lubrication) simply on the basis of a software change. of course, the termòsoftwareó in this context refers to the particular text or masks that differentiateone book or chip from another, but the principle is the sameñonly intellectualinputs or changes are necessary to produce a different product, while the physicalfacilities of production remain much the same. but for other products, changeovertimes remain significant.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38information technology for manufacturinga programmable factory is also necessary for the economic manufacture ofhighly customized products. an example from today is the òondemandó production of softcover textbooks in which chapters can be selected by a teacher basedon his or her individual teaching needs. with increased product customization,customers would be able to obtain catalog items with the features, characteristics,and aesthetics they desired, at prices they could afford (probably comparable tothe prices for massproduced goods). the material and manufacturing cost perunit of producing a product likely would not be significantly different for aproduction run of 100 units or of 100,000 units in a single batch. smaller lot sizeswould also have major benefits with respect to quality control. when defects ina production process are caught early (as is the case when small lot sizes areproduced), the amount of rework is minimized and fixes to the production process can be implemented more rapidly.note that high degrees of customization create additional stresses on scheduling. since customization requires only small quantities of specialized materials, òjustintimeó scheduling either works properly or fails by idling the production machinery; the option of building inventory as a hedge against misseddelivery times simply does not exist, since maintaining excess inventory is then amatter of purchasing unnecessary components rather than purchasing components that will ultimately be used.the networked factoryin concept, a networked factory is one in which suppliers (both internal andexternal) and customers are connected electronically to a manufacturer (e.g., onthe national information infrastructure). manufacturers have been tied to suppliers and customers by telephone, mail, telex, and fax for years; the primary advantage of electronically networked connections would be the speed with whichinformation could be exchanged and processed, sometimes automatically by intelligent agents that could respond to certain routine requests.an electronically networked factory (hereafter a networked factory) woulddemonstrate significantly reduced transaction times as information technologyreduced the delays of paperbased information transfer; information technologywould facilitate instantaneous acknowledgment, scheduling of deliveries, andguaranteed service times. many of the factors contributing to delays in the designand production processes would be significantly reduced within a networkedfactory. reducing delay would contribute to reducing the time to market for newor improved products. a particularly important improvement would be a reduction of the time it takes a production facility to initiate the first step needed torespond to an order, since it is this time that often dominates the overall timerequired to fill an order.enabled through the national information infrastructure, networked factories would increase the options available to product and process designers.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research39todayõs designers are strongly constrained by the process capabilities of manufacturersñproduct designers do not design products that their factories cannotmake, and process designers do not create processes that their factories cannotimplement. indeed, even approaches to design regarded today as sophisticated(e.g., design for manufacturability, design for assembly) are necessarily limitedby preexisting production processes and facilities. when a single firm owns themeans of production, such approaches make sense. but if constraints on ownership are relaxed (and process elements consequently can be linked on a regional,national, or even international basis), designers can be freed to focus primarily onthe expressed needs of the customer without worrying about how best to use asingle plant for which many costs have already been incurred. designers using anetworked factory would be able to òoutsourceó various production processesmore easily and to coordinate their operation.of all the different modern concepts in manufacturing, the idea of a networked enterprise including a networked factory is perhaps the most widelyaccepted and adopted; in some circles, the term òagile manufacturingó is alsoused. further, the evolving national information infrastructure is expected tofacilitate networking of all sorts. chapter 6 discusses this connection in greaterdetail.microfactoriesa microfactory is a production facility whose output capacity can be scaledup by the replication of identical facilities. since microfactories would not depend on economies of scale for economic viability, they would draw strongly onthe technologies of programmable or reconfigurable factories as they attemptedto produce smallscale output at unit costs comparable to or only slightly higherthan those for massproduced items. if microfactories prove to be feasible, asingle, large, centralized manufacturing facility could be replaced by a largenumber of replicated, modular microfactories that could be geographically distributed and located close to customers.for producing quantities of identical items, traditional factories orientedtoward mass production will probably remain superior to microfactories, becauseanything that could be done to improve the production process in a microfactorycould also be done in a traditional factory. on the other hand, todayõs massproduction factories are capitalintensive construction projects that are themselves custombuilt. if a microfactory could itself be mass produced in quantitieslarge enough to reduce the cost of an individual microfactory, it might be possibleto amortize the cost of designing the microfactory over many such (identical)facilities. even today, some steel micromills have drastically reduced the capitalcost of steel production. in addition, microfactories might incur lower producttransportation costs (as the result of placing microfactories near customers), lowerinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40information technology for manufacturinginventory costs (as the result of production on demand), or lower labor costs (asthe result of using locally available labor).irrespective of cost issues, however, microfactories might well provide advantages in other situations. for example, microfactories might provide a wayfor firms to insert local content into manufactured products, perhaps throughlocal final assemblyña capability that could be desirable for political purposes(e.g., as a dimension of international trade relationships). a second example of amicrofactory could be a mobile fabrication facility (e.g., a microfactory locatedon a large naval ship that produces replacement parts for the battle group withwhich it sails); in such a scenario, economic concerns might be secondary to thecapability for a rapid response. a third example is that microfactories of a sort doexist today, although they make business sense for reasons other than lower unitproduction costs. microbreweries for beer and streetcorner copy shops are twoexamples of microfactories in which production costs are higher than those oflarger facilities; nevertheless, such microfactories fill niches because they provide higher quality or greater convenience. the primary challenge remaining formicrofactories is one of economics.getting from here to thereñthe need for balance and a considered approachthe various new manufacturing capabilities described above are tantalizingand appeal to many current notions of the progress possible in manufacturing.but for this vision to be realized, it will be necessary first to balance the responsibilities of factory managers and manufacturing decision makers to turn outquality products at low cost in a timely manner today against the desirability ofplanning to secure the potentially large improvements offered by judicious andinnovative use of current and future information technology.even if these tensions are resolved, however, the full implications of successfully implementing it are not known, and neither the committee nor themanufacturing community at large has thought through the many possible effects. to illustrate, success in some of the areas discussed above raises thefollowing questions:¥if products are available on a fully customized basis, what happens toservice, repair, and maintenance? technicians may be faced with an extraordinary learning task if they are to be competent at repairing thousands of customized variations, although such a task might be mitigated by electronic informationcarried aboard the product itself. in locations far removed from productionfacilities, cannibalization of one unit to obtain spare parts for another is a timehonored maintenance practice that may no longer be feasible. even today, documentation of new products for maintenance and repair technicians is an enormousproblemñhow will documentation be provided for an even larger number ofinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research41products? will information technology provide solutions to this problem, or willnew approaches to product design reduce the need for voluminous documentation?¥what are the limits (if any) to desires for novelty and customization?customers may not all want entirely customized products. consider, for example, automobiles whose control systems (e.g., steering wheels, clutches) areentirely different; such differences might even prove detrimental to public safety.cost pressures may limit the variety that consumers are willing to purchase.customers may also resist products that demand that they learn new habits andoperating procedures. finally, customers may not even know what they wantwith the precision needed to specify a customized product.¥if automation replaces multitudes of manufacturing workers, what becomes of the displaced workers? will they become managers? technicians?who will retrain them? for what will they be retrained? how will manufacturing workers in the new regime respond to being directed by automated overseers?¥if manufacturing operations are dispersed geographically, what becomesof team and corporate loyalties that are often the result of physical proximity andinformal daytoday social contact through work? what will happen to geographically based brandname and corporate loyalties?¥what degree of information automation is òrightó? in the case of physicalautomation, trying to automate many factories entirely proved to be a poor choice;improvements in productivity were obtained at the expense of flexibility, and itturned out that flexibility was a much more important characteristic. this mayalso be so in information management; what degree of automated decision making is appropriate? this is a very subjective decision, differing for differentindustries.¥how will research results, such as new fabrication processes, be converted into economical and reliable factory equipment? the same question applies to the conversion of new design algorithms into easytolearn cad software. the industries that supply these vital infrastructure elements are short oftechnical expertise, financially weak, and subject to huge fluctuations in demand.¥how will the sophisticated ideas outlined in the committeeõs vision offuture manufacturing be transferred to small businesses and lowertier suppliers?large businesses depend crucially on the lower tiers, but many businesses inthese lower tiers may not be able to compete successfully without new technologies or assistance in adopting these technologies.these questions, and many others, are largely outside the scope of this report.but their identification, articulation, and eventual resolution are an integral partof moving toward a vision of itenhanced 21stcentury manufacturing.whatever oneõs view, it is clear that a number of major technological andsociological barriers must be overcome before itõs potential to revolutionizemanufacturing can be widely accepted and achieved. more rapid progress ininformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42information technology for manufacturingovercoming these barriers will increase the likelihood of earlier acceptance andachievement. the nature of these challenges and the research needed to overcome them are the subjects of the next several chapters.the research agendatechnology researchin formulating a research agenda, the committee was faced with the realization that manufacturing is fundamentally a complex activity, with many interactions among its various components. in the committeeõs view, this realizationreflects the nature of manufacturing as òan indivisible, monolithic activity, incredibly diverse and complex in its fine detail . . . [whose] many parts are inextricably interdependent and interconnected, so that no part may be safely separatedfrom the rest and treated in isolation, without an adverse impact on the remainderand thus on the wholeó (harrington, 1984). thus, it is fruitless to seek theidentification of specific òsilver bulletsó upon which all other progress in the fielddepends. that said, however, the committee has identified several general themesfor technology research that would advance the capabilities of information technology to serve manufacturing needs; these themes include product and processdesign, shop floor control, modeling and simulation (òvirtual factoryó) technology, and enterprise integration as it affects factory operations and business practices.the sections below summarize a research agenda that is discussed in detail inchapters 3 through 6. the largest part of the research recommended in this reportis aimed at developing various itbased tools to support advanced manufacturing.product and process designproduct design and process design depend heavily on human judgment.research is needed both to develop information tools that can help human designers make good decisions in their design work and to increase understandingof the design process itself. enabling the creation of better tools and facilitatingthe design process could, for example, make it easier to generate a requirementsspecification that meets customer needs or to design a product or a process òfromscratchó and/or through the reuse of existing and validated designs. althoughbetter tools and techniques are needed in all fields, product and process design formechanical components and assemblies is especially important.the committee believes that a research agenda for product design (especiallyfor the design of mechanical products) should build to the extent possible on thelessons learned in the design of electronic products such as integrated circuitchips. for example, the design of electronics today is based on having, at eachinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research43stage in the design process, design abstractions that contain only the detail relevant to that stage. using these abstractions, the product designer can postponedecisions about details and focus on higherorder questions about function, leaving the detail to the subsequent stages in which lowerlevel issues can be resolved. designers of electronic products also have an extensive set of predefinedand prevalidated òpartsó that can be used as building blocks in product design;altering the parameters of these predefined parts allows some customizing of theproduct being designed. such capabilities also need to be made available todesigners of mechanical products.although mechanical products differ qualitatively from electronic products(e.g., mechanical products are threedimensional, and interactions among theircomponents are more analytically intractable), making their mechanical design aseasy as the design of electronic products today is a reasonable asymptotic goal towork toward. in addition, tools are needed that will enable the identification oftradeoffs between cost and dimensions of performance such as reliability, powerconsumption, and speed; between cost and design choices; between alternatespace allocations; or in functional decomposition, subassembly definition, threedimensional geometric reasoning, and makeorbuy decisions.in the domain of process design, tools for describing processes are criticalfor the design of individual products, the design and operation of factories, andthe development of modeling and simulation technology. formal descriptionsare necessary if processes are to be represented in sufficient detail and withenough specificity to be adequately complete and unambiguous; such formalismswould allow designers to describe factory processes (involving both machinesand people), design activities, and decision processes, among others. languagesfor describing processes must facilitate checking for correctness and completeness and must be able to express variant as well as nominal process behavior.new tools for describing and representing processes could also be used toenhance product design, so that by simulation and emulation the best processcould be matched to the product design (and vice versa) for maximum economicadvantage (or to satisfy whatever criteriañsuch as quality or time to deliveryñare important for the particular case). used in this way, simulation and emulationcould facilitate òdesign for manufacturabilityó and òdesign for assembly,ó whichshould also encompass design for rapid testing and diagnosis, fast maintenanceand repair, quality control, and material handling, as well as design for modelingmore efficient factory processes and operations.shop floor controlby automating processes, extending the uses of sensors, and improvingscheduling, information technology can play a vital role in improving the flow ofmaterial and the routine control functions of machine tools, robots, automatedguided vehicles, and many other basic machines on the factory floor.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44information technology for manufacturingresearch is needed to advance the level of process automation, includinggreater ease of interconnection of factory equipment and more automated responses to problems. the current thrust today in systems development is towardopen systems that allow equipment from different manufacturers to be òmixedand matchedó as needed. achievement of an open equipment controller architecture that would enable all factory and shop floor components to share the sameprogramming environment, communication facilities, and other computer resources would contribute to the interconnection of factory equipment (as well asto enterprise integration). advanced manufacturing languages that would bemore flexible than existing languages for programming unit processes (such asapt and compac for machining) would support the operation of accessory devices in conjunction with a particular process and be more closely coupled toproduct data generated by cad/cam systems (to facilitate direct transfer ofproducts from blueprint to production).research is needed on advanced sensor systems as well. sensors providerealtime feedback about the operation of a process during manufacturing (e.g.,unpredicted parttool interactions). historically, sensors have served only asproduction monitors. increasingly, they are becoming active components ofproduction systems, integral to either a process or a finished product. standardized sensor architectures must be developed so that sensors and actuators can beplugged into a common control system with only minor, automatic reconfiguration. sensors connected through such architectures would be linked directly intodatabases for dynamic updates usable by machine controllers. standardizedsensor architectures will require a uniform method of characterizing sensors andactuators suitable for automation, applicable to a wide range of devices. datafusion techniques for correlating inputs from multiple sensors would help overcome the difficulties of sensing in a relatively òdirtyó environment. intelligentsensors would be able to process shop floor data to higher levels of abstraction todetermine their significance to manufacturing decisions.effective realtime, dynamic scheduling of factory operations on the shopfloor remains a major problem but has great potential for improving factoryperformance. dynamic scheduling is desirable because management prioritiesfor production must be balanced moment to moment against circumstances prevailing in a plant and in the manufacturerõs supply chain (e.g., sudden changes inconditions generated by drifts in machine capability, material shortages, unplanned equipment downtime, delays in arrival of necessary components). dynamic scheduling would determine what should be done next by any particularpiece of equipment at any particular moment based on current conditions throughout the factory. research is needed to develop realtime scheduling tools thatwould provide capabilities for integrating scheduling and control reactively (e.g.,tools that would make use of adaptive scheduling techniques based on the severity of the contingency at hand and the time available to adjust the schedule and/orinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research45scheduling techniques that could exploit windows of opportunity occurring fortuitously).also needed are information tools and techniques to ensure graceful degradation of plant operations in the event of local problems. factory managers andoperations teams will require effective means to support overall situation assessment, both within a factory (e.g., knowing when certain machines are inoperable,knowing the location of various parts) and outside it (e.g., knowing that a delivery will be delayed). they will also require tools that integrate multiple dimensions in which managers must make decisions, including decisions about productrelease, reordering, sequencing and batching, safety stock and safety leadtime,use of overtime, and order promising.autonomous agentbased architectures are a potential alternative to topdownscheduling. autonomous agents (implemented as software objects or collectionsof objects, perhaps represented by physical robotic agents) could be attractive formanufacturing applications in the areas of planning, monitoring, and control.important research problems connected with agentbased architectures includethe level of autonomy that agents in various locations should have and howcollections of agents would maintain stability when given potentially contradictory goals. the deployment of agents might well be risky until these issues areaddressed in detail.modeling and simulationto realize a virtual factory that can faithfully reflect the operation of a realone in all relevant dimensions, it will be necessary to represent real manufacturing operations at different levels of abstraction. all objects in a real factory,whether they are pieces of equipment, product lots, human resources, processdescriptions, data and information packets, or facilities, must have direct counterparts in the virtual factory; indeed, the actual production facility in which rawmaterials are transformed into physical products is itself one level of abstractionin a comprehensive virtual factory model. the boundaries of the virtual modelmust be flexible, capable of incorporating activities outside the factory or focusing only on entities within the factory structure as necessary for analytical purposes.central to simulation technology is research on modeling frameworks thatcan link the wide variety of models representing activities from all parts ofmanufacturing, from design through orders to multicountry manufacturing anddistribution to customer delivery; a large number of models will be needed tosimulate realistically even a modest factory. the models will be distributed intime and space; research will be required to understand how to link these essentialpieces in a timely manner. work is needed not only on general modeling techniques but also on fast methods of tailoring a specific model to local conditions.hierarchical simulation models built from welltested fundamental equipmentinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46information technology for manufacturingblocks will be critical to the success of factory modeling. similarly, proceduresare needed that allow for the parallel processing of these hierarchical models sothat very rapid (faster than realtime) simulation times can be achieved.a second dimension of simulation technology is how to account for thestochastic nature of events on the factory floor. given the multitude of unexpected events that can affect factory operations (e.g., tool breakdown, late supplyshipments, personnel absences) as well as decisions influencing operations (e.g.,which machine is to be changed, what personnel are to be used), no singlesimulation run will be definitive. rather, tools are needed that can test a givenconfiguration or plan in thousands of probabilistically determined runs.a complete simulation that could be used for everything from analysis tocontrol for even a modest factory is out of reach today. however, a first stepwould be the comprehensive simulation of an individual production line. forsuch a task, appropriately detailed models of individual tools are needed that canthen be combined to provide overall realism. equipmentlevel simulation modelshave been developed and used to analyze equipmentlevel characteristics, but thesimulation of a production line would test the ability of such models to act inconcert.validation of simulation models will be essential. since a simulation is goodonly to the extent that it provides an accurate representation of reality, justifiedand wellgrounded confidence in the model is critical for use and implementation. simulation models can always be tweaked and otherwise forced to fitempirical data, but the purpose of simulation is to learn something reliable abouta hypothetical factory operation for which no empirical data exist. managers anddecision makers will need high levels of assurance that a simulationõs predictionof a new factory faithfully reflects what would actually occur, even taking intoaccount the random events that affect todayõs manufacturing systems so adversely. wellvalidated simulations would enable the creation of a demonstration platform that could compare results of a real factory system before thesystem ever operates. tools to automate the process of sensitivity analysis forsimulations would be particularly helpful in coping with the stochastic factoryenvironment.ultimately, the modeling and simulation capabilities resulting from the research outlined here should be able to support configuring and constructing a realfactory for highlevel performance (on multiple dimensions), as well as planninghow best to operate it once it has been constructed. a concrete demonstration ofthese capabilities would be the creation of a platform capable of comparing theresults of real factory operations with the results of simulated factory operationsusing information technology applications such as those discussed in this report.for modeling and simulation to serve manufacturing needs, two broad areasof research stand out for special attention: the development of information technology to handle simulation models in a useful and timely manner, and capture ofthe manufacturing knowledge that must be reflected in the models.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision and recommended areas of research47enterprise integration and business practicesresearch is needed to extend and enhance the information infrastructuresupporting manufacturing enterprises, including both the internal infrastructureused within a factory (perhaps a dispersed one) and the external infrastructurethat increasingly links an enterprise to its suppliers, partners, and customers. theuse of networks by all kinds of personnel and of equipment to exchange all kindsof data (text, numeric, graphic, and video) calls for high bandwidth; greaterdependability and security; greater support for realtime communication, monitoring, and control; and better interoperability (through architectures, standards,and interfaces) for component systems and networks of different types. achieving ease of interconnection is essential; attaching equipment and subsystems to afactory information system should be as easy as plugging household appliancesinto outlets, at least in principle. beyond better networkrelated facilities, there isa need for better technology for the exchange of information, information services to support integration of applications, and standard representations, protocols, libraries, and query languages.in addition, enterprise integration requires research and development relating to the interconnection of applications. indeed, much of todayõs manufacturing information technology can be characterized as islands of automation that areunable to communicate with each other due to incompatibilities in their representation of largely similar information. enabling intercommunication will requirethe development of appropriate ways of explicitly representing information related to products, fabrication processes, and business processes, as well as howeach element relates to itself and to other elements. these new representationschemes will themselves demand a deep understanding of the underlying information, an understanding that is sorely lacking in many of the domains that relateto manufacturing.research is also needed on organizing principles and architectures for connecting different networkbased applications into a seamless environment. suchconnection is necessary, for example, to link flexible manufacturing cells to theplant scheduling function and to link the scheduling function to the enterpriseorder, delivery, and financial systems. enterprise integration also implies a needfor research to enable the automatic interpretation of the type of transaction beingexecuted, the routing of the message to the right location for processing, and theprocessing that must occur when the message for the transaction reaches thecorrect system. integration of individual enterprises into the marketplace in theinformation age will require security and authentication features that guaranteethe integrity of electronic transactions.nontechnology issuesexpanding the scope of what is achievable by information technology is onlyone dimension of realizing a 21stcentury vision of manufacturing. it is equallyinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48information technology for manufacturingimportant to understand how manufacturing enterprises can actually make use ofthe technology. even today, much useful technology remains unused. innovators in manufacturing must ensure that human, institutional, and societal factorsare aligned in such a way that information technology can be deployed meaningfully. this is a difficult but essential task, since even great technology that goesunused is not particularly beneficial to anyone.data, information, and decisions need to be communicated accurately acrossthe breadth and depth of manufacturing organizations. many mechanisms cancontribute to enhancing communication, including sabbatical programs for industrialists and academics in each otherõs territory, teaching factories, and advanced technology demonstrations that illustrate how the use of informationtechnology can benefit factory performance.considerable research in social science will be necessary to facilitate thelargescale introduction of information technology into manufacturing. in particular, fully exploiting new technologies generally requires new social structures. innovators will have to confront issues such as the division of laborbetween human and computer actors, the extent and content of communicationsbetween those actors, and how best to organize teams of human and computerresources.matters related to education and training will be central to 21stcenturymanufacturing. given an environment of increasingly rapid change, continualupgrading of skills and intellectual tools will be necessary at all levels of thecorporate hierarchy. òjustintime learning,ó that is, learning things as it becomes necessary to know them, may assume added importance.finally, although businesses depend increasingly on their intellectual andinformation assets, generally accepted accounting principles that businesses useto audit their finances and operations are derived from a business philosophy inwhich capital expenditures (i.e., expenditures that relate to the longterm value ofa company) are associated with buildings and pieces of equipment. research isneeded to develop valuation schemes that appropriately account for the contribution of knowledge and core competencies to manufacturing and enterprise values.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.492manufacturing:context, content, and historythe economics of manufacturingthe economics of manufacturing is driven by the desire to produce salablefinished products at as low a cost as possible while still maintaining acceptablestandards of quality, functionality, and timeliness. figure 2.1 describes in broadstrokes the relationship between unit cost and production volume for three paradigms of production: manual, mass, and flexible. flexible production has beenthe focus of recent efforts to apply information technology (it) to manufacturing.¥manual production. in manual production, the cost of producing an itemis to first order independent of the production volume, since the dominant cost ofproduction is the workerõs time in producing the item.¥mass production. in mass production, a substantial amount of capital isinvested in a production line. however, once the facility has been built, theincremental cost of producing an additional unit is that of materials and labor,which is small compared to the initial cost of the facility. when the productionfacility is fully utilized, unit cost is minimized. however, such facilities byassumption produce a single product, require long lead times to deploy, and tie uplarge amounts of capital.¥flexible production. flexible production is still a goal rather than aparadigm. if successful, flexible production lowers both the capital and the timerequired to deploy a factory for a new product. indeed, for certain types ofproducts (e.g., integrated circuit chips, books) a ònewó production facility isinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50information technology for manufacturingobtained from an òoldó facility simply by making changes to the software thatcontrols the production processes.as figure 2.1 suggests, manual production is superior to other types ofproduction for those cases in which a highly customized product is needed insmall volume and for which the nonmanual production of the product in a factorywould require an expensive facility. when sufficiently large numbers of identical products are needed, mass production is generally superior. but the flexibleproduction paradigm seems the most economical for intermediate quantities ofmoderately customized products that are needed in a timely manner.the nature of manufacturingmanufacturing can be divided into two typesñdiscrete and continuous. continuous manufacturing refers to the production of substances or materials (e.g.,the manufacture of chemical products). in continuous manufacturing, plant operations are reasonably represented by the wellunderstood mathematical formalism of differential equations. however, discrete manufacturing (e.g., the manufacturing of cars, airplanes, and other assembled products) is altogether different.discrete manufacturing cannot be well represented by any known formalism.volume of production per yearunit costfigure 2.1 unit cost versus production volume per year. solid line, manual production; dashed line, mass production; dotted line, flexible production.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing: context, content, and history51for example, there is today no design formalism that automatically allows only acertain class of objects to be attached to another object (so that a handle but not afork can be attached to a cup), although work on featurebased and constraintbased design tools is attempting to address this problem. the result is thatpredicting the operation of a discrete manufacturing plant is quite difficult andmay be tractable only through the use of simulation models. the focus of thisreport is primarily discrete manufacturing.discrete manufacturing involves making discrete objects and is often basedon actions such as shaping and assembly. the final product intended for the enduser may be a desktop computer, a car, or a chair. but except in the simplestinstances, the factory does not convert raw materials (e.g., sand, iron ore, wool)into a final product in one step. instead, the final product is most often fabricatedfrom components.1 each component is often itself the result of an assembly ofsubcomponents, and the number of steps between elemental raw materials andfinal product may be large indeed. each component or subcomponent may beproduced inhouse or obtained from another supplier. thus, in a sense, the òfinalproductó of component suppliers may well be components for an assembler ofenduser products. another type of final product is created through the deposition of materials, in which a product is created by the selective layerbylayerdeposition of material on some substrate: both books and integrated circuit chipsare created in this manner. depositionbased production is also often used tocreate prototypes or product shells.it is helpful to abstract manufacturing into four basic elements of an idealized process: product design, process design, shop floor production, and businesspractices:¥product design normally begins with a combined effort by people whocreate new technology and people who meet customers to find out what customers need or want and what technology is available or feasible to meet those needs;this aspect of product design is often called conceptual design. in some cases,demand òpullsó and (less often) technology òpushes.ó what emerges is a highlevel product model that usually contains a nontechnical statement of performance (e.g., provide instant communication with a distant computer) togetherwith some quantitative goals (e.g., weigh less than 100 grams, communicate witha computer 300 meters distant).once a productõs functionality is determined at this high level of abstraction,detailed design is undertaken to convert requirements into successively moredetailed designs that anticipate or include, at each stage of the design process, the1 fabrication is used here in a somewhat loose sense to denote both the mechanical connection ofelements (assembly) or the conditioning of a component by the removal or treatment of some material, such as drilling a hole (shaping) or heattreating (conditioning) a component.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52information technology for manufacturingimplications for manufacturing methods, sales techniques, customer interactions,reliability and cost targets, field repair, safety, and environmental impact. as theproduct concept is refined, a variety of specifics may be added to the model, suchas geometric details, materials or electrical specifications, and tolerances. stylists, designers, and engineers make sketches, layouts, system diagrams, flowcharts, and physical models as they try to define physically a specific product thatwill meet the stated requirements. components and materials may be consideredand rejected (because, for example, they weigh too much) several times before apromising solution is found. cost, performance, and reliability must be predictedwith increasing accuracy, as must potential manufacturing or use problems.conceptual design and detailed design interact. while it is clearly absurd toundertake detailed design before a designer has any idea of what the product is todo, feedback from detailed design may well influence the next iteration of theconceptual design.a key element of design is verification. verification activities test portionsof a product design with prototypes or computational simulations, and test keyportions of the overall fabrication process to ensure that cost, functionality, safety,and reliability requirements are met. computer simulations allow the explorationof large numbers of test cases, but only actual physical testing can account forfactors that cannot be adequately simulated; such factors range from small details(e.g., fatigue cracks) to major omissions (e.g., fundamental design flaws). verification generates test results that can be used to improve product and processperformance or quality.the output from the product design activity is a model that describes theproduct with sufficient specificity and lack of ambiguity that it can be producedwith a high degree of conformance to its specifications.¥process design refers to the determination of an appropriate sequence ofindividual fabrication and assembly steps for converting raw materials and/orparts into a finished product. process design is driven by a productõs specifications and the processes available to produce the product. process designers mustfind or create equipment and process plans (perhaps to be executed by othersoutside the factory) that will make and assemble parts into working products.2process designers must ensure that each process step can be performed economically, accurately, and at the necessary speed. they must also ensure that thecollection of steps, when executed, will result in a smoothly running factory. theoutput of this stage of manufacturing is a set of process designs that are compatible with the product design.2 the extent to which a process designer must develop a new production process for a new productdepends strongly on the nature of the product being produced. as a rule, mechanical items require agreater amount of customized process design than do electronic items such as integrated circuitchips, for which manufacturing is mostly patterninsensitive (see also chapter 3, footnote 3).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing: context, content, and history53¥integrated product and process design. increasingly, product and processdesign are linked in an integrated effort. although the steps above are describedas though they take place sequentially, an integrated product and process designeffort calls for them to be undertaken concurrently. product design and processdesign interact through small feedback loops (whereby a change to a detailedproduct design may be made to simplify the process of making the product) andthrough large feedback loops (whereby feedback from customers may identifyproduct design errors or ways in which process or product design can be improved). such feedback loops are essential for uncovering incorrect designs orsupporting data, incorrect assumptions about customers and their needs, incomplete specifications to suppliers, and inadequate tracking of performance in peopleor machines.¥production implements the processes specified by the process designer.a qualified production facility ensures that these processes are capable of producing a product in sufficient quantity and of accceptable quality in a timelymanner and within budget as often as needed. moreover, qualification demandsboth technical assurances (e.g., that sixsigma defect rates3 will be met for finalproducts) and nontechnical assurances (e.g., that a supplier organization has sufficient financial staying power to guarantee a supply for a certain long period oftime). often working with the process designer, the production engineer makesdecisions such as whether to make or buy a given part or process, what factorsqualify a supplier, and how to manage engineering changes. in general, a production facility must provide for the receipt and acknowledgment of orders, theacquisition of materials, the performance of shop floor operations,4 and the generation of the information needed to support continuous improvement.a significant amount of realtime planning and scheduling is necessary tosupervise those activities taking place on the shop floor. in addition, the production environment itself is complex and dynamic: machines break, resources suchas parts or people are not always available, processing capability varies, communication falters, people with unique skills get sick or leave the company, andcustomer demands change. consequently, the production facility must adapt bydetecting changes, modifying intermediate goals, making tradeoffs among conflicting goals, resolving constraints, and executing actions in a timely fashion.the production function also includes planning for machine requirements andresource capacity, systems management, and control. production engineers mustconsider plant design, as well as identify inconsistencies and anomalies in thework contributed by product and process designers.3 sixsigma defect rates correspond to a defect rate below 3 in 1 million.4 equipment on the shop floor for discrete products performs two types of action: individualmachines or work cells fabricate or assemble partially finished parts or subassemblies, and transfersystems move the output to the next machine or cell.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54information technology for manufacturing¥business practices are the aspects of manufacturing that go beyond theproduction activities occurring on the shop floor (the òtouch laboró activities) andtheir realtime supervision. business practices include marketing, designing andproviding production facilities and equipment, managing materials and resources,procurement, contracts administration, financial accounting, and order taking.external suppliers must be found and their material and supply streams integratedinto manufacturing operations for equipment or product components or materialsthat are not built or produced inhouse. planners must muster the capital toprovide the necessary capacity to meet the anticipated demand for a product.thus, manufacturing businesses care about the cost, quality, and schedule of allrelevant processes, not just those related to what is traditionally associated withproduction (e.g., shop floor scheduling, machine utilization and control, and soon).the steps within each element are not independent. for example, withinproduct design, the specification of an objectõs geometry may be related to itsfunctionality. within process design, the particulars of how iron ore is convertedto steel may affect how the steel is machined or shaped later. within production,the placement of a particular piece of fabrication equipment may affect the speedwith which a product flows through a facility. rates of equipment utilization canbe kept higher (tending to reduce costs) by a willingness to accept higher levels ofinventory (tending to increase costs). within business practices, suppliers mustbe chosen carefully to ensure that they deliver on time supplies that meet therequired performance specifications. orders must be processed accurately andconverted quickly into work orders, schedules, materials purchases, and personnel assignments.so also are the various elements of manufacturing interdependent (see coverillustration). product design and business practices intersect in the market forproducts, the sources of finance, and the suppliers of components and equipment.product design and process design appropriately linked constitute design formanufacturability,5 while process design realized successfully in production ismanifested as process excellence. production capabilities significantly influencewhat product designers can create (although box 2.1 illustrates another influenceon product design). finally, enabling and driving production tasks and businesspractices is the appropriate use of physical, human, and financial resources. themanufacturing philosophy of concurrent engineering is based on the interactionof all these elements; the manufacturing òwheeló depicted on the cover of thisreport is intended to suggest the integration of manufacturing activities both5 indeed, todayõs product designers must concern themselves with a wide range of concerns thatdid not affect those of yesterday; these include product designs that facilitate manufacturability,assembly, repair, maintenance, recyclability, affordability, and so on.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing: context, content, and history55box 2.1 the relationship between product designand implementing technologya design engineerõs choices about product design are necessarily constrainedby the technologies available to implement those designs. of course, implementing technologies include shaping and cutting tools and their capabilities for removing precisely controlled amounts of material. but a product also embodies technologies (e.g., the materials used in its construction, the technologies used to controlits operation). when these change, the engineerõs design options changeñit isclearly a different design matter to build a glider out of wood rather than metal orplastic composites.the technologies that control the operation and behavior of a final product arealso crucial. in recent years, design options have been expanded by increasingcapabilities to substitute electronic components for mechanical ones. watchmaking is a good example. fifty years ago, timekeeping accuracy was a direct function of the mechanical sophistication of a watch and the skill with which its components were fabricated, and high accuracy came only at great cost. today,electronic chips and liquid crystal displays enable comparably accurate timekeeping at a tenth or a hundredth the cost of watches 50 years ago. similarly, traditional mechanical fuel distribution in automobiles has been replaced by microprocessordriven electronic fuel injection and ignitions, which have led to lower emissions,better fuel economy, lower maintenance, and lowercost manufacturing.an extreme case is illustrated in production processes that are based on thedeposition and removal of material; both integrated circuit chips and books areproduced through such processes. in contrast to a more traditional productionparadigm in which raw materials are fashioned into parts and then assembled intoproducts, fabrication by material deposition requires many fewer intermediatesteps that are qualitatively distinctñrepetition of the same process (with differentparameters) is sufficient to manufacture the product. those designing products tobe produced in such a manner can generally operate with much more freedom intheir work than those designing within a more traditional paradigm in which thefabrication of intermediate components constrains the design options.another example is the use of sensors incorporated into finished products. it isexpected that sensors will be embedded into aircraft wing skins (for dynamic analysis and control of the aircraft), engine shafts (for torque readings), engine diecastings (for thermal and strain information), structure members (for load and corrosion information), and tubing (for information on pressure, temperature, or electromagnetic radiation). sensorloaded products may be able to indicate wherethey are, how they are being used, when they have been damaged, or when theyfail to meet a specified parameter. they may be able to monitor their environmental impact and signal for containment or destruction. sensors may even enable aproduct to undergo òdynamic remanufacturingó even as it is being used. alloyswith òmemoryó are a crude example of a sensorloaded product; nitanol is an alloythat òremembersó its original shape when it is subjected to temperatures in excessof a certain critical value, and a deformed nitanol structure will tend to revert to itsoriginal configuration upon heating. a more active example is provided by recentwork at the xerox palo alto research center on active control of structural elements. work there has demonstrated that by using a sensor and a computer tosense and compensate for initial deflections in a support column subject to buckling stresses, the strength of the column can be increased by a factor of 4 with anegligible increase in weight.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56information technology for manufacturingamong the four basic elements of manufacturing (the four spokes of the wheel)and across these elements (between the spokes). in contrast to traditional productdevelopment, which involved little communication between the various elementsof manufacturing, concurrent engineering emphasizes improved communicationand early consideration of òdownstreamó issues such as the relationship of product repairability by the end user to the ease of assembling the product. concurrent engineering stresses more or less simultaneous consideration of product andprocess design, customer needs, and business practices in order to speed thedevelopment process and avoid costly errors or redesigns.the historical context of manufacturingchange is ever present in manufacturing. new technologies brought to themarketplace in the form of products and capabilities become part of the platformthat manufacturers use to create the next generation of products. new economicconditions, new knowledge about how to organize manufacturing effort, newconsumer preferences, and new manufacturing techniques constantly alter themanufacturing front. in a few decades, manufacturing has undergone a majorchange with respect to the environment in which it operates, the methods throughwhich it conducts business, and the technologies that support it.early paradigm changesmanufacturing has undergone many paradigm shifts from the bronze andiron ages to todayõs technology, but the change has been especially apparent inthe last few hundred years, affecting the way manufacturing was performed, theprocesses used, the products made, and the economic power of the locale inwhich manufacturing was taking place.6 these paradigm shifts have ranged fromeli whitneyõs invention of interchangeable parts to the invention of numericallycontrolled machine tools. in each case the paradigm shift has resulted in anincrease in productivity of about a factor of 3 beyond the old method (figure 2.2).in the earliest paradigm, the transformation from raw material or subassemblies into a more valuable final product was carried out by skilled artisans andcraftspersons, people who practiced under expert supervision until they achievedproficiency. these experts performed the entire task of transformation, from rawmaterial to final assembly and test, mostly by hand. an areaõs economic wealthdepended on the skills of local artisans and craftspersons, and world fame accrued to specific areas that manufactured specific goods. london, imari, leeds,birmingham, and other artisan centers achieved world renown.6 a more comprehensive, engineeringoriented examination of manufacturing epochs can be foundin a table on the evolution of manufacturing in jaikumar (1988).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing: context, content, and history57during the industrial revolution, when steam power became readily available, economic wealth shifted to locations that had inexpensive access to powersources such as coal, oil, and hydroelectric power; to raw materials such as iron,aluminum, and copper; or to lowcost transportation via rivers or seaports. economic wealth was determined largely by the capital equipment available to transform raw materials into finished goods. pittsburgh, gary, the ruhr valley, andother smokestack areas became centers of the new manufacturing capabilities.the latter part of the industrial revolution introduced mass production methodology, changing the nature of work from a òdo it alló process to a specializationprocess. specialists now performed repetitive tasks in one specific activity,substantially decreasing the cost of the finished product. interchangeability ofparts became critical, but knowledge about how the entire product came togetherdecreased. detroit, wolfsberg, osaka, and other cities became centers of massproduction.one effect of these paradigm shifts, as shown in figure 2.3, is that employment in the united states in the manufacturing sector has dropped drasticallyeven as the value of goods shipped has remained relatively constant as a percentage of gross national product.the next major paradigm shift occurred after capital, manufacturing technology, and access to raw materials became widely available and no longer represented competitive advantages; u.s. manufacturers faced greater, worldwide064214921800183119001950197019878englishm/ctoolamericantaylorismspcnccimit?productivity1991figure 2.2 productivity follows paradigm shifts. the solid line in this figure fromjaikumar (1988) illustrates how each paradigm shift has resulted in greater manufacturingproductivity. the dotted line was added by the committee to suggest that the increasinguse of information technology (it) to integrate manufacturing activities may have animpact comparable to those of previous changes in manufacturing. spc, statistical process control; nc, numerical control; cim, computerintegrated manufacturing.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58information technology for manufacturingcompetition. various approaches to reducing costs and improving delivery wereundertaken, with significant attention being paid to industrial engineering.knowledge became important, as did quality control, time studies of manufacturing processes, flexible organization, skilled workers, and so on. the availabilityof an educated work force became a driver of economic wealth. silicon valley,los angeles, seattle, tokyo, route 128, and others became the new centers ofexcellence.recent changes and their effectsfrom the u.s. perspective, perhaps the single most profound change in themanufacturing environment in the recent past has been the emergence of a competitive worldwide market in sophisticated manufactured products as other nations have capitalized on advantages not available to the united states (e.g.,19501960197019801990403530252015manufacturing jobsas a % of total jobsmanufacturing outputas % of gdppercentageyearfigure 2.3 manufacturing over timeñrelationship between u.s. manufacturing jobsand manufacturing output, 1950 to 1990. gdp, gross domestic product. courtesy ofbureau of labor statistics.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing: context, content, and history59inexpensive yet highly educated labor, cheap capital). in the early stages of thisevolution, quality disciplines and process control methodologies became competitive weapons. japan, with its national quality programs and intense focus onquality, was the first country to use this strategy widely, but others have followedsuit. the global pursuit of quality has evolved to the point that quality, in itself,no longer confers a significant advantage: it is simply taken as a ògivenó byconsumers everywhere.product quality, more rapid delivery, better asset control and utilization, andthe ability to execute more complex manufacturing tasks and build increasinglycomplex products have come to characterize excellent manufacturers. manufacturers are now linked directly to their suppliers and customers. many retailerscollect worldwide sales data every day and modify their suppliersõ schedules inresponse. products are designed to suit regional styles and needs, even if they aremade in other regions. international payments are made in a variety of currenciesas materials are purchased, labor is obtained, ships are laden, and products aretranshipped. these business and marketing issues are not usually associated withthe more technical concerns of manufacturing, but in fact they are central to itssuccess and enlarge the very definition of manufacturing. most importantly, theyare very informationintensive. without informationdriven links to financialmarkets, logistics services, and market knowledge, manufacturing businesseswould operate in a vacuum or seek blindly to force their output on unwillingcustomers and ultimately fail.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60information technology for manufacturing603integrated product and process designintroductioninformation age manufacturing begins with information age design. designing both a product and the processes by which it is produced involves understanding what the product is to do and how the product will do those things, convertingthe requirements for the productõs behavior into engineering specifications, andproducing plans that marshal the materials, equipment, and people needed tomake and deliver the products. even apart from the pressures for shorter time tomarket for new products that stress current design paradigms, new design challenges are generated by new product trends (e.g., shrinking feature size, decreasing tolerances, or a growing numbers of parts) and by new manufacturing processes (that designers must learn to exploit).as a result, the amount of knowledge and data relevant to product andprocess design is rapidly becoming more than a single individual can comprehend. a further complicating factor is that an integrated product and processdesign (ippd) effort must usually be coordinated among a number of engineeringteams with different specialities and from different companies, since it is rare fora single company to have all the skills, technologies, and financial resources todesign inhouse all of the components needed. managing this coordination taskrepresents a major opportunity for information technology (it) to have a positiveimpact.as described in chapter 1, a comprehensive ippd system would includeintegration of performance specifications, conceptual design, detailed design,manufacture, and assembly, together with the ability to simulate actual use, fieldinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design61repair, upgrade, and disposal. such a comprehensive system will not be possiblefor many years.however, an important first step toward this vision can be achieved byjoining detailed design with manufacturing and assembly. to accomplish thisrequires a new level of information structuring and integration. featurebaseddesign is the best way currently known to capture and integrate the necessaryinformation that links the geometry of parts with their functions, fabrication, andassembly. present computeraided design (cad)1 systems support creation ofgeometry only. apart from stress and thermal analyses of parts and certain typesof kinematic analyses, most design analyses must be done manually becausethere is no way to obtain the necessary information from the circles and linesstored in the cad system.an ippd system that realizes this first step toward a more comprehensivesystem will consist of three elements: a database, a set of algorithms, and userinterfaces. the database will be structured to capture the information about thedesign in the form of geometry plus features (places of interest on each part,together with information on what role they play in the productõs function andhow to make and assemble the features in relation to each other). the algorithmswill take the information they need from this database to simulate function,determine optimal assembly sequences, estimate fabrication or assembly cost, orperform designforassembly analyses, for example. the user interfaces willmake it easier for the designer to create a design using features and apply thealgorithms to study and perfect the design.prototype software that does some of these things exists now. this softwarecan be a basis on which to build a new kind of computerassisted design thatintegrates technical, business, and economic issues relevant to design. it cansupport analyses of cost and function, as well as the study of families of productsthat share parts or subassemblies. such software has been demonstrated for thedesign of certain complex electromechanical items.another itenabled connection between design and manufacturing is the useof stereolithography as a visualization aid for designers and as the basis for rapidgeneration of prototype molds and dies for the production of mechanical parts. inan experiment conducted by a major automobile manufacturer, vendor bids basedon a drawing and a stereolithographed model were lower than bids based on adrawing alone; this result was explained by the fabricatorõs greater ability tovisualize the complexities of the item in question and thus to more accuratelydetermine the costs of its fabrication.1 over the years, the acronym cad has evolved in meaning. cad initially stood for òcomputeraided draftingó; however, perhaps because information technology achieved greater penetration intothe world of design engineers, it has come to mean òcomputeraided design,ó of which one part isdrafting.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62information technology for manufacturingonce a core design system is in trial use, it can be extended up and down thedesign process to include concept design and field use considerations. the information hooks in the data structures will be there to integrate with functionalsimulations, repair environments, and other aspects of product design. thisevolution of the design system will be fueled by experience with its core implementation; feedback from users will determine what new capabilities it needs.design paradigmselectronic designof all the different types of design for discrete manufacturing, the design ofvery large scale integrated (vlsi) circuits (described in greater detail in box 3.1)is today the most sophisticated. thus, it is reasonable to suggest that the vlsibox 3.1 an example of information technologydrivenintegrated product and process designin the semiconductor industry, electronic computeraided design (cad), alsocalled electronic design automation, is a good illustration of how information technology can support the integrated product and process design process. today, adesigner of a chip using commercially available cad tools would undertake thefollowing steps:¥conceptual design. customer requirements are determined and convertedinto design goals (e.g., instruction set, power consumption, and chip size andspeed). designers choose an underlying technology based on these goals. inaddition, an associated òframeworkó orchestrates the operation of various otherdesign tools, thus enforcing some of the methodology (e.g., cannot proceed tostep x before step y is complete).¥detailed design. in detailed design, the conceptual design is reduced tologic elements that take in, convert, and put out logical values. a designer determines the basic architecture of the chip (how it will be partitioned into functionalunits) and then writes a description of each functional unit using a hardware designlanguage such as vhsic hardware design language (vhdl). detailed designinvolves making tradeoffs among power, speed, and size; tools for detailed design address automated logic design, test vector generation, formal verification toensure that the gatelevel view of the chip matches the vhdl description, earlytiming analysis, and the spatial arrangement of various components. tools arealso available to perform a variety of detailed design tasks, such as static timinganalysis, partitioning, layout, routing, wiring, and circuitlevel timing; results fromthese tasks may impel the designer to alter the vhdl description. unless a chip isto be fully customized (perhaps for reasons of maximizing speed of operation orminimizing power consumption or size), libraries are used to provide logic components to be integrated into the new chip. detailed design results in a set of chipmasks that drives the production process.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design63design paradigm might suggest directions for improving the ippd process inother manufacturing domains. an examination of vlsi design suggests that itssuccesses are based on certain key attributes, including:¥appropriate design abstractions. the amount of detail needed in eachstep of electronic design is appropriate for the work to be performed at that step,thus allowing, for example, the threedimensional characteristics of a chip to bevirtually ignored until the final step of the detailed design process. central tothese design abstractions are languages that describe electronic products at manylevels of abstraction (e.g., verilog hdl) and the ability to use these descriptionsin simulation, in designspace exploration, and in automation of a large part of aproductõs detailed design. further, design tools can operate at different levels ofabstraction and still obtain feedback from lower levels in the abstraction hierarchy; such tools enable an iterative refinement of the chip design that starts with¥simulation and verification. the detailed chip design must be tested todetermine correctness and the extent to which the design meets functional requirements. functional simulation ensures that the chip, as represented throughthe vhdl description, actually meets customer requirements for logic. physicalsimulation, orders of magnitude slower than functional simulation, takes place atthe gate or transistor level to ensure that timing and other layoutdependent issuesare handled appropriately. physical tests are performed on the chip that mayreveal flaws in the simulator used to design the chip, flaws in the fabrication process, or design flaws that were initially unnoticed by the designer.the design stages and simulation tests are repeated until results suggest thatthe overall chip design is adequate. process design generally need not be undertaken to create a fabrication process for a particular chip, since chip designersdesign only products that a given factory can fabricate; process design is neededto plan the factory and the fabrication technologies the factory will use to produceelectronic chips of neararbitrary design within one product or process technologyfamily.the design of a semiconductor technology requires similar steps. what resultsis a set of design rules for the technology and highlevel chip masks (used foretching the chipõs features onto the semiconductor substrate) and usually a set oftools and library functions that the designer can use in implementing the logicaland physical design of a chip built with this technology. these library functionsconsist largely of boolean functions, circuit components such as latches, registers,register files, and memories, and design rules that define how they can be connected together in a logic network. each library cell has a geometric view, a functional view (e.g., a threeinput nand gate) for use in logic synthesis, a behavioralview for use in highlevel simulation, a fault view for use in testing, and a timingview for use in timing and delay analyses. cell libraries may contain families ofsamefunction circuits with different timing, power consumption, test characteristics, and geometry.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64information technology for manufacturinghighlevel estimates and continues to the manufactured chips. today, highlevelchip specifications allow design alternatives to be explored almost at once, leading to early detection of conceptuallevel errors and pruning of unprofitablepaths. the early design can be refined and made more specificñdata collectedfrom this level can be backannotated and used by higherlevel tools.2¥appropriately parameterized òpartsó that can be used in the design process. chips with new designs often make considerable use of logic functions thathave been implemented before, for example, boolean functions, latches, drivers,and receivers and terminators. libraries of these basic functions (called librarycells) and assemblies of these cells (called macros) that implement more sophisticated functions enable a designer to use prevalidated designs (perhaps with thespecification of a few parameters) when appropriate, with the result that thesefunctions are more likely to be integrated into a new chip correctly and in lesstime than if they are designed from scratch. (on the other hand, since connectingpredesigned building blocks almost always does not result in optimal chipperfomance, chip designers may choose to forego the advantages of libraries toimprove various dimensions of chip performance.)¥the ability of the designer to ignore most offnominal behavior and sideeffects in the design process. in practice, the behavior of transistors is influencedvery strongly by their context. for example, a logic gate generally has differentspeed and power characteristics depending on where it is used. however, thedesign rules associated with library cells and macros and the tools that enforceadherence to these rules enable a designer to treat library components as parts thatcan be connected without concern for issues such as backloading.¥a close relationship between the fabrication processes and the extent towhich the actual product matches the original design. if a designer adheres to theset of chip design rules3 appropriate for a given semiconductor technology, aproperly controlled fabrication process will yield the desired product and desiredproduct behavior (even if individual chips are different at some level). òcontrolóusually includes scrupulous attention to impurities in materials, surrounding2 a specific example of this iterative design process is the use of logic synthesis and early(prephysical design) timing. statistical methods are used to time the logic before it is placed andwired, and automated logic design systems (logic synthesis) can use these data to tune the logicdesign to meet timing requirements. after physical design, the timing is refined and made moreaccurate because more precise information about wire lengths and routes is present. the logic can beannotated with the exact times and be brought back to logic synthesis for readjustment of the logicdesign based on the new information.3 the fabrication of digital chips uses what are essentially fixed manufacturing processes that areconfigured by patterns (plates and masks) derived directly by algorithms from the chip specifications. for this reason, chip fabrication is sometimes called a patterninsensitive manufacturingprocess. the role of design rules is to restrict the patterns to those that will be faithfully honored bythe fixed production process.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design65gases, and process fluids and is pursued to ensure that the process itself remainsstable and thus able to honor any design obeying the design rules.while the chip design process in actual practice generally requires moremanual intervention than the idealized description above would suggest, mostexperience in electronic design suggests that automated design tools have dramatically increased the complexity of chips that can be fabricated and havereduced the time needed to deliver designs of constant complexity.4application to mechanical designmechanical design poses myriad different problems, and the extent to whichthe electronic design paradigm can be applied to mechanical design is a matter ofsome debate. digital logic can be considered as a special class of product whosedesign and fabrication problems have proven amenable (with the expenditure ofconsiderable r&d resources) to the application of information technology. bycontrast, mechanical items represent a wholly different class of products forwhich there is currently no formal representation of function and there is nodirect algorithmdominated way for reducing a functional description to a physical design; whether this is fundamentally true or merely a limitation on currentknowledge is as yet unknown.most importantly, the science and engineering underlying models of mechanical products and the processes to manufacture them are not nearly as wellunderstood as those for electronic products. mechanical designs are characterized by complex and large multimedia energy interactions between a limitednumber of elements and by changes in element behavior over time. the information needed to describe multiple behaviors of mechanical systems is difficult toexpress in a single format or language, and there are few tools for representing or4 this is not to say that electronic design does not have limitations. mooreõs law states that thenumber of transistors on a stateoftheart chip will double about every 12 months. however, thedesign capability of engineers is not increasing with time nearly as fast as the number of transistors.using todayõs design tools, an expert electronic designer engaged in fully customized design canreasonably hope to complete the necessary design work on a few hundred transistors in a single dayof work; such work includes the detailed design, debugging, and documentation needed for a commercial product. for example, the pentium processor (order of magnitude 5 million transistors) tookabout 100 engineers 2 years to develop, a rate that corresponds to approximately 250 transistors perday per engineer. the resulting gap between the complexity of a chip and the design capability ofindividual engineers must be filled by the use of additional engineers. over the long run, twoapproaches for filling the design gap seem plausible: better tools to increase the design capability ofindividual engineers, and the reuse of existing and validated designs to reduce the amount of workthat must be undertaken from scratch. some designers today claim the ability to lay out hundreds ofthousands of transistors (tens of thousands of gates) per designeryear by using highlevel designparadigms with tools and programmable chips.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66information technology for manufacturingbox 3.2 aspects of the mechanical design processthree basic elements of mechanical design are the following:1. conceptual design. the design of mechanical systems often calls for themanagement of significant energy flows, the consideration of complex threedimensional geometry, and the understanding of relationships between geometryand energy. the òunderlying technologyó in which a mechanical system will beimplemented is often not naturally specified by the product requirements, and thespace of design goals is much more multidimensional than in the case of verylarge scale integrated (vlsi) systems.2. detailed design. for mechanical items, detailed design is generally independent of conceptual design, since no formal methods exist for linking conceptsor functions to detailed geometry except in perhaps a few special cases. in mostinstances, detailed design of mechanical systems that are even marginally efficient in their use of space, weight, or energy generally requires the custom creation of integrated combinations of threedimensional geometry rather than piecing together predesigned and tested library building blocks. using standard partsor designs for parts used for other products is not easy because geometries differgreatly even for the òsameó item, and there is no way to catalog them systematically. the few standard library or catalog items that are available are generally notmain function carriers but instead are fasteners, bearings, motors, valves, andother similar items. difficulty in mechanical design often centers on creative geometric reasoning, management of multiple behaviors, mitigation of unavoidableside effects, and anticipation of a variety of failure modes. (in some cases, amechanical design is an evolutionary outgrowth of a past design. in these cases(such as automotive suspensions) progress is being made in establishing designtemplates that capture in parametric or rule form the traditional parts and relationships among parts that every good example of the genre must contain. designthen consists of packaging the given elements, using existing simulations to confirm basic behaviors.)3. verification. computer simulation tools can predict nominal behavior at thetesting mechanical designs that are comparable in power to those available for theanalogous electronic design task. a similar point applies to the modeling ofmultiple and simultaneous highlevel energy interactions. compared to the problems encountered by the vlsi circuit designer, the problems that challenge themechanical designer, described in box 3.2, suggest important research questionsfor better it support of the design effort. these challenges are the subject of theremainder of this chapter.needs and research for mechanical designas noted above, it is not clear that the paradigm of electronic design can beapplied to mechanical design, the area that the committee believes poses thegreatest need today. nevertheless, the successes of todayõs electronic designparadigm suggest research areas to improve mechanical design.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design67specifically, an important goal is the development of appropriate abstractions at every stage of the design process and tools that manipulate these abstractions. abstraction is not the same at each phase of a design, and resolution ofimplementation details is deferred in the design process until such details arereally needed. the use of such abstractions reduces work because existing representations can be reused, and different representations can be related throughtheir common pieces. key to developing these abstractions is the exploitation ofhierarchical composability (i.e., the construction of complex standards or information models from simpler ones). researchers should seek appropriate abstractions for mechanical products and develop tools to support design in terms ofthose abstractions.in electronic design, many sophisticated tools have been developed to support physical aspects of design, while fewer tools exist for aspects of conceptualdesign such as requirement gathering or architectural decision making. thissystem level if only one or two main modes of behavior are simulated at once andonly in the case of sufficiently simple mechanical systems. since side effects andoffnominal behaviors often cannot be adequately modeled and usually cannot bedesigned out, either extensive, timeconsuming, and costly prototyping and fieldtesting are required, or the designer must design the system very conservatively tomitigate the consequences of these side effects to an adequate degree over theexpected life of the system.process design is integral to the design of individual mechanical systems. onereason is that for many mechanical parts, there is no way to automatically convertproduct geometry and other specifications to a fabrication process such as a sequence of machining steps. designing fixtures, for example, is a major problem.moreover, most mechanical fabrication processes are neither patterninsensitivenor precisely controllable; even when the commands to a given process are repeated identically, the output of the process (as implemented on an actual production line) is different each time, and the differences may well matter. a commandto drill a hole 0.500 inches in diameter may be provided, but the resulting hole maybe 0.499 inches in one case and 0.502 inches in a second case. in general,elimination of these differences is either too difficult or too expensive. thus, process design involves the choice of an economical process whose output comprises mostly acceptable (though different) parts. in most cases, there are no simulations that can predict the range of variations in nominally identical outcomes that agiven mechanical process might generate. this range, usually called òprocesscapabilityó when appropriately normalized, is often estimated by experienced people. (such òtolerancelikeó problems also affect chip fabrication: for example, achip that emerges from the fabrication process with line widths that are too large ortoo small may run more slowly or not at all. such issues affect yield rates dramatically. the difference is that for electronic fabrication, the process that determinesyield is independent of the pattern on the chip to a considerable degree.)the above three steps may have to be repeated until a functional and manufacturable design in achieved.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68information technology for manufacturingdisparity suggests that it is far easier to collect, characterize, and represent dataabout òthingsó than about ideas and decisions. nevertheless, the payoff forautomated support of activities such as requirement gathering, corporate decisionmaking, and overall product architecture is so high that research directed at thesetargets is also worth undertaking.the committee believes that concentrating on the areas described in the restof this chapter will yield the most significant benefits to the ippd process in theshort to medium term. other areas in the ippd process not described in thischapter (mostly in the conceptual design area) will be advanced in the short tomedium term by better communication capabilities and by better and additionalaccess to data.the committee notes also that success in improving design is likely to yieldparticular benefits to small manufacturers. to a considerable degree, tools thatsupport product and process design can be categorized as òmostly softwareó; thatis, they require low capital investment to obtain. moreover, the increasing powerof computational hardware (and its dropping cost) will make these tools moreaccessible to manufacturing firms with small capital budgets. to capitalize onthis enabling trend, it is necessary to design these tools and their interfaces so thatsmall businesses with limited technical depth can use them readily. a growinginformation infrastructure (chapter 6) will link these small firms with each otherand with larger firms. the emergence of standard data formats and interoperabletools will facilitate the spread of advanced capabilities.table 3.1 lists several areas for research in product and process design. ingeneral, the research proposed by the committee focuses on designspace exploration, creating (parameterized) geometry, characterizing tolerances, predictingfailure modes, increasing robustness, and facilitating reuse of components anddesigns. in addition, major issues of scaleup and complexity remain to beaddressed explicitly as an integral part of any research done in these areas. explaining these research foci is the subject of the remainder of this chapter.table 3.1 research to advance product and process designsubject areaexample of research neededmultiview design descriptionsdesign by functionrelation of geometry to functionfunctional simulationparametric designcapture of nominal and varianta mathematics of variation forbehavior of products andperformance modelingprocesses in one modeldescriptions of product function andvariants directly related to descriptionsof geometric or material variationsinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design69table 3.1 continuedsubject areaexample of research neededmultipurpose data and modeltechniques for relating models atrepresentationsdifferent levels of abstractionlogicbased representationsprotocols, formats, and representationsfor data interchange among modelsdesign methods and tools fordecomposition methods to break productgroups of parts and systemsconcepts into subsystemssubassembly performance models andinterface descriptions for joiningsubassemblies to each otherassembly planningtradeoff analysis (e.g., cost and design)process description languagesset of process primitives (building blocks) fromand modelswhich process models can be builtlanguages with syntax checking forcorrectness and completeness of processdescriptionsresource description modelsaccommodation of spatial and temporaldimensions of processesnovel design considerationseasy, errorfree configuration control at theselling or servicing stagemanufacturing of a robust final product fromparts obtained from different sourcesproductprocess data modeldata descriptions for many physical processesand entities in a unified formdescriptions of design interactions, analyses,and process steps integrated with productgeometry and function descriptionsdecision aidsdata visualizationdatabase searching using geometric features,performance criteria, or process descriptionsintelligent advisorsgeometric reasoningvisualization toolsknowledge and informationsystems that capture corporate memory andmanagementknowledgesystems that support corporate learningtechniques for handling data legacy issuessystems that record design history and rationaleinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70information technology for manufacturingresearch for product descriptioncommunication among engineering professionals has always relied on modelsñsketches, drawings, analytic models of behavior, or many other symbolicrepresentations of knowledge related to products. however, what distinguishesdata or information models from arbitrary documentation, such as simple reportsor drawings, is the addition of formalization.5 this formalization is motivated bythe need for unambiguous communication between collaborators and/or our desire to use and interoperate among a growing set of computerbased applicationtools. specifically, a data model is expressed in some data description language.a language specification defines the form and meaning (syntax and semantics) ofentities in the language. the initial graphics exchange specification (iges;iges, 1993), for instance, specifies the language of iges data files by specifyingtheir syntactic form and relating the entities in the data files to known geometricentities.traditionally, the specifications of data description languages such as igeshave been written in a natural language such as english, and a human being mustuse that description to build a software parser/recognizer for the data descriptionlanguage. the semantics of the elements of the language remain expressed solelyin english. more recent efforts such as pdes/step (product data exchangeusing the standard for the exchange of product model data; iso, 1994) provide amore formal language, express, for use as a data description language inwhich data models are described. express allows the modeler to capture someof the semantics of the data by explicitly recognizing relationships between dataelements along with the cardinality of such relationships and by capturing constraints between data elements. box 3.3 describes two approaches to knowledgerepresentation. appropriate formalisms also support the generation of agreementon queries about data; application tool development; language translation; andservices such as change notification, management of information dependencies,and matching of information producers and consumers.a highly general expressive capability is needed to support the exchange of5 the term òformalizationó is used in this chapter in the sense of òa greater degree of rigor, clarity,and explicitness that would be necessary for computerbased representation, manipulation, and analysis.ó however, the extent to which it should include matters such as formal proofs of completenessor correctness is subject to some debate within the community, with some advocating much higherdegrees of mathematical formalization than others. those who believe in high degrees of mathematical formalization tend to be logic theorists. the advantage of logicbased approaches is thatthey are neat and clean and amenable to the power of formal logic and mathematics. on the otherhand, it is not necessary to embrace this degree of formalization in an attempt to get away frommodels specified in english and a few drawings. indeed, the need to cope with the uncertainty of themanufacturing environment and with spatial and temporal relationships (for example) requires that aformal logic be modified in a way that reduces the òneatnessó of the formalism and its ease of use asa base language for representing interesting phenomena. the result may be a more òscruffyó approach to the problem.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design71box 3.3 knowledge representation foundationsdifferent computeraided tools for working in different domains may requiredifferent data models for a given product. nevertheless, since such models generally contain much common structure that can be exploited to reduce the work increating new models and to provide the basis for generic tools that operate onrepresentations of knowledge, it is inappropriate to create separate, toptobottomstandards for each domain of interest.the first requirement is a basic framework that provides building blocks sufficient to our diverse forms and uses of product knowledge. once these buildingblocks are in place, it is possible to develop standards for domainspecific applications. two approaches to developing the base building blocks appear promising:¥information modeling languages, such as the express language that isused to state the pdes/step standards, which provide a capability to specifymachinereadable definitions of shared data. express allows a designer to describe object classes with attributes and inheritance, which offers limited formalsemantics for the data (i.e., for database operations). the pdes/step effort hasencouraged the development of tools that can operate on the express languagespecifications to provide capabilities such as graphical display of data structuresand generation of code to support tool creation or database implementations.¥knowledgerepresentation languages, such as the knowledge interchangeformat (kif). knowledge representation languages are based on the concept of aòshared ontology,ó which is simply an agreedupon set of terms and meanings thatenable two parties to exchange knowledge for some purposes in some domain. inpractice, it is a dictionary of classes, relations, functions, and object constants,along with their definitions in humanreadable text and machineinterpretable sentences. this approach offers enormous flexibility, including the taxonomic capabilities of objectoriented and framebased approaches, and the ability to constructaxiomatic theories. consider, for example, the following query posed by an analyst working on a product design: òi added the following assumptions to theory z. . . and took the following quantities as given . . . . i then arrived at the followingconclusion (part x will fail). do you support my conclusion?óbecause they are rooted in firstorder logic, the knowledge representation ontologies are more expressive and hence more flexible than expressbasedstep standards. conversely, the step standards provide much more direct support to developers of computeraided applications through application protocolsand other mechanisms provided in the standards. translation facilities betweenexpress and kifbased constructs allow complementary use of both formalisms.engineering knowledge, specifically the ability to exchange a conceptualizationthat specifies the objects that are presumed to exist in some area of interest, aswell as the relationships that hold among them (genesereth and nilsson, 1987).for example, for two parties to discuss models of dynamical behavior, they mustfirst agree on the use of terms such as generalized coordinates, position, andvelocity, and they must understand the laws on which the models rely (e.g.,newtonõs laws, lagrangeõs equations, or kaneõs equations). at the same time,information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72information technology for manufacturingbox 3.4 domainspecific librariesin creating domainspecific libraries of representations, a balance must bestruck between shortterm needs (dictated by existing tools) and possible futureuses of the knowledge. tool designers must also accept the reality that both thetools and their context for use will be changing continuously as technology andorganizations evolve.any specific modeling choice constitutes a compromise between a variety ofcompeting interestsñthe chief tradeoff being between specific or shorttermneeds and generality. for example, a controls design department and a dynamicanalysis department in an organization may regularly exchange models of a satelliteõs dynamic behavior. but the information models appropriate to their needsmay require a simple model that accounts for only a single degree of vibrationalfreedom or a complex model based on partial differential equations. at a minimum, it is necessary to identify the intersecting knowledge in the two views thatallows a more formal bridging of the gaps between their different views of theworld.standardization, or the practice of conforming to a particular representation, isan important part of sharing knowledge efficiently. standardizing at the level ofknowledge representation greatly reduces the overhead costs associated withtranslation and the construction of information models. however, the need forlarge numbers of domainspecific information models suggests a very flexible approach to standardization. unlike choosing between syntactic variants such asiges and dxf,* there is much more to distinguishing among different representations of a behavior theory like kinematics. in kinematics, a variety of formalismsexist that can model the same behavior (e.g., quaternions, matrix exponentials,screws, euler parameters, euler angles). even particular representations of screwtheory could differ significantly in their completeness and in the manner by whichbasic entities are defined. individual information models, then, will be evaluated bypotential users in much the same way that designers evaluate the choice of motorsfor a particular device. models will come in many shapes and sizes with varyingcapabilities; some will be good, some bad. a wide variety of competing representations is expected and even desirable.*design exchange format, a proprietary interchange standard controlled by autocad, sanraphael, calif.6 additional discussion of these examples can be found in msb (1988), pp. 1719. it recommendsresearch on product and process design, including data structures for describing products in terms ofconceptual design, functional features, dimensions and tolerances, manufacturable features, and soforth, and methods that allow such structures to be interfaced with other computerintegrated manufacturing components, such as knowledgebased systems.generalpurpose approaches, while inherently flexible, are intrinsically clumsy touse precisely because they do not provide specialization to individual domains ofinterest. domainspecific approaches may be more efficient for use in thoseindividual domains and may be more expressive for them (box 3.4).examples of the research needed for product description to support designefforts include:6information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design73¥ design descriptions that allow multiple views of a product (geometry,engineering parameters, functional requirements and behaviors, and relationships among these domains). data models should be capable of representing the product or component from many different views at differentstages of design, manufacture, and use. the product designer should be ableto view its geometry, tolerances, assembly problems, and repair scenarios;the techniques of featurebased design and parametric design hold particularpromise (box 3.5). the current pdes/step effort does address some ofthese issues; for example, an addition to the step application protocolcalled configuration controlled design will contain both the geometry of aproduct and information on the revision, release, and effectiveness associated with producing this product. nevertheless, no adequate data modelexists, nor are there adequate methods for supporting these activities.¥ model formulations or simulations that are capable of describing the mainoffnominal behaviors, or variants, as well as the nominal behavior of aproduct.7 for many products, more effort goes into anticipating and mitigating a wide range of offnominal behavior (e.g., testing aircraft for fatigue andcrack resistance, determining if layers in a microprocessor will peel apartunder temperature extremes) than into determining how to meet the mainfunctional requirements. (see box 3.6.)¥ better understanding of relationships between different representationsand models. because of the interdisciplinary nature of collaborative productdesign, relationships between different representations are important. questions such as how to relate a model in someone elseõs view of the world to amodel in oneõs own view are ubiquitous. determining relationships betweenmodels (e.g., between models of different levels or types of abstraction) willremain a difficult problem for some time, but a farsighted approach to knowledge representation can greatly enhance computational support through theexchange of information among different applications. logicbased representations may help in this area in the future, although there is debate on thepoint; further exploration is needed.¥ formats and representations that enable data exchange among differentdesign tools. while different computeraided tools for design are based ondifferent data models, much of the content of these models is overlapping.as more computational support for design comes online, engineers will rely7 a 1991 nrc report recommends research on tolerance analysis, tolerance representations, toleranceperformance relationships, and tolerance standards and measurement methods. see msb(1991), pp. 5657.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74information technology for manufacturingbox 3.5 featurebased designa featurebased data model is a way of describing a design that contains moreinformation than just geometry. in a computer model, a circle may represent ahole, but it is not a hole. however, featurebased data could include text datasaying that it is a hole and giving the diameter and tolerances, plus numericalcontrol instructions for how to drill it. the òholeó is then called a feature, which infact is a data object that contains instructions for how to draw itself on the computer screen and how to drive a machine tool to drill it. features can describe machined areas, or they can describe areas where a measurement will be taken(òmeasurement featuresó) or where one part will be joined to another (òassemblyfeaturesó). features are thus able to hold a great deal more information than apurely geometric model can. in principle, features can contain design intent aswell as details about how to make and use the feature. for example, a pocket tohold a precision ball bearing would require tighter tolerances and a finer surfacefinish than a hole through which oil is squirted. featurebased models may alsoreduce storage requirements, because compact functional descriptions could bestored and voluminous geometric descriptions could be generated from the functional descriptions when needed.featurebased design also supports higherlevel product data models and descriptions of configurations. a simple model of configurations may include relationships among subparts and attributes. such a model can be used to create amore specialized theory of configuration design that includes connections betweenparts, special part subclasses, predefined lists of available parts, and so on. theidea is to create multiple layers of representation that mimic the multiple levels ofabstraction at which we view things. this approach has two benefits: work isreduced through reuse of existing representations, and different representationscan be related through their common pieces.several step projects provide for specification of simple form features, forexample, through and blind holes, although the taxonomy is far from complete. inaddition, new work has just been initiated in providing a parametric representationwithin step, an ability that is necessary to support more extensive use of formfeatures. ford motor company is actively working on a research project calledrapid response manufacturing that makes extensive use of form features. output from this project is expected to drive development of the step standard in thisarea. this program is being conducted jointly with general motors, texas instruments, united technologies corporation, and allied signal.increasingly on information models to help bridge the gap betweenmultidisciplinary users of diverse tools; exchangeable geometric models arethus a particularly pressing need. success in developing exchangeable representations of performance, geometry, and process requirements is a prerequisite for their use in design tools and by practitioners in the allied domains ofprocess equipment design and shop floor planning and operations, as well asby designers in other companies or in other technical domains.¥ tools that facilitate understanding the relationship between cost and deinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design75box 3.6 limitations of tolerance analysisthe inherent variability in the shape of manufactured parts imposes major limitations on the performance of products assembled from those parts. to reducethe impact of such limitations, designers traditionally impose tolerances on theseparts. however, too little is known at present about the relationships betweenunwanted variations in shape and product performance to permit rational assignment of tolerances except in a few special cases such as optical systems andjournal bearings. in most cases, tolerances are assigned on the basis of experience or the capability of available manufacturing systems. two fundamental tolerance problems are tolerance analysis (i.e., identifying which dimensional variations contribute most to a final error) and tolerance allocation (i.e., choosing thebest way to distribute inevitable tolerances among several potential contributingsources during design so that the desired level of final error is achieved at minimum cost). today, most tolerance analyses are simple onedimensional fit studies. more complex multidimensional studies are done less often and employ monte carlo methods. these methods are difficult to use because there is noautomated way to apply them to a computer model of the geometry. they alsosuffer from combinatorial and scaleup barriers. research is needed to extendengineering models and then link them to geometry and geometric variations.sign choices. design tools for electronic devices typically do not provideinformation about fabrication cost, because the cost of fabricating a givenchip is approximately independent of what is put on it.8 but this is not truefor mechanical design, in which design choices may have a significant impact on the cost of making the final product. designers need to be able tokeep such highlevel tradeoffs constantly in mind through the use of betterdesign tools. many papers have been written on this subject, and some suchtools exist (e.g., hewlettpackardõs sheet metal design advisor).more generally, product data models will have to include information thatgoes beyond simple geometry. these models should also relate highlevel function, assembly processes, possible interactions between product and user, theproductõs structure and geometry, a schema for describing component parts, andthe productõs behavior, manufacture, maintenance, and ultimate disposal or recyclingñin principle, any information that could describe a product. moreover, theinformation contained in a product data model may represent a single instance ofthe product, a set of possible instances, or even a set of possible descriptions.8 one qualification is necessary. while chip fabrication is generally patterninsensitive, the yield(i.e., the fraction of chips that are usable after the fabrication process is complete) is a direct functionof the feature sizes and material gaps chosen: wider lines and wider gaps between lines generallyresult in a higher yield, which in turn reduces the unit costs of chips that may be sold.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76information technology for manufacturingbox 3.7 using design as a strategic toolnippondenso co. ltd. (ndcl) manufactures automotive components. its order mix is highly variable and unpredictable, and thus a primary challenge forndcl has been to develop a factory environment in which it can produce a neararbitrary mix of product variants. this type of flexible manufacturing has oftenbeen attacked as a problem involving factory floor operations, but ndcl has defined and solved it primarily as a problem of design.in particular, ndclõs design approach is based on what can be called a combinatoric method (figure 3.1). product variety is created by selecting among several versions of each part in a product. each product is designed so that thephysical and functional interfaces between parts are the same for all versions ofeach part. the result is that any combination of versions of parts can be assembled into a working unit. the interfaces between the parts and the assembly equipment are similarly standardized so that differences between versions of parts aretransparent to the equipment.ndcl achieves its flexibility goals by using fairly ordinary parts and then employing unusual logistical methods to assemble them into different variants. theschedule for fabrication of parts is not based on the details of what kinds of itemsare ordered, but instead follows broad statistical patterns of orders. it is the assembly process that addresses the detailed stream of orders. because assemblyis so much faster than fabrication and because ndclõs assembly machines canbe switched from model to model so quickly, model mix can be addressed muchmore easily and economically during assembly than during fabrication.close coordination of top management objectives, product design, and production technology is required to carry out this approach. as a result, it can be saidthat ndcl has taken concurrent engineering well beyond the goal of improvingfabrication or assembly. instead, ndcl has learned how to use design to achievethe essentially strategic goal of meeting the demands of its customers.thus, in addition to serving the traditional role of providing neutral data formatsfor computeraided application tools, models must support a host of activities formanaging and exchanging information.research for process descriptiontools for process description have application to the design and operation offactories; in addition, they are the basis for experiments with and evaluation ofcontrol and organizational changes before actual systems are installed. processdescriptions will also be used to enhance product design, so that by simulation thebest process can be matched to the product design (and vice versa) for maximumeconomic advantage (or to satisfy whatever criteriañsuch as quality or time todeliveryñare important for the particular case). box 3.7 describes a rich andproductive interaction among process design, product design, and what happenson the shop floor.the primary need in process description is formalization, which is necessaryinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design77for representing processes in sufficient detail and with enough specificity to makethe process description adequately complete and unambiguous.9 such formalisms allow designers to describe, enforce, and simulate processes, including fac9 of course, at the root of a good process description is a good scientific and engineering understanding of the specific process involvedñthe best tools to formalize process description are nothelpful if the knowledge base they are used to formalize is shaky and uncertain. indeed, manyfabrication processes in use today are incompletely understood and only partially characterized.still, as important and crucial as such understanding may be, a research agenda for process characterization is outside the scope of this report.figure 3.1 a panel meter (left) and the combinatoric strategy (right). each zigzag lineon the right represents a valid type of meter, which is assembled by following the pathfrom top to bottom. òsdó stands for standardized design, an effort that reduced thenumber of variants of each part as shown. the production rate is 32,000 per shift. aòcatalogó of only 16 parts is sufficient to support production of 288 different kinds ofmeter. if all the 288 possible paths at the right were drawn, one would see that each partis a member of many possible types of meters. thus to first order most parts will be usedregardless of the pattern of the order stream, so that there is little inventory risk in makingthe 16 kinds of parts. if each different meter type were created by a few parts that werespecial to that type, a shift in the order pattern would require a large and awkward shift inthe schedules for fabricating parts, which could not be accomplished as quickly as theswitching of an assembly machine. also, feeding the hundreds of different kinds of partsneeded to support so many varieties of meter would be very awkward. these are some ofthe reasons that variety can be achieved more easily during assembly than during fabrication. courtesy of nippondenso.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78information technology for manufacturingtory processes (involving both machines and people), design activities, and decision processes.research needs in the area of process description include:¥ a language for expressing process descriptions that facilitates checking forcorrectness and completeness and the capability to express not only nominalprocess behavior but also variant behavior. such a language must also betranslatable across technical domains.¥ process model representation schemes (both aggregate and detailed) andonline data collection. data included in such schemes should describelogistic, fabrication, materialhandling, inspection, assembly, and test processes and should give information on the characteristics, capabilities, andcosts of various production and assembly methods. data should be capturedas a product is being produced so that the process can be improved.¥ specific process models that reflect all relevant spatial and temporal transformations. such models are critical for the local control and planning ofmanufacturing operations and will draw on knowledge about the kinematiccapabilities of individual pieces of equipment and other process limitations,processing capabilities of the equipment, and tool and fixturing capabilitiesassociated with the equipment. ultimately, these models should contain thedetail necessary for dynamic control of the individual operations as well asthe information required to simulate the operation of the manufacturing system, indicate the effects of perturbing the operational parameters as well asthe effects of complex interactions among processes, and be generalizableacross a wide range of production environments by appropriate parameterization.¥ algorithms and tools to solve process problems. for example, one suchproblem is the determination of efficient assembly sequences; an inappropriate assembly sequence may result in the need for a tool to reorient the itembeing assembled many more times than necessary, thus increasing the timeneeded for assembly and the likelihood of breakage. such factors are to aconsiderable degree irrelevant to the design of the product itself but have asignificant influence on the cost of making the product. other importantprocess problems include the determination of efficient equipment layoutson a factory floor, equipment selection (matching equipment capability toprocess needs), makebuy decisions, and determination of how best to cutand shape materials to minimize waste.¥ dynamic models for describing resources available over time to the manuinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design79facturing system.10 such models will be used in both the design and theoperational control of manufacturing systems. common representations anddescriptions of resources are necessary to enable development of transferable (from planning to analysis to control) models and analysis. despite theimportance of resource management, little research and effort have beendevoted to creating generic representations of resources.11 as a result, specific resource characteristics must be recreated each time a modeling activityis undertaken. resources include those related to fabrication (e.g., tooling,machines, available controller features) and their interconnection, as well assystem resources such as corporate information or knowledge and information such as company or external standards.research for tools to support integrated product and process designcomputer tools that directly aid the management of the ippd process itselfwould be helpful to managers. today, such tools are limited primarily to communication aids or ògroupwareó for helping people post notices and share information. means of describing and managing the design process need to be developed. few tools exist for creating, monitoring, and guiding the design processitself, except for familiar project management tools like pert. (pert is largelya schedule and resource management tool.) scheduling aids beyond pert arerequired to help in determining effective task sequences, setting up informationflows, establishing schedules and milestones, identifying people, assigning workto them, routing information to them, and linking them to colleagues elsewhere.existing tools do not help to identify information flows or facilitate them.a single design decision may have several simultaneous impacts, some ofwhich may be beneficial and others adverse. the design environment shouldsupport techniques to express comparisons and tradeoffs vividly so that a designer can assess the impact of a wide range of design decisions on a productõscost, time to produce, or quality. tools are needed that focus on the identification10 see msb (1988), pp. 1113. it recommends research on a number of specific resource management modeling methods, for example, modeling methods based on knowledgebased systems, objectoriented systems, and petri nets; methods that are sufficiently fast and efficient that resourceproblems are tractable while plants are being designed and built, as well as being operated; methodsfor correcting models, based on comparisons of predicted and measured performance; and manyother methods.11 a notable exception is idefx, an evolving language developed for the air force in the integrated information for concurrent engineering program that does identify information flows withinthe process and is used to support the reengineering of business processes through process modelingand simulation. the first version, idef0, was developed under the integrated computeraidedmanufacturing program and was used primarily for modeling of individual activities within processes; idef0 is today a federal information processing standard. see moore (1994), p. 49.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80information technology for manufacturingof design tradeoffs between cost, performance, and reliability; alternate spaceallocations; functional decomposition; subassembly definition; threedimensionalgeometric reasoning; and makeorbuy decisions.to produce such tools, research is needed on decision tools that draw on theproductprocess data model and performance simulations of the product beingdesigned, as well as process models and various data on costs and tolerances ofdifferent processes. these decision tools will sort data and models on the basis ofcriteria supplied by the designer to aid in making comparisons between alternatedesigns and processes.in addition, improvements to simulation and rapid prototyping tools shouldbe brought to bear on the problems of viewing physical parts, òvisualizingócomplex relationships (certainly between physical parts, but also between moreabstract relationships such as design requirements and their costs), and presentingdesign alternatives to customers and to designers. this category also includesmethods or tools to handle groups of parts such as assemblies, subsystems, product families, madetoorder configurations, and selected combinations of partsthat create different product models by virtue of which parts are selected. (box3.7 describes such an application.)research is needed on design methods and computer tools adapted for thedesign and creation of groups of parts or systems, in addition to individual parts.such methods and tools will enable the designer to divide a product into subassemblies, design optimal inprocess test strategies during assembly, and identifyassembly sequences that minimize cost, tolerance errors, material handling, andpart damage during assembly. also, the methods and tools will include standarddesign modules and methods that facilitate optimization of part or all of a productfor cost and quality. such optimization requires a deep understanding of specificcomponents and features of the product.12finally, it would be highly desirable to have tools that would allow productdesign and process design to proceed more in parallel. these tools would enableproduct designers to work with some degree of incomplete information about theprocess designerõs work, and vice versa. successful development of such toolswould contribute greatly to the reduction of needed design time.research areas not specific to manufacturinggeometric reasoninga generic intellectual activity required by mechanical design is geometricreasoning. a major difference between vlsi design and mechanical design is12 because such understanding is often proprietary to component suppliers, research in this andsimilar areas of collaborative design must consider nontechnical issues such as intellectual propertyrights and intercompany data exchange.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design81the degree to which threedimensional geometric reasoning is fundamental toeven the simplest mechanical designs; vlsi design is based on twodimensional(2d) analysis (or at worst, 2 1/2 dimensional analysisñthe use of stacked 2dlayers). three factors make threedimensional (3d) reasoning more complex:3d design is more likely to involve moving parts or flows; 3d design mayinvolve interconnections and tolerance relationships between 2d domains; and3d designs can be visualized only in cross sections, perspective, and explodedviews. research is needed on building robust geometric modelers. many of theòboundary representationó modelers in use today are not robust: interactionsbetween the algorithms they use and finiteprecision arithmetic offered by thecomputer result in certain modeling operations that yield incorrect results. trulyrobust algorithms to correct such problems remain a challenging research problem. ultimately, the design environment should support improved visualizationtools or other design aids that will help make geometric reasoning faster andefficiently achievable by a broader range of people. in addition, tools that undertake geometric reasoning automatically (i.e., without relying on a skilled human)may be able to replace human designers for certain purposes.knowledge and information managementbasic to design are many issues of data management and of data themselves.the future design environment will include a number of data management methods and tools. for example, the design environment will have to handle datalegacy issues, such as converting data from one cad system to another andpreserving old data for decades or more so that they can still be read, edited, andprocessed. today, such data are either lost, kept on paper, or accessed in alimited way by old hardware kept on hand for the purpose.13a second data management issue is that the design environment will have toinclude ways to capture corporate memory and knowledge so that successors ofcurrent designers can tell what knowledge was used, what competitive methodswere used, what errors were made, and on what factors success was based. theability to record design history and rationale is of particular importance. everydesign is a historical web of decisions that grow out of each other and depend oneach other. revision, whether for correcting an error, absorbing a new outsidecircumstance, or improving manufacturability, requires unraveling the web to acertain degree. the design selected, the web of decisions leading to it, and òroadsnot takenó indicate the corporate state of belief at the time the decisions weremade and thus form a historic context.13 siewiorek (1992) posed the following research questions that must be resolved before concurrent design and rapid prototyping become integrated into industrial practice: how can design andmanufacturing information be reused in future products? and, how can the compatibility of newincremental information with all the previously acquired information be ensured?information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82information technology for manufacturingspecific research questionsa variety of specific research questions are motivated by discussions earlierin this chapter. in accordance with the charge of the study, the focus of theseresearch questions is largely information technology and associated disciplinessuch as mathematics. if the underyling science and engineering aspects of manufacturing are well understood, it can help immeasurably in exploiting suchknowledge and information, but by itself it is not a substitute for that knowledge.¥ how should the data contained in a product data model be organized toaccommodate their huge size and complexity and the many disciplines thatneed access to them?¥ how much of that information is physical and how much is òrelationaló?how much can be captured in traditional geometry and how much isnongeometric or not focused on one item but shared or spread among manyitems, or even not attached to specific items?¥ to what extent can a product description for mechanical items be convertedautomatically into a production plan, that is, a sequence of fabrication stepsthat transform raw materials into a final product?¥ can a general process description language be developed that would beboth man and machineintelligible, permitting processes to be describedmore precisely than is possible now?¥ how can cad tools be used at different stages of the design process? canhighorder abstractions be used as a starting point for encapsulating productand process facts and knowledge, geometry, requirements, tolerances, andother product characteristics, providing a link between product function,geometry, and processes? can òmetafeaturesó be defined that will encapsulate groups of features, creating a feature hierarchy? if not, how can the scaleof real designs be encompassed using features or any other means of capturing and combining detailed design data, geometry, and intent?¥ features are often very processdependent, and the fabrication of parts mayrequire the application of multiple processes, each of which uses a differentset of features to address the same part. attaching features to descriptions ofparts may prove impractical due to the differing feature sets for the samepart. featurebased product description may prove unproductive. in thisevent, to what extent is it feasible to design process models that interact withseparate product models to generate appropriate product models?information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integrated product and process design83¥ how can the human interfaces of cad systems be improved so that morecomplex shapes, assemblies, and other multidimensional problems can behandled more easily?¥ what new process analysis tools can be developed, especially to handlecomplex problems like assembly, model mix manufacture, and tolerances?¥ how can the reliability of new product or process designs be better predicted, including tradeoffs between cost and reliability?¥ what new languages or data structures can be developed to better describeproduct requirements, such as performance, reliability, shapes, interconnections, interfaces, and tolerances?¥ similarly, what new languages or data structures can be developed to betterdescribe process requirements, such as performance, cost, reliability, ease ofdiagnosis and repair, material handling, ease of use, and ease of modification?¥ what new data logging and correlation methods can be devised that wouldhelp the process of continuous improvement, such as finding multiple occurrences of the same type of machine failure or deducing what is the bestsequence for testing a broken system to diagnose its problems?information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84information technology for manufacturing844shop floor productionintroductionseveral generic tasks characterize production, the process through whichparts and materials are transformed into final products. these tasks include,among others, the receipt and acknowledgment of orders, the acquisition of materials, the performance of shop floor operations, and the generation of information needed to support continuous improvement. together, these tasks (whenproperly done) constitute a qualified production process. qualifying a production process is a demanding and important task that requires people trained andphysically qualified for a given job, machines and process instruments that can beguaranteed to operate within specifications, production capacity that can matchthe order demand, and the availability of production capacity in the desired timeframes.the informationprocessing view of a production facility is in essence thesame as that for an individual work cell within the facility. both factories andwork cells process orders and turn out products. for a factory, the order usuallycomes from a customer outside the factory; for a work cell, the order comes frominside the factory. for a factory, the product delivered is a final product that canbe sold to an external customer; for a work cell, the product delivered is apartially finished product that goes on to the next work cell, which regards it as apart or a raw material for that next cell. the demands made by factories onsuppliers for components are the same as the demands made by an individualprocess to be carried out by a work cell.this chapter focuses on those aspects of production related to the schedulinginformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production85of specific factory activities, control of the activities and the operation of machines on the shop floor, and mechanisms for providing rapid feedback thatbecomes the basis for nearrealtime adjustments in various production activities.table 4.1 summarizes information technology (it)related research needed toadvance shop floor and production systems.scheduling factory activitiescentralized controlthe dominant issues in production planning today are achieving major reductions in manufacturing lead time and major improvements in honoring promised completion times. better scheduling and planning might well help to reducethe total time required for converting raw materials and parts to finished products.todayõs dominant scheduling paradigms are based on material requirementsplanning (mrp) and manufacturing resources planning (mrpii), although otherapproaches are used from time to time. mrp and mrpii were developed in the1970s and 1980s. originally developed to handle planning purchases of partsrequired for the products to be manufactured, mrp assumes a plant of infinitecapacity. mrpii goes beyond mrp to take into account inventory, labor, actualmachine availability and capacity, routing capabilities, shipping, and purchasing.mrpii generates a master production schedule that serves as the driver or triggerof shop floor activities.by design, the characteristic time scale of scheduling (in mrp jargon, theòbucketó) based on mrp and mrpii is days or weeks, perhaps even months;depending on the implementation, mrp and mrpii may or may not be the basisfor òtotheminuteó or òworktoó timetables for equipment use and material flows.under any circumstances, however, arranging for the momenttomoment controlof factory operations is the job of the shift supervisor. for the shift supervisor,situational awareness is at a premium. he or she must draw on informationprovided by workers on the previous shift (reflecting matters to which he or shemust attend on this shift) and sensors and worker reports of what is happening onthe shop floor during this shift (e.g., the condition of various tools, how variousprocesses are operating, who has reported for work, what materials are available),as well as directives from senior management concerning overall objectives.from these sources, the shift supervisor must develop a local plan of operationfor the next 8 hours.in principle, the realtime factory controllers of today operate by periodicallyreceiving a list of jobs that must be completed if the mrpbased scheduling planis to be followed. for each production job, a process plan is retrieved from adatabase. such a plan involves the identification of routings of particular work inprogress to specific process cells, scheduling of all activities at both the cell andworkstation levels, coordinating those activities across the equipment, monitorinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86information technology for manufacturingtable 4.1 research to advance shop floor and production systemssubject areaexample of research neededequipment controllersarchitecture and technology for shop floor equipment anddata interfacesopen architecture for control systemsappropriate operating systems, languages, data structures,and knowledge baseshumanmachine interfaces to permit people to interacteffectively in a modern manufacturing environmentdesign for repairability and the ability to work aroundequipment crashes, including diagnostic softwarebetter realtime controlwireless communicationsensorsstandardized interface connectionsmanufacturing control architecturedynamic (realtime) schedulingdynamic shop floor models with highspeed recomputingtime and the ability to handle numerous variablesrealtime planning and scheduling tools for the flexiblefactory and the distributed factorytechniques to ensure graceful degradation of productionoperations in the event of local problemstools to facilitate situation assessment and scheduling bythe factory manager and operations teammultilevel understanding of largescale systemsmeans for identifying the relevant measures andquantifying the relative performance of alternative systemstools to support the brokering of priorities and obligationsamong cooperating entities, based on minimizing overalltransportation, material handling, inventory, capital, andlabor costsintelligent routing systemsidentification of appropriate interfaces among productdesign, product engineering, manufacturing engineering,and factory floor procedures as they emerge in computeraugmented work groupsinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production87intelligent routing systemsdemonstration of the resilience of intelligent routing(continued)systems with respect to the vagaries of factory conditionssmart parts (automatic routing)practical open standards for recording and communicatingdata among parts, assemblies, subsystems, and theirnetwork of makers and maintainersmechanisms for costeffective embedding of informationand for ensuring access throughout the life of a partmodeling ofways to efficiently manage large amounts of related datamanufacturing systemsspread over many machines and locationsways of specifying complex data relationshipsways of ensuring interoperability of design process toolsbetter ways of encoding and decoding dataimproved data retrieval methods, including humaninterfacesrapidly reconfigurabledevelopment of agility in the face of rapid change in aproduction systemsnumber of important product or process variablesinvestigation of the feasibility of developing a reasonablyuniversal product configuration language and methodologyassessment of the feasibility of using programminglanguages to represent manufacturing operations in thesame sense that design languages represent designsdevelopment of systems that simulate the operation of agiven manufacturing configuration under a variety ofconditions to optimize configurationresource description modelsdevelopment of schemata and models to representmanufacturing resources and their interconnectionknowledge bases fordevelopment of a robust and flexible system that cannew process methodsmodel efficiently nearly any process that may bedevelopedtable 4.1 continuedsubject areaexample of research neededinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88information technology for manufacturinging activities, and job tracking. the realtime control system then determines thesequence of activities necessary to execute that process plan. once determined,the sequence of activities is passed down a control hierarchy that is often organized around equipment (e.g., numerical control machining centers, robot systems, automated ground vehicles, or any other computercontrolled manufacturing equipment and related tooling resources), workstations of interrelatedequipment, and cells of interrelated workstations.in practice, the activities on the shop floor in most mrp or mrpii installations are orchestrated by an informal, manual, chaotic process that tries to adhereto the assumptions on which a given mrp scheduling plan is based. such plansare difficult to change when unforeseen contingencies occur (e.g., delays, material defects, unexpected machine downtime). thus, in an attempt to avoid disrupting the schedule, factory managers expend considerable effort in solvingrealtime shop floor problems, for example, by arranging for priority delivery ofparts at added expense. nevertheless, considerable replanning and reschedulingare necessary when managers are unable to fix these problems, a notinfrequentoccurrence in a manufacturing enterprise.effective realtime control of a factory depends on scheduling that remainsclose to optimal (relative to some performance measure(s)) over a realistic rangeof uncertainties and over time. with such scheduling, priorities from moment tomoment can be balanced against circumstances prevailing in the plant and in themanufacturerõs supply chain. such circumstances might include sudden changesin conditions generated by drifting machine capability, material shortages, workerabsenteeism, unplanned downtime, tool breakage, and the arrival of unexpectedrush items. today, managing such sudden changes often requires costly crisisintervention. an effective realtime schedule must be flexible enough to absorbminor perturbations in the system and require many fewer òreschedulingsó whensomething goes wrong. realtime dynamic scheduling with this kind of flexibility would be able to reflect the external priorities of the manufacturing enterprise.dynamic scheduling would increase the overall utilization of material, labor, andequipment by improving the whole system and modifying the operations at eachcell, thus reaching levels unattainable with the best of present methods; for example, dynamic schedulers would account for interactions among receiving, material handling, and cell schedules and propagation of changes.a dynamic scheduler would continually track the status of jobs, cells, tooling, and resource availability. through network communications, each cell wouldhave access to information pertinent to the shop floor. what should be done nextby any particular cell at any particular moment would thus be determinable at thatcell and would be based on current conditions throughout the factory.a followon to mrp/mrpii technology would provide tools for productionplanning, scheduling, and control with:¥the ability to build and maintain highquality finite capacity schedulesinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production89(both aggregate and resourcebased) that realistically account for the major constraints and preferences characterizing the production environment at hand;¥integration of adaptive planning, scheduling, and control capabilities, thusmaking it possible to quickly revise a production plan or schedule to account fora wide range of contingencies and making it possible to drive automated equipment in real time and to make tradeoffs of local goals in favor of higherlevelones;¥the ability to effectively integrate improvements in a wide range of production planning and scheduling decisions within a given manufacturing site aswell as across the supply chain;¥support for powerful interactive capabilities making it possible for theuser to incrementally manipulate the production schedule at multiple levels ofdetail and to explore òwhat ifó scenarios in overall factory planning as well asscheduling on the shop floor, and helping the user to identify possible inefficiencies in the production schedule and determine ways to correct these inefficiencies(e.g., adding overtime, shifting personnel around, buying new equipment, modifying raw material reordering policies, and so on);¥reconfigurable and/or reusable software, making it easy to customizethese techniques for a wide variety of manufacturing environments;¥support for integration with other important functionalities (e.g., processplanning, factory layout, accounting, preventive maintenance, and so on);¥capabilities to deal with the stochastic and sometimes reentrant nature ofshop floor events. within the mrp/mrpii paradigm, inputs are deterministicestimates of the times for various shop floor operations that are obtained by timeand motion studies. however, in reality, the timing of events is probablisticrather than deterministic, and the distributions of service times and of interarrivaltimes, far from being deterministic, look like nonstationary exponential probability density functions with long tails.1 manufacturing operations may also bereentrant, in the sense that the same equipment is often used for performingseveral different steps at different times during a production process (e.g., photolithography in semiconductor manufacturing). such nonlinearities introduceadded difficulties for the development of new scheduling paradigms; and¥backwards compatibility with mrp/mrpii technology. while technologists often believe that a clean break with current technology will enablenewer technologies to avoid their most basic problems, as a matter of practicality,few manufacturers will be willing to abandon familiar though perhaps flawedsystems in favor of new technologies not proven in the factory. whether thismeans that the followon to mrp/mrpii will be an entirely new paradigm for1 personal communication: charles hoover, professor of electrical and mechanical engineering,director of the manufacturing engineering program at polytechnic university, brooklyn, new york;july 1994.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90information technology for manufacturingtechnology with translators that bridge the gap to legacy systems or an evolutionary improvement to mrpii is an open question.to support effective scheduling, research is needed in the following areas:¥ dynamic shop floor models with fast run times and the ability to handlenumerous variables. factors that affect production scheduling include thefollowing:¥ are the appropriate resources available at the right time? (such resources include people, tooling, jigs, fixtures, or other special product orprocess needs.)¥ is the equipment up and running?¥ what is the next scheduled downtime? will people be there to handlethis?¥ is the òdownstreamó process ready to handle the output?¥ what is the status of any inventory buffers?¥ can a particular lot be fabricated using factory resources other than theone for which it is planned? if so, how?all these and other variables have to be entered into the factory model andscheduling system in order for the results to have any benefit. the modelcould include agents that would take requests from customers (i.e., otheragents that are òfedó information provided by these agents), decomposethose requests into information requirements, and then request that information from its suppliers (i.e., still other agents that feed information to theseagents). as suppliers respond with estimates of their capability, the agents inquestion make realistic forecasts of their ability to respond. once the requested information is in hand, the agents pass status reports to customers.¥ realtime planning and scheduling tools for the flexible factory and thedistributed factory. such tools would also provide capabilities for integrating scheduling and control reactively (e.g., they would make use of adaptivescheduling techniques based on the severity of the contingency at hand andthe time available to repair the schedule and/or scheduling techniques thatcould exploit windows of opportunity that occur fortuitously) and for propagating of schedule changes throughout the system.¥ techniques to ensure graceful degradation in the event of local problems.many production operations today are brittle, in that a problem in one cruciallocation can halt an entire production line. more desirable would be a realtime scheduler that could detect cell problems as they occur and reroute workflows around them while the cell in question was being repaired. if suchdynamic rerouting were possible, factory output would be damaged only toinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production91the extent that one cellõs contribution to the overall process was no longeravailable, rather than producing the functional equivalent of losing the contribution of many cells to overall output. dynamic rerouting would alsoenable the production of varying items. research in this area would addressdiagnosis of plan failures, plan repair, and planner modification, as well asanalysis of material handling.¥ tools to facilitate situation assessment and scheduling by the factory manager and operations team. for the immediate future, management of shopfloor operations will be under direct human supervision. human decisionsmakers will need such tools if they are to perform their jobs effectively.tools in this area should also provide techniques for analyzing interactiveplanning and scheduling. better techniques would help to develop tools tomonitor and analyze the operation of an enterprise and identify bottlenecksand opportunities. one important aspect of this problem is avoiding suboptimization by understanding the impact of alternative goals at each workstation and downstream consequences of changes made. in addition, sincesuch tools are likely to be able to produce schedulingrelevant information involuminous quantities, good visualization and other humancomputer interfaces will be necessary as well.¥ tools to support the brokering of priorities and obligations among cooperating entities, based on minimizing overall transportation, material handling,inventory, capital, and labor costs. such tools must also integrate multipledimensions in which managers must make decisions, including release decisions (e.g., when to release jobs and orders to the shop floor), reorderingdecisions (e.g., when to reorder raw materials and/or components, how much,and from whom), sequencing and batching decisions (e.g., grouping ordersfor similar parts to reduce setup costs), safety stock and safety leadtimedecisions (e.g., increasing lead times as a hedge against various sources ofuncertainty), overtime or orderpromising decisions (e.g., promising delivery dates to potential customers), coordination decisions (e.g., using distributed scheduling and control within a given plant as well as across the supplychain), and materialhandling decisions (e.g., when to add capacity or whento change the strategy of the materialhandling system).¥ development of new techniques for optimizing production planning andscheduling. traditionally closer to operations research (or), several successful optimization techniques are better characterized as a mix of techniques drawn from artificial intelligence and or.2 learning can conceivably2 for example, certain scheduling techniques developed at carnegie mellon university are basedon constraint satisfaction techniques developed in the artificial intelligence literature and also combine various orlike optimization subroutines.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92information technology for manufacturingbe used at all levels to enhance the performance of these tools (e.g. to enhance the performance of scheduleoptimization techniques, help determinestrategies for selecting among multiple reactive control policies, learn important user preferences to facilitate interactive planning and scheduling,learn to identify specific types of inefficiencies in the production schedule,and learn effective coordination strategies with suppliers and subcontractors). a related research problem involves the development of optimizationtechniques that lend themselves to efficient implementation on parallel hardware.decentralized controlan alternative to topdown scheduling of production activities is a decentralized organizational structure in which activities are initiated on the shop flooritself, without regard for a master factory scheduler. since it is not known withconfidence whether a topdown or a bottomup approach to initiating and performing production activities is more likely to result in success, it is reasonable toinvestigate both approaches. at least two aspects of decentralized control seemworth exploring, autonomous agents and work and logistics flow.autonomous agentsthe use of autonomous agents may offer some potential as a means to handlecomplex dynamic environments. implemented as software objects or collectionsof objects (perhaps representing physical robotic agents),3 they may providesolutions for manufacturing problems in the areas of planning, monitoring, andcontrol. agents may be able to take responsibility for shutting down a machine,starting up a program, or sending a message to another agent. because suchagents automate control and interaction functions, they can eliminate activitiesotherwise performed by people and allow for simpler organizational structures,which in turn can simplify requirements for software development and maintenance.if autonomous agents are to be successful, better architectures for manufacturing systems involving distributed intelligence will need to be developed.agents should model realworld behaviors, enable encapsulation, promote flexible distribution of control versus centralized control, capture the inherently3 the committee recognizes that the precise definition of an agent is a topic of debate in thecommunity. (a significant amount of time was spent engaged in this debate in the aaai specialinterest group for manufacturing (sigman) workshops of 1992 and 1993, and the ijcai sigmanworkshop of 1993.) another definition of an agent is that it is an actor with certain cognitivecharacteristics, such as motivation and intent.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production93nondeterministic concurrent nature of the environment, and model the neededlevel of knowledge or behavioral detail at any instance in time.a critical consideration for sensible agent behavior is level of autonomy.the practical deployment of agents in manufacturing requires that they behavesensibly, incorporating an understanding of both global and local goals. theissue of agent autonomy is very relevant to planning, monitoring, and controllingagent behaviors. the purpose of planning behaviors is to develop and plan stepsof action. monitoring behaviors involves evaluating the environment external toagents. controlling behaviors encompasses modifying behavior or data. theextent of autonomy can range from local autonomy, which requires that agents becapable of initiating their own thread of execution, to consensus (negotiation)autonomy, with each agent adhering to a set of rules or constraints governing howconsensus is achieved and ultimately how agents behave, to commanddrivenautonomy, with agents restricted to simply executing some given request (command) without the benefit of queries or òfact findingó about the state of the globalworld (state of agents external to a given agent).research is needed to develop tools to find information (such as autonomousagents), tools to distribute information, and stable sets of rules for interactingagents (rules for agent behavior). with regard to development of autonomousagents, the following research topics appear important:¥ architectures supporting dynamic distribution of intelligence among autonomous agents for planning, monitoring, and control as well as dynamiclevels of autonomy.¥ system stability. for sensible decisionmaking capabilities, autonomousagents must understand how to resolve conflicting goals. instabilities mayarise when multiple agents interact, although collections of agents may alsodemonstrate emergent characteristics, that is, modes of stable (and desirable)behavior that arise from the complexity of their interaction. strategies forresolving conflicting goals may need to be developed.¥ better representations of spatial and temporal dimensions relevant to shopfloor operations, rather than simple declarative knowledge.¥ representations supporting multiple perspectives of data and knowledge.simulation, analysis, and design tools need to use product information. yeteach of these applications of the data has a different perspective on theproduct data. these data must be consistent and persistent, and translatorsoften fall short.to date, no autonomous agent built has demonstrated sophisticated behavior.even a task such as searching the internet for the email address of a particularinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94information technology for manufacturingindividual remains out of reach, although many researchers argue that an agentwith this particular kind of capability will soon be available. if the potential ofagent technology is to be broadly believed, a convincing demonstration must becreated.4work and logistics flowa complementary approach to achieving decentralized control is the use ofan intelligent routing system that can route a partially finished product to the nextavailable manufacturing cell or station capable of performing the work needed inthe next step. in such a system, each manufacturing cell knows the operationsthat it has been certified to perform and bids on work to signal its availabilitywhen it is free. cells communicate their status to intelligent parts carriers througha communications network. work flow is thus controlled in a bottomup manner.one approach to an intelligent routing system presents acceptable methods(or routes), including one determined to be the best according to specified criteria(e.g., minimum cost, maximum speed, and/or maximum quality). all acceptablemethods become functional alternate routings. whenever an engineering changeoccurs, the routing is downloaded to all cells that have been authorized by theengineering change to bid for work on the part.another major aspect of shop floor management is coordinating the flow ofvarious components to appropriate locations on the shop floor. today, the transport of parts to these locations is performed by intelligent parts carriers. thesecarriers are in essence automatically guided vehicles that carry parts to any available workstation or to the preferred workstation (selected, for example, on thebasis of its having the shortest queue). the carriers expedite the progress of partsthrough the plant.such carriers are most useful in a single facility. however, when productsrequire production that crosses building or enterprise borders, òsmart partsó willcarry the information necessary to supply production instructions and history. (asimple illustration of a smart part is one that signals its location within a factoryas it is moved about, perhaps through the use of bar codes or attached radiotransmitters.) as manufacturing operations are carried out, instructions embedded in the part can be deleted or marked to indicate completion. smart parts canalso monitor and indicate their own performance. thus maintenance requests canbe triggered if the part senses its own performance to be substandard. plannedmaintenance regimens may also be recorded within the part, automatically triggering requests for maintenance.to realize intelligent routing systems, research is needed to identify appro4 even if no single agent will be able to demonstrate sophisticated behavior, the possibility remains that a collection of agents may be able to do so.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production95priate interfaces among product design, product engineering, manufacturing engineering, and factory floor procedures carried out in computeraugmented workgroups, including humancomputer interfaces. the immediate research focusshould be on demonstrating the resilience of the intelligent routing system withrespect to the vagaries of factory conditions.for smart parts, research is needed to identify practical, open standards forrecording and communicating data among parts, assemblies, subsystems, production equipment, and maintenance equipment. research is also needed into costeffective mechanisms for embedding the information and for ensuring accessthroughout the life of the part.controlling individual factory activitiesproduction (e.g., material modification, assembly, testing, recycling, or information processing) takes place in a factory. the factory environment is inherently messy and highly unpredictable: dust obscures lenses, objects fall in thewrong place, and metalworking lathes jam. in this uncertain environment, afactory control system determines the operational production efficiencies thatinfluence greatly how responsive a system can be to customer orders and howmuch a product costs. since all business, engineering, and integration activitiescome to fruition with the production of an item, the factory control system musttherefore òhook toó all of the other business and engineering activities as well asto those on the shop floor itself.information technology has the potential of taming the future productionenvironment by making it more flexible, efficient, and responsive. for example,information technology enables the increased automation of traditional production techniques, as well as new techniques such as stereolithography and materialdeposition. in addition, many of the individual technologies and components ofunattended machine tools and other fabrication and assembly equipment alreadyexist as experimental devices in the laboratory or as commercial products, and injapan, several òlightsoutó factories (factories that operate with limited humaninvolvement) have existed for several years.however, a fully integrated computerbased factory control system that isflexible and robust is still very much a goal rather than a reality. major unsolvedresearch problems remain, including those discussed later in this chapter. moreover, vendors and technology suppliers have chosen in many cases not to build onprevious work, instead opting to develop and use their own proprietary standardsand interfaces, while in other instances, companies have developed their ownstandards. today, even so òminoró a characteristic as the amount of data thatmust be passed between two points in a factory can slow down control systems tothe point that they are no longer functional. in some instances, even products bythe same vendor are incompatible with each other.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96information technology for manufacturingequipment controllersthe purpose of an equipment controller is to effect a timely change in thestate of the piece of equipment being controlled. state changes effected too earlyor too late can cause system instabilities and even failure. controllers are used inmany aspects of shop floor operations; factories employ mill drive controllers,cutter controllers, controllers for variablespeed pumps, crane controllers, controllers for large ac/dc rectifiers, controllers for materialhandling systems, andautomated guided vehicle controllers. for simplicity, the discussion below focuses on tool controllers, although many of the issues discussed also arise forcontrollers of other types of equipment.a tool controller translates human directions into specific actions taken bythe materialworking end of the equipment. the simplest controller is the classical proportional integralderivative (pid) controller, which uses the basic timeconstants of analog electrical circuits to control timing. in recent years, theseanalog controllers have been supplanted by computerbased digital controllers,because digital controllers are not subject to drift or other calibration inaccuraciesand because the simple analog controllers are not adequate to drive more complex assemblies of tools.todayõs computer numerical controllers (cncs) are generally adequate forservo control of motion axes and control of specific discrete devices, but they donot adhere to industrywide standards for intercommunication. as a result theirprogramming flexibility and ability to communicate with external computers anddevices are limited:¥standard configurations cannot accommodate nonmachining devices suchas workholding accessories, force sensors, vision sensors, and other subsidiarydevices.¥cnc design concepts are excessively conservative, especially with respect to their hardware interfaces. for example, current cnc communicationsare effected mainly through slow serial lines (rs232 and other similar interfaces), or through reading and sending files without the capability for realtimecontrol.¥the user interface in many of todayõs controllers is essentially a pushbutton operatorõs panel (the new touchsensitive screens are essentially the same)that does not take advantage of the rich information environment.¥programming is performed through a cryptic controllerspecific gcodelanguage, which is not practical for nontrivial programs and necessitates a special, installationdependent postprocessor to translate from higherlevel partsand tool programming languages such as apt.55 in principle, gcodes are the subject of a standard (eia rs274) and are not supposed to varyfrom controller to controller. but different implementations of the standard for different controllerslead to incompatibilities between the gcodes for them.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production97the challenge in designing a controller is providing the appropriate computer environment for the integration and implementation of a complex machinetool environment that applies these individual technologies. this challenge cannot be met with current controller technology. future machine control technology should be characterized by two central themes:1. a selfsustaining work environment. a selfsustaining machine, for anykind of processing operation, will be serviced in its immediate vicinity by adexterous manipulator or other automatic loading device, dedicated to the continuous needs of the process, such as material supply and unloading. instructionsfor the machine (e.g., cutting path) will be generated directly from parts specifiedby cad/cam design. a variety of onmachine sensors will provide vision,touch, force, and temperature senses, with the task of recognizing unexpectedevents, performing incycle inspection, and adjusting the production parameters.2. an open system for realtime control and communication. an opensystem is one in which the control or communications product developed by athird party also adheres to the standard on which the open system is based; a goodparadigm for open machine control and communications architectures is represented by the standards that characterize unix and tcp/ip. machinery controllers for unit processing such as mosaic (box 4.1) aim to promote this atmosphere. if successful, the u.s. machine industry will grow as market opportunitiesare expanded for sensor companies, diagnostic software developers, and all ancillary product suppliers.the following research and development areas should be addressed in order toachieve the vision of 21stcentury control of factory equipment:¥ an open architecture for machine controllers. an open architecture wouldprovide a more efficient and òuserfriendlyó environment for operation andprogramming, the ability to integrate various devices with a machineõs construction and operation, and the ability to communicate more tightly withcad/cam systems and factorywide operational management systems. anopen architecture ensures that all components share the same highleveloperating system, programming environment, communication facilities, andother computer resources. it accommodates the installation of new devicesand sensors as a part of the machinespecific configuration. controller architectures and software must also support communication with òupstreamófunctions (including computeraided process planning and computeraideddesign) and òdownstreamó functions (including those that drive and processsensor data). also, such an architecture has to be compatible with a range ofvery different factory characteristics (fixed versus variable product flow,static versus rapidly changing product mix, shared versus assigned toolingresources, and so on).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98information technology for manufacturing¥ advanced manufacturing languages for unit process programming. whileexisting languages (such as apt and compac for machining) must be supported, a more flexible language is needed. it should include provisions notonly for realtime control, but also for the operation of accessory devices inconjunction with the machining process, a more direct connection to cad/cam systems, and a flexible interface for user applications. such a language might also provide controllers with information defining the workbeing performed, rather than simply specifying the motion of a point throughspace (as is the case for most current languages).box 4.1 an example of an open architecturefor machine controllersthe mosaic project of the late 1980s (greenfeld et al., 1989) was one of thefirst attempts at establishing an open architecture for machine control. mosaicprovides all of the expected functionality of a conventional òclosedó computer numerically controlled (cnc) machine tool. that is, the partsprogrammer of a cncmachine tool can interact with the mosaic system from any automatic programfor machine tools (apt)like, cad/cam terminal with the result that the files generated through this interaction are postprocessed into machinelevel commandsthat provide exactly the same functionality as g&m codes.however, mosaic adds a computer operating system that serves as a uniformplatform on which cnc applications can build, specifically, a realtime version ofunix. the architecture of this operating system allows a set of independent application programs to be developed. this set of application programs can be developed by any third party and brought into the mosaic controller for use by the localprograms or system developers.by contrast, a closed architecture constrains local programmers to work withthe predefined set of g&m codes that are supplied with the machinery companyõsvendorspecific controller (fanuc, mazak, and cincinnatimilacron are todayõsmostoftenseen controllers). recently, some of these vendors have also claimedan òopenó system; but close examination usually shows that the òopennessó is onlyin relation to their own expanded library functions, written in local formats. theywill not be òopenó to any arbitrary thirdparty software developers able, say, tosupply new routines for new sensors coming onto the market.in general, machines that plug into an open system must be equipped with ageneralpurpose computer environment and bus structure that in a òlocaló sensewill control the axes of motion and the various sensorbased devices and will manage programs and data locally. however, to be part of a òbroadó intelligent environment, the machinery must use communications and networks that are universally accepted in the computer culture. the machine should be adaptable to thechanging environment and tasks, and thus, modular, in terms of its controllerõscomputer configuration, and in terms of the mechanical construction.mosaic is suggestive of what an open architecture controller might be. nevertheless, any commercially viable product would have to deal with interactionsbetween the large number of controller features required in such products.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production99¥ appropriate data and knowledge structures. different needs and differentlocal working environments require different data and knowledge structuresand different ways of managing these structures. for example:¥ special realtime database systems are required for realtime acquisition and control of data, since conventional database systems do nothave the responsiveness necessary to support rapid acquisition of data.for example, data may need to be timestamped, so that events can besynchronized at a later time in a conventional computing environment.in addition, databases for ostensibly different purposes must often coupleto each other: databases related to equipment maintenance are differentfrom databases that support lotscheduling needs, but since schedulersneed to know the status of equipment, the equipment maintenance database must be linked to the scheduler.¥ expert systems today tend to be rigid in the sense that they are notreadily interoperable with another knowledge base derived from theexpertise of a different expert. research is needed to find ways toreconcile knowledge bases derived from different experts on the samesubject. in addition, knowledgebased technology must be developedthat is responsive enough to be used with realtime systems.¥ databases that pass and manage information about events and activities on the shop floor are needed to inform design engineers as well asshop floor workers handling successive shifts. design engineers maynot understand very well what is actually happening on the shop floor;expert system shells have been useful for presenting operators withtheoretical best practices and capturing their immediate reactions, whichare then routed instantly to engineers along with other information thatexplicitly defines the context of an operatorõs remark. for shopfloorworkers, special databases are needed that will track on the flynewly discovered and ad hoc information (e.g., flaws discovered on themidnight shift) for use in the next shift.¥ databases and knowledge representations that enable decision makersto distinguish between unusual system behavior that nevertheless reflects òreasonableó or òappropriateó behavior and unusual system behavior that reflects some kind of failure. as factory managers becomeprivy to larger amounts of information, such questions will arise morefrequently.¥ validation of models underlying controller designs, for example, a controller based on an expert system that interprets sensor input. the relationshipbetween different inputs and different rules in an expert system needs to bewell understood if operators are to have confidence in the operation of thecontroller. thus, reliable techniques are needed to demonstrate the validityof the underlying expert system model.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100information technology for manufacturing¥ the humancomputer interface (hci). given the complexity of a factoryõsinformation environment, an effective factory hci must provide displaysthat will provide a human being with the appropriate level of detail for his orher needs (which may change as more is learned about a given situation).desirable features for a factory hci include:¥ a direct, easytouse interface into product design databases so thatproduct specifications can be easily reviewed on the plant floor;¥ support for unusual input/output options necessitated by the factoryenvironment. for example, an operator with both hands full may needto interact by voice, or an information display may need to be viewed ata distance, or a very concise set of keystrokes may be needed to savetime in user input; and¥ tools that enable the end user to tailor the interface for individualneeds and to standardize the interface across multiple machines. thevarying hcis of differing equipment currently present significant obstacles to training employees and attaining quality in manufacturing.¥ design of shop floor equipment for repairability and the ability to workaround equipment òcrashes,ó including diagnostic software. factories arefragile environments; small changes can cause large disruptions in workflow. such disruptions can be very expensive; 1 hour of shutdown can costupwards of several hundred thousand dollars. thus, problems and disruptions must be diagnosed quickly, and fixes implemented promptly. quickfixes may be applied to bring crashed equipment up, even as more permanentremedies are studied and adopted. many capabilities related to promptdiagnosis and repair will be achieved by using sophisticated software, databases, expert systems, and networks. the requirement will be speed andaccuracy; a quick but poor solution may be more costly than a slower butmore correct one. study of the tradeoffs between the time for and thecompleteness of solutions is a worthy area for manufacturing research, as isthe designing of work flows in factories so that there are no single points offailure. (today, such failure points include network servers, central databases, and cell controllers.)¥ the nature of realtime requirements. factories operate in real time, and acontroller that issues a command too soon or too late may cause inadvertentdamage. but realtime computing and control are extraordinarily complexand demanding. thus, several areas require attention:¥ the role of time in various control situations. delay times owing tocomputer operation cannot be predicted on the basis of simple formulasas they are in the case of analog circuits; rather, they are currently amatter of best guess and experiment. even then, they are subject toconsiderable statistical variation. research in this area should seek toinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production101establish the characteristics of the time distribution that will lead tosuccessful control, characterized by the distribution of response times,especially the mean and average times and the worsttime behavior.¥ mathematical formalisms for realtime control. developing appropriate formalisms for representing and controlling devices is key to thedevelopment of good realtime systems. today, classical control theoryis the dominant formalism used in realtime control, although moderncontrol theory, state space analysis, fuzzy logic, and neural networkshave made inroads to some degree. controllers of the future are likely toinvolve all the control techniquesñclassical, modern, fuzzy logic, andneural networksñin an integrated approach to control.¥ the development of a realtime operating system for manufacturing,suitable for the very high speed control required for unit processingoperations. current generalpurpose operating systems do not providethe response time essential for maintaining the speed, accuracy, andsafety features needed in future machinery. a realtime operating system for manufacturing should be compatible with industrystandard operating systems such as unix or msdos with respect to highlevelmanagement, filesystem operations, communications, and programmingenvironments. capabilities for networkbased coordination with othertools running on the same realtime operating system will also be necessary for the integration of equipment controlled by separate controllers.¥ wireless communications. since computing will be used throughout themanufacturing environment, and it is impossible to predict beforehand wherethese interactions will occur, wireless communications will probably be required. wireless communications will make factory reconfiguration easier,faster, and cheaperñas the locations of equipment need not be tied to communications portalsñand will be useful in supervision, maintenance, handling of materials, and other activities in which personnel cannot be tied tofixed workstations. but the tradeoffs associated with wireless communications in a factory environment are complex, for example:¥ tradeoffs between the capital costs of fixed building wiring with veryhigh bandwidth versus the facility costs of wireless transmitters andreceivers that operate within a very restrictive bandwidth;¥ tradeoffs among broadcast power, geographical coverage, and multistation interference; and¥ the potential hostility of the factory environment to such communications (e.g., wireless communications in the presence of radiationsensitive equipment).research will be needed to support a rational decisionmaking process withrespect to these tradeoffs. research will also be needed in the area of theinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102information technology for manufacturingtransmission and reception of complex and varied signals in a sensitiveenvironment. other relevant research (and standardization) would addresssuch issues as maximizing the use of the limited electromagnetic spectrumand spreadspectrumtype wireless communications using trellistypeencodings to ensure maximum security, reliability, and noninterference withsensitive manufacturing equipment.beyond research, standards (for components, configurations, interconnections, and control software) and related assistance (e.g., from sematech activityfor semiconductor manufacturing) are needed to ensure consistency and interoperability of implementations, to coordinate and standardize open systems concepts in control systems, and to motivate system and equipment suppliers to usethese mechanisms in their equipment.additional dimensions of equipment controllers are discussed later in thischapter under òfacilitating continuous improvementó for reasons that are madeclear in that section.sensorsto ensure the optimum performance of production processes, it is necessaryto have information on what those processes are actually doing in real time andhow those processes are affecting equipment, tooling, work zones, material handling, and workpiece material. knowledge databases and predictive models of aprocess and its components provide a baseline of òinadvanceó information, but ifroutine deviations are greater than can be tolerated for production within tolerances, sensors are needed to augment this baseline information for process monitoring and feedback to controllers.in existing systems, estimates of the impact of sensing systems on processperformance indicate as much as a sixfold increase in effective operation speed(eversheim, 1991). add to that the increased yield due to prevention of defectiveworkpieces and the impact is more impressive. moreover, sensors can alsosupport worker safety, prevention of damage to a machine, prevention of rejectedworkpieces, prevention of idle time on the machine, better interfacing of transfermechanisms with equipment, and optimal use of resources.the increasing demands of unit processes have encouraged the developmentof systems using a variety of sensors. examples of devices and processes intowhich sensors will be incorporated include extrusion dies for control of temperature and metal flow and surface finish; turning tools, for thermal control toprovide maximum life and load; and continuous processes, for transmitting process parameters. sensors will interface so closely with processes that complicated external interpretation of data will no longer be necessary. future sensorswill provide diagnostics (as many do today) as well as fault tolerance and in somecases selfhealing capability. sensors will provide salable sample rates for analyinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production103sis of process variation, summarylevel information, and statistical descriptionsof process parameters.sensors can play an important role in many aspects of production, including:¥quality control. many quality control schemes rely on pre and postprocess inspectionñthat is, catching a mistake before a component enters anindividual unit process (when nothing is happening) or when it exits from thesubprocess (when the unit process is completed). extension of quality control toinprocess inspection, so that problems can be caught in òreal timeó and perhapscorrected before much additional processing, is even more dependent on sensorperformance and the availability of advanced sensors.¥workpiece placement. machining tools depend on information abouttolerances, orientation, material characteristics, and assembly sequence. sensorsare needed to assess these characteristics before the partially finished assembly orpart is worked on.¥use of intelligent processing equipment. a unit process could do more orless to a part being fabricated (e.g., heat it more, remove less metal) depending onhow the particular part being worked on responded to its treatment. a piece ofequipment with location sensors could signal its location as it was moved aroundon the shop floor.¥highprecision fabrication. highprecision fabrication is characterizedby very stringent tolerances on form, dimension, or surface features in the presence of a number of material, tooling, and environmental variables. as a production tool shapes material for a finished (or intermediate) product, the reaction ofthe material to the tool has an influence on what the tool should do next. forexample, a machine that unexpectedly encounters more resistance than anticipated to a given cut may need subsequently to exert more force, and a sensor isneeded to close the feedback loop to the toolõs controller so that the necessaryorders may be given.¥use of tools. a sensorloaded tool moving along with the process couldprovide information on product and process specification compliance and location. the new active sensors will change the way products are transported,tracked, monitored, and maintained at every stage of their existenceñfrom creation to recycling to disposal. researchers have developed miniature vibrationsensors and accelerometers that, if appropriately built into a machine structure(like the resin concrete structures now in use as machine tool structures), couldprovide in situ sensing capability for control of machine stability and deflection.sensors are key elements in the other enabling technologies of process control and process precision and metrology. a vast array of sensors are commercially available or under development in research laboratories; these sensorssupport unit processes through an extensive array of sensor technologies ranginginformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104information technology for manufacturingfrom optical, infrared techniques to highfrequency ultrasonic and acoustic emission.6 sensor innovation will be necessary in the future, because many characteristics of machining processes today (e.g., very low power consumption) tend toreduce the effectiveness of, or render useless altogether, a large number of traditional sensing methodologies based on force, torque, motor current, or powermeasurement. examples of more novel sensors include acoustic sensors to monitor and improve tool performance and surface finish or to monitor the relativelocation of parts in a finished product; photoelectronic and ultrasonic sensors thatenable intelligent processing equipment to position and set functions; and barcode and radio frequency sensors that identify and report on the status and location of parts. in many cases, it is likely that relevant sensor technology will havebeen first developed for application in other fields.the first major contribution of information technologies to sensors was theidea of digitized output, which removed analog variation from the outputs. later,selfcalibration and error detection were added to allow selfdiagnostics to assurethat the information from the sensor was not detrimental to the process control.sensors for the future production environment pose a number of challenginginformation technology research questions:¥ standardization. todayõs sensors (and actuators) require customized drivers for their operation, greatly increasing the cost of an otherwise inexpensive sensor or actuator. architectures and interface standards are needed sothat users can select from a catalog of sensors and actuators, each with acertain limited set of parameters specified in the catalog, and plug thoseselected into a common control system with only minor, automatic configuration. when such architectures and standards are in place, sensors shouldbe able to feed data directly into a process control system. sensors connected through such architectures would be linked directly into databases fordynamic updates usable by machine controllers.¥ sensor characterization. an appropriate characterization would describe asensor or actuator at various levels of abstraction (e.g., as an abstract physical process, as an electrical device producing an output, as a òsmartó devicewith a certain amount of preprocessing capability, including accuracy corrections, zerooffset correction, and perhaps selfcalibrating and selfscalingfunctions). the method of characterization should be applicable to a widerange of devices, including sensors from simple thermocouples up to imagesystems, and actuators from simple onoff switches to multiaxis robots.¥ sensor fusion. many sensing techniques are not individually reliable6 an excellent review of these sensors as related to machining is provided in shiraishi (1988;1989a,b).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production105enough for process monitoring over the normal range of process operation.multiple sensors that are collectively effective over the entire operating rangemay be enablers for effective realtime process monitoring if questions ofintegration can be resolved. to be effective, a multisensor approach requiresmore attention to feature extraction, information integration, and decisionmaking in real time.¥ sensors with onboard intelligence. with onboard intelligence, the collection of data might be collapsed into a statistical distribution (for routine data)and specific reports of exceptions to the distribution, thereby reducing bandwidth requirements for reporting sensor data. onboard intelligence mightenable a sensor to recognize physical features of a machined part (e.g., color,size, shape) to detect the presence or absence of a component or characteristic of a part. intelligent sensors also might include capabilities for signalconditioning and processing (reducing the impact of uncertainty in sensordata), and perhaps models relating measured values to monitoring and control variables and strategies for using the information gathered.facilitating continuous improvementwhen applied to the shop floor, continuous improvement refers to the continual monitoring of shop floor practice and how that practice is reflected in theproducts that result. whereas traditional shop floor environments emphasize thedesirability of procedures that are consistent and hence unchanging, continuousimprovement suggests instead the incremental evolution of procedures to makeproducts of everhigher quality and timeliness. products are monitored for timeliness and for quality at every stage in production; the resulting information ispassed back to process operators with enough detail to suggest corrective actionsthat may need to be taken to improve the process on the next round. processoperators implement certain changes and then see if their changes have had thedesired effect. if so, such changes are recorded as annotations to the thencurrentoperating procedures to effect the improvement. in this manner, continuousimprovement relies on standardization of practice, resulting in an empiricallyrelevant point of comparison against which to measure change in practice, ratherthan standardization (and hence invariance) of procedure.at the heart of continuous shop floor improvement is the idea of operatorcentered control systems that enable operators to take a wide range of actions thatmay be necessary to improve production quality or speed. research is needed onseveral dimensions of operatorcentered control systems:¥ capture of most recent agreements. annotations to standard operatingprocedures can be described as the most recent agreements (i.e., details ofunderstanding reached on the last shift) between operators and the mostinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106information technology for manufacturingrecent version of those operating procedures. such agreements must bepassed on to subsequent shifts if the knowledge is not to be lost. whencaptured, these agreements should specify the nature of the changes in operating procedures indicated, the rationale for these changes, the changes inoutput to be expected, and the circumstances under which these changes areto be implemented. a particularly promising approach is the use of expertsystem shells that allow informed agreements to be captured on the spotusing the operatorõs expertise.¥ effective diagnostic capability. a tool should be able to report its state ofhealth: where the process it implements is weak, what problems are impending, and when action will need to be taken.¥ communication with other shop floor systems. this connection wouldprovide, for example, scheduling that reflects the most recent priorities sothat the most important jobs could be done first. a connection to the materialhandling system that feeds the tool would inform the operator of unexpected delays in the arrival of materials and permit, for example, maintenance to be performed in that unexpected free time. information about thetoolõs output would be available to workstations downstream.¥ userconfigurable interface. a display (control panel) should be dynamically modifiable in accordance with user preferences and needs. once achange called for by a new agreement has been implemented, the user shouldbe able to modify the interface to reflect that change.¥ administrative control. operatorcentered tools should account automatically for operator time and attendance, labor distribution, production countsand rates, quality levels, and similar administrative data. greater accuracyand precision in obtaining these statistics should be possible.all of these elements are aspects of the equipment controller. but they arediscussed separately from the earlier discussion of equipment controllers in thischapter to underscore their importance in capturing information generated at theback end of the production cycle.controlling and managing product configurationmanufacturers often produce variants of a given product. for example, intelcorporation produces microprocessor chips that are òupwardly compatibleó invariants known as the 386, 486, and pentium series. each model also has variants(e.g., those with math coprocessors versus those without, those with powermanagement features versus those without, and so on). production operationsinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop floor production107that can shift easily and rapidly from producing one variant to another would givemanufacturers a needed degree of flexibility in their management.flexible production of this sort is likely to depend on the implementation oftwo ideas of different time scales. the first is that of a single production facilitywhose internal operations can be modified substantially by softwarebasedchanges to machine controllers and schedulers.7 the second notion is that of amanufacturing operation that can draw globally dispersed units providing specialized expertise and unite them temporarily to carry out a specific productiontask (e.g., to produce a specific product or product line) and then disband themwhen the task has been completed.to effectively control and manage product configuration, research is neededto manage product variations and to check the validity of proposed configurations. at present, companies develop productspecific systems or may use artificial intelligence techniques (also often productspecific themselves) to deal withconfiguration control. in addition, configuration control and management require a universal product configuration language and methodology that can beused by both marketing and manufacturing personnel to develop valid productconfigurations.specific research questionsas in chapter 3, a variety of research questions are motivated by discussionsearlier in this chapter. but the caveat posed in chapter 1 also applies here:research to fill the gaps in the scientific and engineering knowledge about shopfloor processes to be supported by information technology is essential if thepromise if it is to be exploited fully. for example, a deeper basic understandingabout the physics of parttool interactions or the physics and chemistry that mightunderlie possible faults in a process will be necessary if it is to control tools or tohelp diagnose faults in a production line. as always, it can help immeasurablyin exploiting knowledge and information that people have, but by itself it is not asubstitute for that knowledge and information.¥ how extensive should any factory system be? one hierarchical system7 even an idea as simple as changing the order in which variations of a product are manufacturedcan have significant effects on productivity. for example, an at&t manufacturing plant was responsible for the production of 80 pbx (private telephone exchange) systems each week in a widerange of sizes with many different options. the order of manufacture was determined by the sequence in which orders for these systems were received; this pattern resulted in a large and undesirable variation in flow rates of work through the plant as the result of the many different feature setsneeded. by rearranging and thereby improving the manufacturing sequence of these 80 systems, asignificant improvement in throughput times from the lines feeding final assembly was achievedwith no additional equipment purchases. see luss et al. (1990), pp. 99109.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108information technology for manufacturingwith many embedded applications for specific purposes, or a set of distributed applications with few interactions?¥ how complex may the user interaction systems be before the complexityoverwhelms the user?¥ how are new systems introduced into a factory that contains many older oreven obsolete legacy systems? how can an existing, obsolete system bereplaced with minimum factory disruption?¥ how are decisionmaking systems transferred into decisionmaking roles?¥ what level(s) of abstraction are appropriate for controlling factories?¥ what is the tradeoff between levels of detail required and the speed ofresponse?¥ what characteristics and configurations of autonomous agents give rise toemergent behaviors, swarm stability, and divergent behavior?¥ how will humans interact with factory systems? what will be the nature ofthe user interfaces?information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1095modeling and simulationfor the virtual factoryintroductionthe development of manufacturing systems often proceeds in the operatingfactory by trialanderror experimentation using valuable factory resources andtime, with a resulting high cost in lost manufacturing productivity due toprototyping and debugging on the factory floor. data continue to be generated atan exponentially increasing rate, but there is little opportunity to assimilate, muchless act on, the information they represent. the abundance and variety of customized and unintegrated new technological capabilities introduce problems for managers, engineers, supervisors, and operators within a factory, with which the workforce may be illprepared to cope. better ways to introduce new manufacturingtechnology onto the factory floor must be developed to help improve our manufacturing capabilities.as noted in chapter 4, the factory environment is complex. to develophighlevel insight into what is happening in the factory environment and howfactory operations might be affected by changes in that environment, manufacturing researchers have attempted to construct simulations and models of factoriesthat factory decision makers can experiment on without disrupting actual production. this approach requires a virtual factory to be a simulation that faithfullyreflects that operation in all of the dimensions relevant to human managers, fromthe weeklong and monthlong time scales that characterize todayõs materialrequirements planning (mrp) and manufacturing resources planning (mrpii)planning and scheduling systems to the second and minutelong time scales thatcharacterize realtime dynamic schedulers (human or computer) of shop flooroperations.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110information technology for manufacturingconsiderations in the developmentof virtual factorieslearning from past problemsthe idea of a virtual factory is not new. but in the past, the development andapplication of large coherent models of factory operations have been largelyunsuccessful, even as more local simulations (e.g., those operating at the equipment level or process level) have succeeded. the models of the past have not hadthe content to capture the essence of factory operations, yet even these inadequatemodels were so difficult to produce that after great effort they typically grounddown into òanalysis paralysisó and were abandoned.possible causes for such failure include the following:¥ the initial models were too poor in detail to provide answers that satisfiedfactory demands, and so the concepts were abandoned. even small events mayproduce large fluctuations in factory operations, and adequate models must becapable of reflecting these subtle influences.¥the simulations were too slow to provide timely answers. timeliness isparamount in factory operations; a piece of equipment that is unexpectedly down,or is being used for another task when required to perform a function, can disrupta shift schedule. data must be provided and acted on very quickly to preserve theintegrity of operations.¥the representations of the process were inaccurate, leading to wronganswers. processes may be simple or complex; in any event, all the importantcharacteristics of a process need to be accurately represented so that applying amodel will supply useful answers.¥the user interfaces were so complicated and/or incomprehensible thatthey were unusable. the most common user of information is a human being,who can be overwhelmed by either the number or the complexity of the userinterfaces required to access or disseminate information. for example, seniorfactory managers are best able to comprehend results that are explicitly tied tofinancial metrics of performance; results tied to metrics relevant at lower levels inthe hierarchy will be less helpful to them.¥there were insufficient skilled personnel to understand and apply themodels intelligently. use of models is not inherently easy. it requires skills thatenable using models and simulations, as well as understanding and analyzing theresults. learning these skills requires education and training.¥there were sufficient skilled experts on the factory floor to manage operations, so that modeling and simulation were considered unnecessary. whenthings are going relatively smoothly, new tools such as modeling and simulationare felt to be superfluous; current skill sets are thought to be sufficient to do thejob.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation for the virtual factory111¥invalid input data to simulations led to incorrect results. for example,communications on the factory floor were insufficient to keep the model up todate. (factory floor communications are used, among other things, to keep trackof equipment placement on the shop floor, a factor with a big impact on workflow; if a model does not reflect changes in equipment placement (which maychange on a time scale of hours), the modelõs output relevant to making workflow decisions may well be incorrect.)¥factories themselves constantly change (e.g., new or modified manufacturing processes may be installed), and a lack of synchronization between amodel and what is actually being done on the shop floor may invalidate themodel.¥simulations may have been performed at inappropriate levels of detail foraddressing problems of interest and relevance to decision makers. an element ofconsiderable importance in constructing a simulation is understanding what kindsof questions need to be answered for what purposes.¥todayõs simulation models are difficult to expand, and they present verydifficult problems in scaling up.for such reasons, factorylevel modeling has never succeeded in capturingthe attention of senior manufacturing management the way that process andproduct models have. however, recent advances in information technology makethe idea of realistic simulations of factory operations much more feasible thanthey have been in the past.determining the requirements for effective factory modelsa virtual factory model will involve a comprehensive model or structure forintegrating a set of heterogeneous and hierarchical submodels at various levels ofabstraction. each submodel will be designed for a specific purpose, but togetherthey will operate from a common source of data or knowledge base and will beable to deal with the task at hand without expensive or timeconsuming handtailoring of interfaces for a userõs particular needs. to a very high degree, thesoftware used to control actual factory operations will also drive the operation ofthe virtual factory model, although it will do so very rapidly so that simulationscan be run on a timely basis.a key consideration in the development of these tools will be accounting forthe essential stochastic nature of events on the factory floor.1 since managers1 a research agenda for cim (msb, 1988, p. 20) recommends research on methods for representing decision objects, for example, states, actions, utilities, prior and posterior probabilities, samples,costs, and decisions; methods for mapping these to manufacturing objects; development of relevantheuristics and algorithms; and exploratory assessment of the merit of these techniques in specificdomains.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112information technology for manufacturingwill be using virtual factory models to perform òwhat ifó exercises to anticipateunexpected events (e.g., tool breakdown, new demands for expediting orders, thearrival of new machines, unplanned maintenance) and to indicate what actionsneed to be taken (e.g., which machine is to be changed, what materials are to beprovided), a simulation based only on deterministic factors would correspond toone òexperiment,ó and in a stochastic environment, there is no reason to expectthat the same line configuration or schedule plan would yield the same result onany particular run. however, a suite of modeling tools that could test a givenconfiguration or plan against thousands of experiments (and the random events ineach run) might well provide a meaningful basis on which to make decisionsabout a configuration or plan. a second important consideration is that thedevelopment of simulation models and tools should be broad enough to encompass both the factory technologies and processes of today (which are embeddedin the manufacturing infrastructure and may not be replaced for many years tocome) and those of tomorrow (i.e., those technologies and processes that have notyet been deployed widely or even invented yet).a complete simulation of even a modest factory will require the integrationof numerous models and is out of reach today. however, an appropriate first stepin developing a full factory model is the virtual production line, which involvessimulation of individual tools and, more importantly, simulation of the integratedoperation of the tools in production. a wide variety of individual, singleactivitymodels are already in use in manufacturing. but the comprehensive integratedmodeling of the manufacturing enterprise will provide new insight into the causesof and remedies for scheduling bottlenecks and new strategic options.2an ultimate goal of the research agenda outlined here would be the creationof a demonstration platform that would compare the results of real factory operations with the results of simulated factory operations using information technology applications such as those discussed in this report. this demonstrationplatform would use a computerbased model of an existing factory and wouldcompare its performance with that of a similarly equipped factory running thesame product line, but using, for example, a new layout of equipment, a betterscheduling system, a paperless product and process description, or fewer or morehuman operators. the entire factory would have to be represented in sufficientdetail so that any model user, from factory manager to equipment operator, wouldbe able to extract useful results.there are two broad areas of need: (1) hardware and software technology tohandle sophisticated graphics and dataoriented models in a useful and timely2 a research agenda for cim (msb, 1988, pp. 1315) recommends research on methods andtechnologies for process operation analysis, optimization, control, and quality assurance and (on p.17) recommends research on methods for coupling process operation with process planning andresource allocation so that these activities can be accomplished concurrently.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation for the virtual factory113manner, and (2) representation of manufacturing expertise in models in such away that the results of model operation satisfy manufacturing expertsõ needs foraccurate responses.modeling technologya requirement for manufacturing models is that all levels of detail be internally consistent, since very small influences at a very local level may have asignificant impact even at the highest factory level (e.g., if a piece of equipmentgoes down, the resulting schedule disruptions can shut down the entire factory).a factory may well demonstrate mathematically chaotic behavior, such that verysmall influences may have totally unpredictable outcomes. the enormous rangeof objects (e.g., pieces of equipment, people, raw materials, batches or lots ofmaterial, process steps, process control, assemblies of objects, a wide variety ofinformation òobjects,ó materialhandling and robotic equipment, and so on) encompassed by even a partial manufacturing model further adds to its complexity.in general, the complexity needed in a model to generate accurate resultsstrongly influences the time it takes to simulate some factory condition. thus,there is a tradeoff between speed of response to provide timely answers and thelevel of detail required to provide ògood enoughó answers. for example, somesimulations of semiconductor processing operations may take hours or days ofcomputation (i.e., may take much longer than the operations take in reality); suchperformance may be useful for analytical purposes but not for controlling oradvising for realtime operations.if advanced modeling technology is to be useful in the future, it must notdisregard the large investment that has been made in existing data systems. theclientserver systems and relational databases of today, and even objectorienteddatabases, will be the legacy systems three and four decades hence. new technology must be able to fold these legacy systems into its representation and be ableto resolve semantic differences that may exist.in addition, new modeling technology will likely reside in an extensivedistributed computing environment. thus, fundamental issues of maintainingdata integrity in a distributed computing environment need to be resolved. administration of systems, networks, and applications is today resourceintensive;more efficient and effective methods of managing these elements will be required.finally, information at the appropriate level of detail must be presented torelevant decision makers and analysts. visibility of the activities of an enterpriseis a prerequisite to effective control. research is needed regarding how to presentto different users (from managers to operators) the information inherent in thebusiness model, which can reflect an actual state, potential future states, and postmortem analysis of past states to determine what went right or wrong. peopleshould be able to prepare presentations of various kinds of information on theirinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114information technology for manufacturingown, rapidly, and without the use of support personnel, and to retrieve òlessonslearnedó and present that information at the appropriate times to users.specific research issues related to developing manufacturing models includeimproving methods and tools for:¥ efficiently managing large amounts of related data distributed over manymachines and locations. data may be directly linked to the computer modelof the production process, automatically updating the status of the model,and it will be desirable to automate data collection to the maximum degree.¥ specifying complex data relationships. since the various scales of manufacturing are intimately interlinked, models will require large amounts ofdetail, probably stored in distributed objectoriented databases. however,these databases will need to be consistent across geographical sites and willspan many time zones. large servers will be needed to manage the modelapplications and the propagation of changes.¥ easing interoperability of design process tools. interoperability problemslie in two domains, in the meaning of the information passed between toolsand in the mechanics of their transfer. to address the first issue, a completedata model of the simulation process must be created, one that will specifythe information at every stage of operation. when this is coupled with a flowmodel of the simulation, it will provide an unambiguous definition of whatinformation is being interchanged and when. the mechanics of informationtransfer require either the development of standards for passing messagesbetween tools (e.g., the communication required between objects in an objectoriented paradigm3) or the specification of programming interface standards, or both.¥ constructing formal models that reflect factory resources. reflectingfactors such as resource availability, condition or repair status, and shopfloor location, such models should interact with process and product models;indeed, at sufficiently high levels of abstraction, process model componentsmay appear as components of a resource model. careful configuration management of these models will provide an approach to alleviating the problemof validating models for a continually changing factory environment.¥ presenting data (e.g., using human interface tools). for example, modeldisplays may have to be very large, either to enable viewing large quantities3 this is one stated goal of the product data exchange using step (standard for the exchange ofproduct model data) project described in chapter 3.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation for the virtual factory115of data or to show lots of visual detail. the displays may even have to bemobile, so that they can be carried around in a factory. display panels maybe attached to a computer or be in the form of glasses used by a viewer tosimultaneously view the model and the real world.¥ reducing the magnitude of the testing and validation task problems bycarefully configuring the relationships between models used for control andthose used for simulation. a factory control system that has been successfully tested for operation in real time could in principle be connected to a setof inputs that simulate the input it receives in real time, and could thus serveas the foundation of a (partially validated) simulation model as well.¥ developing new paradigms for understanding dynamic interactionsamong the different aspects and components of the manufacturing enterprise. a real factory consists of many interacting elements; thus, it is reasonable to expect a highfidelity simulation to consist of many interacting elements (models) as well. but the real factory is difficult to understand, in partbecause of these interactions, and so a real problem of understanding isposed by a complex multitude of interacting models. developing new waysto understand the complexity, nature, and scope of interacting componentswill be a major challenge with ramifications for ensuring model fidelity andvalidation.the following are research areas within modeling technology that need morework:¥ user interfaces. since factory personnel in the 21st century will beinteracting with many applications, it will not suffice for each application tohave its own set of interfaces, no matter how good any individual one is.much thought has to be given both to the nature of the specific interfaces andto the integration of interfaces in a system designed so as not to confuse theuser. interface tools that allow the user to filter and abstract large volumesof data will be particularly important.¥ model concurrency. models will be used to perform a variety of geographically dispersed functions over a short time scale during which themodel information must be globally accurate. in addition, pieces of themodel may themselves be widely distributed. as a result, a method must bedevised to ensure model consistency and concurrency, perhaps for extendedtime periods. the accuracy of models used concurrently for different purposes is a key determinant of the benefits of using such models.¥ testing and validation of model concepts. because a major use ofinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116information technology for manufacturingmodels is to make predictions about matters that are not intuitively obviousto decision makers, testing and validation of models and their use are verydifficult. for factory operations and design alike, there are many potentialòright answersó to important questions, and none of these is òprovably correctó (e.g., what is the òrightó schedule?). as a result, models have to bevalidated by being tested against understandable conditions, and in manycases, common sense must be used to judge if a model is òcorrect.ó becausemodels must be tested under stochastic factory conditions, which are hard toduplicate or emulate, outside the factory environment, an important area forresearch involves developing tools for use in both testing and validatingmodel operation and behavior. tools for automating sensitivity analysis inthe testing of simulation models would help to overcome model validationproblems inherent in a stochastic environment.¥ model evolution. models are not static, in the sense that as users learnmore or as the factory environment changes (e.g., as a result of new rules,new heuristics, changing equipment sets, and so on), models have to beupdated. in addition, as new knowledge is developed, models need to beenhanced, speeded up, and made more detailed. the information that can beobtained from a model depends fundamentally on the modelõs capabilities,which are expected to improve with time. this is a fruitful area for research.¥ chaos theory. to the extent that manufacturing is a mathematicallychaotic environment, chaos theory may be able to show where critical assumptions break down and where they may lead to computationally impossible situations and totally unpredictable behavior.representing and capturingmanufacturing expertiseit is obvious that the modeling sophistication implied by the preceding section will demand an extraordinary degree of manufacturing expertise at all scalesof operation (from shop floor operator to senior management). but a number offactors specific to the manufacturing enterprise exacerbate these demands evenfurther:¥since activities and actions at the different scales of manufacturing operation cannot be considered independently, expertise relevant to one level willoften couple strongly to expertise at a different level. since models will passinformation up and down the management ladder, information exchange mechanisms must be consistent. hence, a consistent model representation language isneeded that will precisely define a modelõs objects and the relationships betweenobjects at different levels of abstraction.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation for the virtual factory117¥the desired coupling of a model (the virtual factory) directly to a realfactory demands that changes in the real factory be quickly incorporated into themodel, or, conversely, that the model be used to drive changes in the real factory.for example, the movement of a piece of equipment in a model would cause arobot to relocate the corresponding real piece of equipment. or, a change in thetemperature in a model object would cause the real temperature to change in thereal factory. to enable such coupling, the links to the real factory from the modelneed to be very robust and bidirectional.¥different òwindowsó into a model will have to be provided for differentusers, including òhelpóline operators, engineers, managers, supervisors, technicians, schedulers, human resources personnel, and maintenance personnel. eachtype of user will have his or her own perspective on reasons for using the model,and the model should be able to be tailored to accommodate those specific needs.it is likely that traditional approaches in artificial intelligence with respect toknowledge engineering will be helpful in capturing expertise, since heuristic oreven analytical manufacturing information is difficult to formalize. at the sametime, research in the area of capturing manufacturing expertise should not belimited solely to the artificial intelligence knowledgeengineering approach. forexample, it would also be valuable to investigate how people involved in themanufacturing enterprise construct meaning when they are listening to othersdescribe some manufacturing process or activity. hard experience in such situations suggests that even when all participants share the same spoken and writtenlanguage (english plus mathematics), it is often difficult to specify certain procedures without ambiguity.the following describes some of the research and development needed forcapturing and representing information:¥ gathering expertise. although it has been possible to gather knowledgefrom experts in certain narrow and wellfocused domains, acquisition ofknowledge is still difficult. since manufacturing is such a varied and complex activity, and since the information exists over a very wide range (fromhighlevel factory decision making to running a specific piece of equipment),capturing the tacit knowledge of an experienced work force for later reuserepresents a key challenge.¥ languages for gathering and representing knowledge. an informationtheoretic based language is needed in which to gather and assemble responses from experts and channel them into a machineusable form. inaddition, a good language is needed to represent the information in the model.this may or may not be the same language as that used to gather knowledge;however, it will certainly be closely related.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118information technology for manufacturingresearch areas not specific to manufacturinga number of research problems in areas not specific to manufacturing willalso need to be addressed if the virtual factory is to be realized. for example: ¥ models that must be concurrently activated and used may have to be builtby geographically dispersed teams. methods to provide for concurrent engineering and for keeping models or pieces of models synchronized will haveto be developed.¥ models must run at realtime speeds if they are to be used in conjunctionwith realtime factory operations; they must run 1,000 or 10,000 times fasterthan real time if they are to be used to experiment with different factoryconfigurations. ¥ testing and validation of models will be difficult, since there are so manyvariables and combinations of objects involved. òprovably correctó moduleswill have to be developed, so that large models can be constructed that arefree from error. tools to help build models will be required. ¥ model security, to protect a model from unwanted tampering or accidentalincidents, to make the model accessible to users but protected from unwanted actions, is another area of concern. ¥ the computational requirements for such simulations will be very high,perhaps requiring the use of supercomputers. however, traditional supercomputers have been configured for homogeneously parallel problems. thevirtual factory simulation will require extensive parallel computation, but itwill not be homogeneous. therefore research is needed on new techniquesto apply massive parallel processors to the simulation question.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1196information infrastructure issuesintroductionmanufacturing information infrastructure refers to the computing and communications facilities and services needed to facilitate, manage, and enable efficient manufacturing; key elements include database and information management systems, data communications networks and associated services, andmanagement of applications software. for the next generation of manufacturing,information infrastructure must have the high degree of connectivity, compatibility, and ease of use that already characterizes traditional physical infrastructure(electric power, water and sewage services, telephone service, and the like).a vision for the manufacturing enterprise of the 21st century includes theability to use an integrated information system to support the entire product cyclefrom product design to product delivery to the end user. such a system wouldfacilitate communications among groups, automate òcorporate memory,ó and aidin decision making. likely using the national information infrastructure (nii),this system would function at both the intrafirm (e.g., connecting branch officesdispersed all over the country) and interfirm (e.g., connecting the firm to suppliers and customers) levels. such opportunities are particularly relevant to smallmanufacturers that will be able to find niches for their specialized capabilitiesmore easily when the nii enables convenient electronic connections for firmssmall and large.the use of networked infrastructures can diminish the role played by place,time, and hierarchy in the structure and management of organizations. a widerange of organizational possibilities remain to be fully explored, and thus invesinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120information technology for manufacturingtable 6.1 research to advance infrastructure systemssubject areaexample of research neededarchitectures and standardsstandard manufacturing control architecturesgeneric functionality within control architecturescostbenefit criteria for potential standardsintraenterprise andprinciples and architectures for coupling networkinterenterprise integrationbased applicationsautomatic interpretation of transactionsautomatic message routing and associated processingsupport for multiple protocols and multiple speeds over agiven mediumtimecritical message delivery in interconnected networksprotocols and services that support specific demands ofobjectoriented applicationsservices for human and machinebased browsing andsearching of information and resourcestools and techniques supporting supplychain dynamicsand associated planningmechanisms and systems to support information sessionmanagementarchitectures forautonomous agents to monitor and respond to productionautonomy andeventsdistributedknowledge agents for enterprisewide management ofintelligencemodels, names, transactions, and rulesarchitectures for manufacturing systems involvingdistributed intelligencetools to find and distribute informationstable sets of rules for interacting agentsdynamic variations in agent autonomyinformation retrieval systemsmodeling and prototyping functions for user interfacesnextgeneration data manipulation languagesmaintenance of data consistency and integrity throughdatabase updatesnetworkbased services for information browsing andsearchingsoftware engineeringsimplification of system designs, operation, andmaintenanceselfhealing systemssupport for new programming paradigmstools for componentbased architecture lifecycleapproachesgeneral tools unconstrained by the limitations of specificprogramming languagestools with aspects of knowledgebased collaborationsoftwareinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues121table 6.1 continuedsubject areaexample of research neededsoftware engineeringrapid prototyping and other methodologies for faster (continued)developmenttechniques for encapsulating legacy systems anddeveloping mediator supportanalysis methodologies, metrics, and selection techniquesreference architectures that cut across manufacturingdomains to support software reusabilitydata representations that depict both spatial and temporalaspectstools for better and more userconfigurable user interfacesdependable computing systemsbetter technology to support changing software withoutremoving a system from operationcontinuous availability of online servicesfaulttolerant hardware and softwareincreased system security and trustworthinesscollaboration technologysoftware, user interfaces, and hardware to supportcooperative worktigation into new information technology (it)enabled organizational forms is anarea of research interest, as new organizational models will ultimately be needed,or earlier paradigms for understanding organizations revised, to better understandhow activities might be reorganized to exploit information technology for better(or higher) performance.progress toward this goal involves development of both physical (e.g., wires,computers, gateways, and switches) and òsoftó (e.g., protocols and informationservices) information infrastructure technologies. areas with research opportunities are listed in table 6.1 and are discussed in the remainder of this chapter.for convenience, these topics are divided into areas specific to manufacturing(architectures and standards, and integration of activities within and among enterprises) and not specific to manufacturing, although the dividing line betweenmanufacturingspecific and nonmanufacturingspecific categories is particularlyfuzzy for infrastructure elements.architectures and standardsarchitectures and standards provide structure for many levels of interconnection, from those among devices to those among businesses. there are architectures for systems supporting specific functions, for enterprisewide information flow, for control of processes, and for management. as the need forinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122information technology for manufacturingexchanging data and knowledge among various manufacturing applications growsand the sophistication of individual applications increases, the interfaces betweenthem become fuzzier and more complex and important. although each interfacemay itself be easy to use, correct, and robust, the complex of interfaces in a large,diversified factory is fragile and is subject to failure for relatively insignificantcauses.1 as a result, applications developers spend disproportionate time andeffort addressing the interfaces, per se, rather than the application itself.standards support the passing of information between the various elementsof a manufacturing enterpriseõs information system. for example, they facilitateconnections from computeraided design (cad) to computeraugmented processplanning to computeraided manufacturing (cam). standardization provides thebenefits of common systems (cost savings, improved integration (òplug and playóequipment and systems) and information flow, and so on).the vision for 21stcentury manufacturing presumes that interconnectingmanufacturing applications will be as simple as connecting household appliancesto a power gridñone need only know how to run the application (equivalent tousing a microwave oven) and manage the interface (plug it in and press a fewbuttons). this ease of interconnection and interoperation extends from devicesfound on the factory floor to applications connecting the factory to the productdesign facility to applications connecting an enterprise to its suppliers and customers. an òapplication socketó for manufacturing would benefit both equipment vendors and customers and enhance factory performance.the desirability of common standards notwithstanding, businesses havelargely been unable to agree on protocols or standards of communication fordifferent kinds of requests. one reason for this failure has been inadequatetechnology (e.g., the use of primitive fixedformat data representational formats)and excessive complexity. but a more important reason is that attempts to reacha common technical understanding have been hampered by epistemological differences reflected in the unstated assumptions of each participant in a technicaldiscussion. social factors relevant to the adoption of standards are discussed inchapter 7.research is needed to develop better manufacturing architecture, standards,and interfaces, including research to develop standard equipment control architectures and generic functionality within the architectures, to support generalmanufacturing information standards, and to lower the cost of more open, lessproprietary approaches. especially desirable would be architectures whose standards accommodate some upgrade capability, so that technology vendors couldworry less about premature freezing of technology and the locking out of poten1 wysk (1992) identified as an obstacle to implementing computerintegrated manufacturing thedifficulty of integrating information system components (i.e., hardware and software) with information (both internal and external) into a smoothly running system.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues123tial competitive advantages, while customers could worry less about intrinsicobsolescence.the importance of standards for manufacturing interconnections raises thequestion of where technology research enters into the development of standards;the answer is not clear. for example, efforts to develop pdes/step (productdata exchange using the standard for the exchange of product model data) are notresearch per se, but the kind of problem that pdes is intended to solve mayrequire research.2because of the importance of international standards in the global marketplace, strong participation of u.s. interests in standards making is valuable, andgreater involvement of u.s. academic researchers (who are less involved thanresearchers in other countries) in standards making may strengthen the u.s.technology base in manufacturing. research is a foundation for the consensusbuilding inherent in standardization, and researchers (from industry, academia,and government) should bring their insights to bear on that process.integrationredesign of business practices today, workers talking on the telephone, typing on keyboards, obtainingparts, scheduling factory operations, and setting up delivery schedules contributemuch more to manufacturing costs than do the workers performing òtouch labor.ó3 lessons learned in both service and manufacturing industries attest to thevalue of systematic redesign of business practices and to the key role played byinformation technology and infrastructure in such reengineering.4in particular, workers in a factory may be working very hard on an inappropriate set of tasks. they may be doing things that are not necessary, doing theminefficiently or even redundantly, or doing their work in such a way that it is notusable or accessible elsewhere. information technology can be used to helpidentify such problems. for example, when modeling techniques are used and2 the pdes efforts are not standards making in the traditional sense. like many other activitiesthat have moved into the standards arena, they involve significant levels of development activity asopposed to simple harmonization of approaches. this is true in many other areas of hightechnologystandardization, such as the unified approach to conceptual data modeling.3 for example, miller and vollmann (1985) assert that òoverhead costs as a percentage of valueadded in u.s. industries continue to increase and have become a major concern of manufacturingmanagersó and that òthe growing implementation of factory automation increases overhead costs as apercentage of value added.ó they point out that òmost overhead costs are created by transactions,not physical products. such hidden factory costs are generated by logistical, balancing, quality, andchange transactions.ó4 see chapter 6 in cstb (1994a). for a discussion of business process reengineering, see hammer and champy (1993).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124information technology for manufacturingthe model is compared with an actual process, steps that do not add value canoften be identified. such information is needed if management is to support aprocess of continuous change and improvement. once such problems are identified, information technology can often play a key role in restructuring businessprocesses for greater effectiveness and efficiency. it can help to reduce thenumber of tasks involved in an activity, change the nature and sequence of tasks,and reduce the total time involved in a business processintraenterprise integrationwithin a manufacturing company, activities such as design, production, marketing, finance, sales, use of human resources, and distribution have historicallybeen linked to each other on the basis of issues such as ease of management andphysical proximity. for example, using the manual and semiautomated manufacturing information systems of the past, integration was achieved through interactions between people where knowledge, data, and project status were sharedthrough formal conversation in meetings and reviews and informal conversationin the hallways.today, electronic mail, shared and remotely accessible databases, ògroupware,ó and other forms of electronic communication present new options forcentralizing and dispersing activities and also for supporting crossfunctionalteams and processes. for example, enhanced communications options tend to beassociated with greater decentralization, obviating the need for all tasks to flowthrough an office or headquarters. electronic communications enable a muchhigher degree of geographic independence. while communication has alwaysbeen fundamental to large organizations with distributed establishments, it supports ever greater geographic dispersion of personnel, allowing firms to reap thebenefits of lowercost production labor or specialized expertise associated withspecific geographic regions.what has stood in the way of a greater degree of intraenterprise integration?there are many causes, but one major reason is that the technical integration ofvarious applications into a smoothly running system has been and continues to bequite problematic. commercial software from one source does not integrate wellwith software from other commercial sources or with internally developed software, revisions come out slowly and hence frustrate users who expect a rapidresponse, and so on. systemlevel issues have received relatively little attention,both because of their difficulty and because they relate to problems that fallbetween the offerings of individual vendors. customizing of general applicationsto specific customer needs and integrating applications and technologies from avariety of sources make development of a robust manufacturing system a formidable task. such problems have plagued all kinds of organizations, but thecombination of physical and informationbased work in manufacturing adds further complications.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues125for example, several manufacturing companies have invested many thousands of personhours in developing and integrating factory information systems,a disproportionately large investment in comparison with their investment inother parts of the factory system. this imbalance is especially serious considering that these companies have often purchased òfinishedó software applicationsystems from commercial sources, which when measured against the benefitsreceived have proved to be less than satisfying. since largescale systems formanufacturing are often one of a kind, they present special problems becausethey are developed by teams with relatively limited experience with the kind ofsystem needed, and they generally entail very high lifecycle costs.a second illustration is the integration problems associated with cad toolsfor mechanical products. each vendor of such tools has its own database design,and exchange of models between different cad programs is possible only forrelatively simple constructs, despite the existence of a standard called the initialgraphics exchange specification (iges). each cad tool has its own uniqueinterface that may take months to learn, and each comes with a different set ofsoftware tools for manufacturing support that may provide functions such asnumerically controlled machining, sheet metal bending, or electrical wire routing.such incompatibilities are found throughout various manufacturing applications, and every phase of the design and manufacturing process requires its owndistinct computer model and data representation. the representation of a part ina database may appear differently for a machining operation than it would for aninspection operation. the design representation necessary to support an engineering drawing is different from the design representation necessary to supporta finite element analysis, and in most cases there are no automatic algorithmsavailable to convert from one representation to another. for data other than dataon the shapes of parts, few good computer representations exist at all. even whenthe interfaces are perfect, a small design change requires a tedious and laborintensive process of propagating the changes through all the cad tools andrepresentations. box 6.1 elaborates on the fundamental knowledge gaps thatunderlie difficulties in integrating applications.databases and database management systems, equipment control systems,communications systems, and design support tools all present a multifacetedchallenge to achieving interoperability. meeting that challenge requires a deepunderstanding of underlying data constructs, the operations that constitute therelevant manipulations, and the assumptions behind various operations and calculations.5 while now readily available in certain domains (e.g., the representa5 for example, defense department officials tell a gulf war story regarding an inquiry about thenumber of mres (meals, ready to eat) available. the answer that came back was òð38,000.ó thisridiculous answer was the result of incompatibilities between two databases: one defined an òmreóas a single individual package (one meal for one soldier), while the other defined an òmreó as apallet of 500 individual packages.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126information technology for manufacturingbox 6.1 knowledge gaps relevant tointraenterprise integration¥the science and engineering of many phenomena underlying todayõs products are not well understood. examples include the behavior of composite materials, failure modes of complex computer systems, turbulent fluid flow, failuremodes such as crack growth and fatigue, and material and chemical incompatibilities.¥the models that do exist capture one phenomenon, behavior, or mode ofenergy storage at a time, while most complex systems exhibit multiple modes atonce. integration of singlemode models is also problematic.¥while the main dimensions of parts and parameter values of an electrical orchemical nature can be specified with reasonable certainty, less is known abouthow much variation about those nominal values is permissible. the current meansof setting tolerances are historical or very conservative. an example is that materials specifications are often stated without indication of variances. the result isthat costs are raised and materials and energy are wasted, both in production andin the overengineering of products that will perform even if tolerances happen toreinforce rather than cancel each other.¥the most efficient ways to carry out design processes to address all theinteracting variables are not known. right now an iterative and òconcurrentó process is used, relying heavily on human memory and facetoface communication.¥it is not known how to construct and populate a database that will contain inan easily accessible form all the information that the designers of modern productswill need.¥it has been difficult to develop standards for data interchange to which allvendors will adhere. indeed, a vendor seeking greater differentiation between itsproducts and those of other vendors may well choose a proprietary data format orrepresentation. at the same time, customers may not realize the waste and overhead incurred in retraining their personnel to use many different software packages.¥finally, we do not know how best to link people to a rising tide of increasingly complex information. for example, information systems must be able to provideinformation at appropriate levels of abstraction: a product designer may not needto know the details of how a partially finished part is held in a jig, although aproduction manager might. information displayed for different individuals in themanufacturing system should reflect their different needs. the term òinformationergonomicsó has been coined to capture this challenge.tion of integer and real numbers), such an understanding is sorely lacking inmany of the domains that manufacturing touches.commercial interests play a key role as well. vendors have often chosen todevelop products with proprietary interfaces and data representations. suppliersof manufacturing equipment anxious to òdifferentiateó their products have obscured generic elements in their control computers, thwarting change and raisingthe cost of acquisition, operation, and maintenance. such practices have tendedto sacrifice interoperability to the desire to capture a set of customers. not onlyinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues127do such proprietary designs inhibit communication with competitorsõ products,but they also block communication with adjacent machines and with older capitalequipment and networks previously installed within a single plant. communication is further confounded by network architectures that typically channel communication into hierarchies that mimic the power structure of an organization,inhibiting or complicating the exchange of simple messages between peers.the result has been that information systems products from one vendor arenot designed to be (and sometimes cannot be) integrated with similar productsfrom a different vendor. (in some cases, even products from a single vendor areincompatible with each other.) interfaces between these systems and equipmentare often crude, causing many problems in their use and, according to manymanufacturing executives, discrediting the entire information technology effort.representations for product designs, process plans, and factory resources arequite often company or even sitespecific.6architectures (functional, control, communication, and management) alsovary excessively. furthermore, these architectures are difficult to describe andmodel. defining architectural linkages and creating integration òhooksó for sensors, machine control, process planning, scheduling of maintenance and repair,and machine interfaces are as critical as creating faster and better devices for eachof these areas. to a large degree, the presence of such hooks would give users theflexibility to assemble their own solutions from offtheshelf software and hardware components.the toplevel goal is the effective and rapid exchange of data and knowledgebetween all operational systems and subsystems,7 although such a goal applied toresearch systems might well freeze technologies prematurely and inhibit improvement. achieving it will require common languages, operating systems, andnetworks. beyond common formats for data representation, a common understanding of data, that is, a common semantics, is also needed for complete knowledge interchange. three important areas of research on the interconnection ofapplications include the following:1. research is needed on organizing principles and architectures for connecting different networkbased applications into a seamless environment.such connection is necessary, for example, to link flexible manufacturing6 internally developed integrated information technology solutions are always possible in principle. but as a practical matter, only the very largest firms have the resources to develop even partialinformation technology solutions inhouse, and essentially no firm can do it all alone.7 the need for commonality and interoperability among manufacturing applications of informationtechnology is in some ways analogous to the problems faced by european engineers 250 years ago asthey struggled to integrate mechanical systems that utilized a puzzling array of hole sizes, bearingsizes, and thread sizes. the crucial difference is that standardization of the latter took place overdecades, while today u.s. manufacturing cannot afford to wait decades for these standards to arrive.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128information technology for manufacturingcells to a plantõs scheduling function and to link the scheduling function tothe enterprise order, delivery, and financial systems. enterprise integrationalso implies a need for research to enable the automatic interpretation of thetype of transaction being executed, the routing of the message to the rightlocation for processing, and the processing that must occur when the message for the transaction reaches the correct system.2. research is needed to support communications networks that can supportthe realtime control of manufacturing processes (e.g., a cutting tool shapinga piece of metal). such networks transmit control messages, each of whichmust be received and acted on within some critical time, t. while theprocess being controlled should be able to tolerate some variation in t, thenetwork must be able to guarantee delivery of that message unconditionallywithin that time. many common protocol suites such as todayõs tcp/ip oropen systems interconnection deliver messages on a òbesteffortó basis andcannot reliably meet such deliverytime requirements, while other protocolsassure timely delivery by reserving communications bandwidth, usually onprivate lines and usually through restrictions on the type and number ofmessages carried. since there is increasing demand for the ability to transmitcontrol messages on existing open communications networks, research isneeded to formulate the principles for construction and operation of networks that support timecritical message delivery in a context of interconnecting, multipurpose networks. if possible, such systems should be compatible and interoperable with other timecritical and nontimecriticalapplications and communications; in this event, they could be made compatible with a wide range of tcp/ip products.3. research is needed to develop services tailored for human and machinebased information and resource browsing and searching, using knowledgebased assistance agents for semantic interpretations, translations, and relationships. the availability of such services will be essential to ensuringgreater information infrastructure performance and efficiency. the higherlevel network directory services of today will not meet the requirements ofnearfuture applications.8interenterprise integrationthe notion of a supply chain (figure 6.1) will be integral to manufacturingfor the foreseeable future, and suppliers will be passing partially finished components or materials to those closer to the point of final assembly. increasingly,8 some relevant work has been undertaken in the context of the x.500 directory standard, andfurther work on implementing that standard is necessary.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues129along with the movement of goods, information must move up and down thesupply chain. information technology can facilitate the passage of informationwithin a manufacturing enterprise, but as importantly, it can enable differentorganizational structures and relationships among various elements in the supplychain, and networked infrastructures can extend well beyond a firmõs boundaries.it can be used to link value chains across firms and shift work involved invarious functions between organizations. already, electronic data interchange(edi) connects companies to their suppliers, shippers, buyers, and even theirbanks. providing a shared body of information and a common set of standardizedforms, edi transforms the ordering, invoicing, shipping, tracking, and customerservice functions, among others, for a growing number of enterprises. throughthese electronic linkages, it enables companies to emphasize their core competencies by òoutsourcingó activities that are mostly common across industries(e.g., payroll, purchasing, or accounting) to other providers that can performthese activities more efficiently. in addition, electronically linked firms cangroup and regroup as the need arises in alliances of convenience.at present, much of the materialrelated cost of production stems from thefigure 6.1 the supply chain, a basic element of manufacturing that will becomeincreasingly information intensive.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130information technology for manufacturingpurchasing, packaging, shipping, unpacking, and moving around of componentmaterials. better communication between supplier and customer enterpriseswould reduce such costs; although not new, edi and other tools to supportstreamlined processes are obvious points of departure and candidates for supporting technology that will eventually culminate in the electronic communication offinancial information and even electronic funds transfers, involving corporatelevel systems and systems at thirdparty financial institutions.mechanisms and systems are required to support information session management. these include the means for connecting to and coordinating the delivery of information between multiple sources using multiple streams, as well asthe mechanisms for collaboration using this information. in addition, tools andtechniques are needed to facilitate realtime planning through the entire supplychain; in certain factories, this is already a partially achieved goal, but for avariety of reasons the techniques are not widely applicable across all manufacturers. intelligent agents (computer automata) may be able to perform most of thehand shaking between customers and suppliers without requiring human intervention; if realized, these agents might provide human users with new, flexible,easytouse humanoriented protocols and standards that are as obvious as thecurrent paperbased solutions. this level of analysis is generally impossibletoday; given the typical operation of manufacturing resource planning systems, itcan take weeks. research will be required in terms of software architectures,protocols for communication, and access and security mechanisms (see òdependable computing systemsó below). these needs are above and beyond the transactionbased processing and management that will clearly be required.nonmanufacturingspecific researchgiven that manufacturing operations are typically large and complex, it isnot surprising that the software for controlling and managing such operations isalso large and complex. research in many traditional areas of computer science,including information retrieval, software engineering, and reliable computing, aswell as in collaboration technology, will be relevant to manufacturing. work bycomputer scientists in these areas, but framed in a manufacturing context, willboth enrich computer science and result in important benefits to manufacturing.99 an approach calling for research work at the intersection of computer science and engineering(cs&e) and other problem domains was contained in the cstb report computing the future (cstb,1992). in particular, this report called for academic cs&e to increase its contact and intellectualinterchange with other disciplines (of which manufacturing could be one); to increase traffic incs&erelated knowledge and problems among academia, industry, and society at large; and toenhance the crossfertilization of ideas in cs&e between theoretical underpinnings and experimentalexperience.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues131information retrieval systemsmanufacturing applications are dataintensive. enormous amounts of dataare needed to support manufacturing activities (e.g., to represent the millions ofparts on a boeing 777 or the millions of transactions that occur on a factoryfloor), and the relationships among the data are complex, sophisticated, andchangeable. for example, a very large scale integrated chip component has adifferent description for each activity; functional, geometric, behavioral, temporal, and other views of the part must be supported. any changes in one view mustripple through all of the other views and extend to invalidate or update usage ofthe component throughout a design process. the movement toward multimediadatabases and applications compounds the problems presented by simple text ornumerical databases.modern information storage and retrieval systems are designed to handle allaspects of data and information management except generating or collecting thedata. these systems serve as the primary interface to data for the user throughpowerful query languages, for bulk storage devices through the file system, forthe rest of the computer through the operating system, and for the rest of theworld through communications networks. in each of these areas, advances havebeen rapid, but progress has only generated more ambitious goals. informationretrieval for manufacturing will stress existing technology and will require amajor research effort. the following three problems illustrate the type of workthat is needed:1. incorporation of modeling and prototyping functions into a manufacturing database management system. the language used for data manipulationwithin the system should contain the basic syntax and semantics that describe products and processes; in other words, the product and process description language should be a sublanguage of the data manipulation language. however, current data manipulation languages were developed tohandle financial and other types of data that can easily be cast into a relational database model. manufacturing data, especially data related to geometry, are instead associative. consequently, using current data manipulationlanguages for manufacturing data is counterintuitive and difficult. researchis needed to develop the next generation of data manipulation languages,perhaps based on the objectoriented data model.2. maintenance of data consistency and integrity in a rapidly changingdatabase that may be distributed. in the design phase, the database mustserve not only as the primary repository of ongoing work but also as theprincipal medium of communication among the participants (who may beusing simulation, analysis, and design tools, as well as manufacturing execution systems); these participants may also be geographically distributedinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132information technology for manufacturingacross many time zones. any disparity in the copies of the database seen bydifferent users as changes are made will wreak havoc. in the processingphase, consistency is essential if realtime control of the process is to beachieved. a realtime production schedule is realistic only if the data aboutequipment status and work location are correct when the schedule is generated. here the performance (i.e., speed) issue that is always present indatabase consistency becomes particularly difficult to resolve. propagatingchanges throughout the entire system imposes additional constraints on realtime performance.3. information browsing and searching in a distributed manufacturing environment. vendors and suppliers connected through the national information infrastructure will want to make information about their products available electronically to customers that may not know about them. design andproduction engineers will need to browse various information archives insearch of a part or a process that they may need. thus, while network toolssuch as gophers, mosaic, and widearea information search systems arepromising starts to the general problem, research is needed to develop moreadvanced automated tools that accept information on needed parts or processes as input, search or make appropriate inquiries at appropriate sites onthe nii, and return to the user a list of those sites and the information foundthere. such an effort would also depend on new indexing schemes and datarepresentations that would allow semantically driven searches of both textand nontext information.software engineeringin view of the experiences of the major manufacturers represented by members of the committee and those who briefed the committee, the current state ofthe art in software engineering is barely adequate to meet current manufacturingneeds. the software problem has a direct impact on a manufacturerõs ability torespond quickly to a changing marketplace with new products. the reason is thatnew product development often calls for rapid responses and agile manufacturing, which themselves require advanced information technologies, open systemsconcepts, and component reuse.the following list describes some of the most important areas of softwareengineering research for manufacturing:¥ tools to support the software engineering process in manufacturing. automating complex, intelligent manufacturing systems requires both solid engineering lifecycle approaches and supporting tools. unfortunately, in manycases, tool development lags significantly behind the use of new methodologies, as in the case of tools to support the recent componentbased architecinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues133ture lifecycle approaches. companies using such approaches for component development and reuse are suffering from the lack of useful tools forsystem analysis, requirements management, design, configuration and integration, and simulation. until such tools become available, the building oflarge, complex manufacturing systems will remain a costly exercise. forexample, more general tools are needed that are not constrained by the limitations of specific programming languages, as well as tools that have aspectsof knowledgebased collaboration software.¥ programming paradigms that enable manufacturing personnel, rather thansoftware development experts, to develop and change application systemsfor the shop floor or the design laboratory. this capability will requirebetter methods of developing software and better humanmachine interfacesto enable domainspecific software specification. objectoriented programming is a particular paradigm of interest.¥ support for faster development of easiertouse and more effective systems.simplification of designs, operation, and maintenance is desired, as are increased predictability of systems, selfhealing systems, and system extensibility. research is needed in system optimization and enhanced systemoperation and maintenance; better capabilities for rapid prototyping are aparticular need. visualization and humancomputer interaction techniqueswill be key.¥ accommodation of legacy systems. manufacturers have a great deal ofinvestment that they will be loath to give up even when new and improvedtechnology is available. thus, research on how to facilitate transitions tonew technology is necessary. one direction for such research is the development of techniques for encapsulation of legacy systems and of mediatorsupport.¥ tools for systems analysis. although there are many different analysismethodologies, such as responsibilitydriven, datadriven, and activitybasedmethodologies, system analysis remains more an art than a science. how dowe compare types of analyses? are some techniques simply better thanothers, or do different types of system development or applications dictate achoice? are the techniques sufficient, or are new ones needed? research isneeded to help answer these questions.¥ better metrics. a number of metrics have been developed for the testingphase of the engineering process to measure dimensions of system performance such as speed and timing. there are no metrics that specify how wella problem in manufacturing is understood and formulated. what are theinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134information technology for manufacturingmetrics for analysis, and how do we measure our successes and failures?when do we know that analysis is complete or at least good enough? canthese questions be addressed with metrics? given the frequent need for rapidsystem development, metrics specifying temporal aspects of analysis shouldbe considered. are there temporal metrics for analysis techniques (e.g.,statetransition diagrams, object models, eventstimulus diagrams) that couldbe related to system characteristics?¥ software reuse. the ability to reuse software and system artifacts andresults from associated analyses in the development of new systems or applications would leverage previous investments in expertise, effort, money, andtime. examples of software artifacts from objectoriented analysis and design include object models (including representations of data and behavior)and object interface definitions. one type of research supporting reusabilitycould lead to reference architectures that cut across manufacturing domains.for example, there could be families of reference architectures for continuous processes and for discrete processes. goals would include minimizingthe number of reference architectures for which thirdparty suppliers mustdevelop software or systems and increasing the ability to leverage previousexpertise across projects.¥ better representations of spatial and temporal dimensions in software.software representation currently focuses on declarative knowledge. research is needed to achieve representations that depict both spatial and temporal aspects of associated data, enriching a systemõs repository of knowledge and facilitating the visualization, design, specification, monitoring, andanalysis of manufacturing processes. multimedia visualization of these newrepresentations may include òwalking throughó models or providing simulations of system behaviors in one window while the activated models employed are presented in another window. such elements would contribute tothe realization of virtual factories, which involve enhanced modeling andsimulation of processes and products. new programming interfaces thatcapture the spatial and physical abstractions of manufacturing are essentialto allow end users to program their own processes and work flows.dependable computing systemsmanufacturing plants require continuous operation, creating a need for dependable computing systems. better technology to support òhot swapsó of software (i.e., changing software without removing the system from operation), continuous availability of online services, and faulttolerant hardware and softwareare among the technologies needed for dependable manufacturing systems.manufacturing provides an application arena for a wide variety of researchinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure issues135relating to increased system security and trustworthiness, including access control and authentication. the need to determine and verify the user of a computersystem or network is becoming increasingly important as a way of preservingsystem and data integrity, ensuring that sensitive data and systems are accessedonly by those who are authorized, and ensuring the highest levels of systemavailability. these concerns affect both intraenterprise and interenterprise communications.10 the manufacturing environment, especially the factory environment, calls for economical and robust technology to address these needs.finally, as manufacturing tools become more autonomous, it becomes imperative to ensure the correctness of controlling software, as control softwarewith errors may be a major contributor to factory downtime due to physicaldamage.collaboration technology and computersupported cooperative workthe trend toward organizing workers of all kinds into teams with significantlevels of decisionmaking authority gives rise to a need for technology to supportcollaborative activity.11 for example, intelligent systems are needed to supportcollaborative efforts in the design of complex products; they can also facilitatecollaboration among factory and other, nonproduction personnel. research needsinclude information technology to support empowered work teams of variouskinds of personnel and tools for total quality management.research relating to technical tools for computersupported cooperative work(including software, user interfaces, and supporting hardware) should be complemented by research examining relevant aspects of human behavior, educationand training requirements, and other similar issues, to ensure both that optimaltools are developed and that they can be used easily.10 electronic contract documents and order qualifications, which are envisaged as part of ourfuture enterprises, will require methods for identification, authentication, and nonrepudiation.11 aside from the emerging, largely messagebased groupware products, todayõs tools are aimed atsupporting individual professional performers rather than collaborating teams.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136information technology for manufacturing1367organizational and societal infrastructurechapters 3 through 6 discuss a research agenda for information technologyrelated to manufacturing. if this research agenda is fully pursued, the scope ofwhat is achievable will be greatly expanded. however, an equally importantchallenge is understanding how manufacturing enterprises can actually make useof information technology; even today, much technology remains unused.put differently, the effective use of information technology (it) in manufacturing depends on more than technology research. it also depends on success in(1) understanding the concerns of manufacturing decision makers; (2) motivatingeffective collaboration and technology transfer between industry and academia;(3) motivating individuals within manufacturing enterprises to implement information technology; (4) developing open standards and appropriate metrics ofperformance; and (5) ensuring through education and training that the skill basein manufacturing adapts to the new types of tools, techniques, and organizationalstructures made possible by information technology and to other òbest practicesóand òbenchmarksó not necessarily associated with information technology. alsoneeded will be execution of global business strategies that protect highvalueadded jobs for u.s. manufacturing facilities. in some instances, these essentiallypractical recommendations contain their own requirements for research, particularly social science research. the challenge for the nation is both to improve onexisting capabilities (the focus of the technology research agenda described inchapters 3 through 6) and to enhance the potential for manufacturing firms toactually use advanced information technology successfully (the focus of thischapter).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure137targeting the decision makerplanned change is driven by decision makers. of course, these decisionmakers may not necessarily reside in the corporate executive hierarchy; nearly allemployees in a company have some decisionmaking authority. however, peopleat different levels of a hierarchy have different concerns; as a result, they look tonew technologies to answer different questions, as suggested in figure 7.1. technology researchers who wish their innovations to be adopted must craft theirresearch in a way that the benefits of the research are highlighted to match theconcerns of the decision makers who will decide on their technologies as well asthose who will use them. focusing on the technology alone is rarely sufficient topersuade a decision maker to adopt a particular solution. unless the use ofinformation technology demonstrably provides substantial payoffs for the enduser, the end user will not take the trouble to learn and adapt to the technology,and that will guarantee that the new technology will not be used.a good example of technology fitting the needs of particular users is evidentin the rapid diffusion of personal computers into the workplace. when personalcomputers became available for a few thousand dollars apiece, they could bedeployed to address the problems of decision makers who controlled budgets onthat scale without the need for action at higher levels of authority. however, thepurpose of introducing personal computers was not to proliferate them or thetechnology they represent; their use is justified because they can solve real factory problems with a demonstrated dollar benefit.motivating technology transferand academicindustrial interactionno matter how good are the ideas and advances developed by academicresearch groups, they are useless in a manufacturing context unless transferred toindustry. effective transfer requires a stronger relationship between academia (orother sources of new technology) and industry.1 although most of the importantrecent developments in design and manufacturing have come from industry,manufacturing firms and their information technology system vendors need theknowledge and expertise of the academic research community, whose role is topursue longerterm research that may not have obvious immediate payoffs. this1 for example, new design methods developed in academia are especially hard to transfer toindustry because industry normally gets such methods from computeraided design (cad) vendors.so the transfer takes two steps (from developers to cad vendors and then from cad vendors totheir customers). however, cad companies are typically small and very limited in their resources,and so they do not take risks on new research ideas. instead, they take their cues from their majorcustomers. consequently, a technology transfer strategy for design methods must enlist the supportof potential users as well as equip the cad vendors.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138information technology for manufacturingwhowherewhat, why, and howchief executive officerchief financial officerchief operating officerworldwide marketingand sales executivechief technologistfactory managerproduction managerengineering managerinformation systemsmanagerhuman resourcesmanagerarea supervisorssystems operatorsproduction schedulersyield managersshift supervisorsprocess engineersequipment managersquality engineersinformation engineersequipment operatorsprocessing techniciansmaintenance personnelinformationtechnologistswhat is my productioncapacity?who gets what when?are we profitable?what products do we makenext year?do we have the right skillmix?how is my factory doing?what is the cost?what are the critical issues?how are the suppliers?is the system responsive?how is my area doing?is the information current?are we on target?what is the area yield?is the material on time?is my shift operating well?what is todayõs schedule?is the process in control?is the product quality high?systems running smoothly?what is the equipment status?how do i fix this process?where is the material?what lot is run next?do we have sufficient spares?to enable a correct response to the higherlevel questions,answers to the lowerlevel questions must be correct.figure 7.1 questions asked at different levels in the manufacturing hierarchy to whichinformation technology can be expected to be responsive.corporatefactoryareaprocessequipmentinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure139is not a new problem, but it is particularly acute in the area of manufacturingtechnologyñand resolving it is more important now than ever before, especiallysince organizations long known for their ability to facilitate the transfer of basicresearch to practical implementation (e.g., bell laboratories, fairchild r&d,ibmõs t.j. watson research center laboratories) are being cut back, reoriented,or even eliminated.the success of computeraided design (cad) programs for electronic designin the marketplace is instructive and provides a good model for universityindustry relationships in other manufacturing domains. cad programs for electronicdesign have been developed over the last 20 years, primarily in universities andindustrial laboratories, often aided by governments grants (mostly from the national science foundation (nsf) and the advanced research projects agency(arpa)). the transfer of these technologies from laboratories to industry is dueto a robust and aggressive set of privatesector vendors, whose role has beenlargely to implement and package research results for general consumption. electronic design analysis research is still going strong, primarily in raising the levelof design abstraction and in improving the capabilities of existing algorithms.development and deployment of fieldprogrammable gate arrays are starting tomake it possible to build early hardware prototypes, rather than relying on software simulations. again, privatesector vendors (xilinx, actel, altera for chips,quickturn for systems) are marketing the basics needed for such prototyping.some of the seeds of the problem of transferring technology for manufacturing lie in the culture of universities. unfortunately, manufacturing is dismissedin many academic circles as a shrinking portion of the gross national productsymbolized by unexciting smokestack factories.2 inducing academics to work onthe inherently interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary problems that characterizemanufacturing problems is difficult when tenure in universities often depends onevidence of the faculty memberõs ability to be successful as an independentresearcher gaining peer recognition; teamwork and industry collaboration are notregarded as important contributions. industry recognizes this fact by formingdesign teams and finding ways to reward all the participants. in academia, manyforces are starting to motivate collaborative research, which is presenting newchallenges and opportunities to administrators; these include, for example, interdisciplinary manufacturing research centers (cstb, 1993).industry can help by articulating to academia the basic intellectual issues ofmanufacturing, not only to help guide research (e.g., by providing data and problems to academic researchers) but also to make those issues recognizable topeople in traditional disciplines. strong statements from industry would help toimpress on manufacturing faculty (many of whom have limited expertise in infor2 for a perspective on the larger problem of nurturing academic work related to system development, see cstb (1994b).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140information technology for manufacturingmation technology) the need for industry involvement and the increasing importance of information technology to manufacturing. finally, if industry werewidely regarded as being open and accepting of new ideas, academic researchersmight have more incentive to work on industryõs problems.a variety of mechanisms could foster better academicindustrial interactionrelating to manufacturing. a fellowship or sabbatical program, for example,could place academics in factories and factory people in academia for periods ofabout a year. (shorter periods have proven less satisfactory; periods of about ayear allow a researcher to better understand the special qualities and inherentproblems of the manufacturing environment, to explore its different operationsand dimensions (e.g., by rotating through different units), and to contribute substantially to addressing a problem.3) historically, this concept has been thwartedby tenure pressures that militate against long absences from the university byresearchers during the period in which they are forming their research programs.to succeed now, mechanisms are needed to ensure that researchers are not penalized for this kind of investment of time and effort.the committee is particularly attracted to the concept of a òteaching factory.ó the study of manufacturing requires a strong laboratory experience, inwhich difficult concepts and poorly understood interactions can be demonstratedand learning can be reinforced, and a teaching factory is designed to provide thislaboratory. a teaching factory would gather together the necessary processingand control equipment (including tools, fixtures, machines, computers, and interfaces) and organize these elements so that a product or family of products couldbe produced. however, the teaching factory would also be organized to demonstrate and make manifest a variety of activities and principles, including thespecifics of processing, control, system and product design, associated management, and their interactions. a teaching factory would serve as a testbed thatcould help researchers see if their ideas are valid. setting aside portions of realfactories for such experiments is usually too costly to be considered. yet testbedsmust be realistic enough to enable researchers not only to find out if their ideaswork but also to learn the constraints of real manufacturing environments anddiscover opportunities and research problems.4 research to develop innovativeand economic means of creating teaching factories is necessary to prepare manu3 industry could reciprocate by funding further education for its workers. one example of a usefulexchange is the massachusetts institute of technologyõs leaders for manufacturing program, whichlinks engineering and business school faculty with industrial representatives and involves mastertheses developed by students òon locationó in manufacturing environments.4 the metal oxide semiconductor implementation service (mosis) provides a facility to experiment with innovative chip designs; a researcher provides a chip design, and the mosis servicereturns (in a very short time) a chip fabricated to the designõs specifications. the concept of aòmechanical mosisó service has been proposed in the past, and it continues to be attractive as avehicle for rapid testing of interesting manufacturing ideas.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure141facturing specialists for the factory of the future as well as to develop deepunderstanding of specific processes.one variation on the concept of a teaching factoryñthe extension of themanufacturing enterprise into academic institutionsñwould be made possible bya broad, enhanced national information infrastructure (nii) such as that envisioned as enabling greater interenterprise integration and the virtual factoryconcept (see òinterenterprise integrationó in chapter 6). efforts to develop acapability for remote access should specifically address problems related to electronic connectivity, the transfer of technically complex principles, and sharedaccess (perhaps remotely) to expensive manufacturing equipment and criticalinformation or knowledge.any program that provides major funding for academic research in manufacturing will likely increase academiaõs interest in manufacturing; of course, that isan objective of the federal advanced manufacturing technology initiative. another mechanism for boosting the prestige of manufacturing would be an nsfpostdoctoral program for manufacturing fellows. matching grants would leverage limited federal funds with industrial resources, using industrial support tosignal areas of particular interest to industry. similarly, funding could be directed to appropriate universityindustry partnerships that are launched with explicit mechanisms for technology transfer.finally, consortia may be necessary to undertake meaningful manufacturingresearch, a trend recognized in a number of federal programs.5 the issue ofmanufacturing is bigger than any company, indeed bigger than any industry.consortia may be the way to carry out expensive research, especially in areas thattranscend specific products. one may question the relevance of, for example, thepossible collaboration between an aircraft company and a semiconductor chip5 for example, the intelligent manufacturing systems (ims) program is an international programfor cooperative research and development in advanced manufacturing that involves the united states,japan, canada, australia, the european community, and the european free trade association. it isintended to bring together large and small manufacturing companies, research and academic institutions, and public authorities in a structure that facilitates the sharing of intellectual property. in theunited states, the ims program is run out of the office of the assistant secretary for technologypolicy in the department of commerce. this program is not aimed at any particular research topic ordirection for attention, though certainly the application of information technology to manufacturingdoes fall under its umbrella.a second example is the technology deployment activity of arpaõs technology reinvestmentproject that focuses on manufacturing extension centers (mecs). an mec is an organization thatworks with small manufacturers to assist them in using technology (including information technology) to improve performance and productivity. mecs are intended to be consortia consisting ofinstitutions of higher education, nonprofit organizations, or government entities in the service ofspecified clientele.other consortia are described in putting the information infrastructure to work (nist, 1994, pp.723).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142information technology for manufacturingcompany. however, it turns out that there may be many possible benefits ofcollaboration. boeing has established a sophisticated design program for its newline of aircraft, and the suppliercustomer relationship established to share designs of parts can benefit a chip maker also trying to share design topics. bothcompanies share concerns about environmental issues, team development, andtechnology to share information. interindustry collaboration may indeed providea rapid path to the introduction of new technology.the development of the nii is sure to have a significant influence on industry collaboration. sharing of information will lead to more collaboration and theavailability of highbandwidth communications networks will facilitate more andbetter ways to collaborate, as will the availability of an infrastructure involvingadoption of standards that support interoperability. as graphic and imagerichinformation management capabilities become available through the nii, for example, the collaboration between industries and suppliers is very likely to beenhanced.motivating introduction and implementationof information technologyunderstanding organizational issuesthe introduction of new technologies into an organization almost alwaysaffects existing social structures. a factory operation that is as tied to information technology as the vision of chapter 1 suggests will inevitably have differentemployment hierarchies, divisions of labor, information flows, and forms oforganizing for tasks than those that exist today. to facilitate a smoother integration of new information technology into manufacturing businesses, research isneeded in the following areas.human resourceseven in a highly automated and information technologyintensive manufacturing enterprise, human beings will continue to have a critical impact on operations. important questions regarding the human role must be addressed:¥ how should responsibilities be divided between people and informationtechnology? at the extremes, this division may be clear (clearly, peopleshould decide if it is socially responsible for a certain product to be produced, and computers should decide at what moment to turn off a cuttingtorch). however, intermediate cases are less clear, especially as informationtechnology becomes capable of acting with more autonomy and can assumetasks previously thought to require human input.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure143¥ how should goals and incentives be structured to ensure that the aggregateof individualsõ behaviors is most supportive of an enterpriseõs overall objective? individuals in a hierarchy may well be much more sensitive to thedemands of their immediate environment than to the companyõs overall goals;most individuals in an organization do what is necessary to satisfy theirsupervisor, and what the organization wants overall is secondary. in motivating the appropriate behavior, a system that rewards individuals on thebasis of satisfying the needs of (internal or external) customers may be moreefficacious than current approaches, and information technology may wellprovide the means to make such a reward system more immediate and thuseffective (holland, 1985, pp. 17).¥ what mechanisms are needed to give individuals the skills they need? thisissue implies training or apprenticeship programs and invites exploration ofissues such as justintime training for small firms that cannot afford torelease staff for more traditional educational environments. older workerswho associate high technology with increased job insecurity may be particularly apprehensive about the introduction of it.communicationstraditionally, the content of communications is structured as distinctionsbetween data, information, and knowledge. this continuum can be regarded asone of everhigher abstraction coupled to increasing levels of contextual awareness and relevance. intuitively, data belong to òlowleveló computers whileknowledge is the province of òhighleveló human actors. but as computersbecome capable of assuming higherlevel functions, what data, information, andknowledge are relevant to which entities? (for example, a person or a computermight have a single function that requires selected communications content fromacross an entire facility, or it might deal with the entire communications contentregarding a geographically and temporally bounded environment. under whatcircumstances is each design more appropriate?) how can the communicationsstream best be made available to workers and for what purposes? how can thediffering requirements of individual agents be taken into account? how caninformation overload on human beings be detected and corrected?organization for ad hoc tasksfor substantial tasks, teams are necessary. as enterprise integration formanufacturing expands to include actors not traditionally included in a manufacturing factory complex (e.g., suppliers and customers), issues of team management and organization will assume added importance. for example, the problems of adjusting organizational structures to permit and support flexibility ininformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144information technology for manufacturingdesign and increased interaction with suppliers and customers as they participatein product development constitute one of the fundamental issues manufacturersare wrestling with today. moreover, the group dynamics of teams with humanand computer actors are very poorly understood. put differently, what should thepartnership between person and machine be like?informal hierarchies of statusin addition to a formal organizational hierarchy (as might be depicted on anorganizational chart), most organizations also have informal hierarchies that reflect the greater status or prestige of certain categories or classes of individualsrelative to that of others. in manufacturing companies, product designers areoften at the top of the pecking order, even though a successful manufacturingoperation requires talent and intelligence in other job functions as well. suchstatus is consistent with the fact that product designers have a much richer arrayof computerbased tools to help them in their work than do factory managers orprocess designers. one consequence of this richer array of tools is that productdesigners can point to computersupported decisions whereas others usually mustrely on experience and intuition, and it would not be surprising if the preferencesof product designers were given more (and perhaps undue) weight as a consequence. preceding chapters have underscored the fact that knowledge aboutproduct design is more advanced than that for process design or factory management, but it is also clear that limited resources are more often invested in accordance with the needs of those of higher prestige and influence. because of alongstanding history of status differentials in u.s. manufacturing organizations,it may be necessary for management to pay explicit attention to differences instatus and to make special attempts to listen to the needs of individuals across anorganization so that they can contribute on a more equal basis.overcoming history and managing riskthe history of attempts to introduce computerintegrated manufacturing(cim) systems into factories demonstrates that companies have tried to adoptthese systems without adequate justification or based on the wrong metrics orparameters; the result has been that these large expenditures of dollars have beenpoorly justified and often wasted. as a result, many decision makers in manufacturing regard cim technology as technology searching for problems to solve. insome cases, such a perception may taint even good cim applications.moreover, the gap between manufacturing managers (the customers formanufacturing research) and technology òpushersó (the suppliers of manufacturing research) is often large; technologists at times push technology because it isòneat stuff,ó whereas managers want and need answers to todayõs problems. thisgap between technology pushers and customers with real problems is significantinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure145and is the source of much friction. many information technology researchers areso immersed in computer technology that they take increasing computerization asa given. these researchers often suffer some hubris about òthose people out onthe factory floor who cannot write programs or integrate new systems . . . .ómanufacturing managers, including members of this committee, express concernthat they already have more technology than they can use. they note that manyhuman obstacles must be overcome before todayõs, let alone tomorrowõs, information technology can be used to benefit manufacturing. attention to the managerial and cultural preconditions for effective use of information technology is animportant elementñperhaps the most important elementñof the developmentand application of advanced manufacturing systems (cstb, 1994a).the gap between technologists and managers was demonstrated directly tothe committee in its interviews with senior manufacturing executives, who spokein terms of cost, quality, and time to market while the committee spoke in thejargon of information technology. the company executivesõ view of what wascontained in information technology differed strongly from the committeeõs view;the committeeõs view of manufacturing was strongly at variance with the executivesõ view. as one of the interviewees for this report put it, òthe managers andthe technical experts talk two different languages. the technologists regard themanagers as being too tied up in returnoninvestment concerns and thereforelikely to miss emerging capabilities, while the managers and decision makersregard the technologists as being too uninvolved in real factory problems tounderstand what the customer really wants and needs.ó such discussions demonstrated that both technologists and executives need to make greater efforts tobridge the communications gap before technology can be applied to the realproblems faced in manufacturing in companies across the united states.manufacturing managers know that realizing the promise of informationtechnologies to help improve factory performance is not easy, and there are manyopportunities for mismatched expectations. expectations may differ betweentechnology supplier and userñindeed, users may have had too little input into thedesign of new systems. achieving a solution may take so long that it may comeonly after the problem has largely disappeared or been fixed by other means, orthe conditions have changed so much that the solution is no longer applicable. anew system may not make use of embedded legacy systems that are too expensive to discard or too integral to operations to modify. the skills required maydiffer significantly from those of the existing work force (see òeducation, training, and retrainingó below).thus, the resistance of many senior managers to the introduction of information technology into real manufacturing operations is not unreasonable, and itarises from the fact that many of the new information technologies are untestedand unproven in actual manufacturing lines, and in some cases have offered poorresults. new systems are not used because they are untested, and they cannot betested because no one wants to be the guinea pig.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146information technology for manufacturinganother contributor to risk aversion is time pressure. bringing in new systems consumes valuable production time, which may not easily be recovered. itis easier (and therefore common) for a factory to use an old, perhaps less efficient, system than to suffer òdowntimeó as the result of installing and testing anew system. box 7.1 provides some guidelines for introducing new informationtechnologies that are responsive to the difficulties that line managers face inapproaching these technologies.the scope of change inherent in manufacturing systems can confound financial analyses. the financial impact may appear too large to justify for a singlefactory, even if the new technology appears worthwhile for the enterprise overall.in addition, the benefits of investing in a new system may be hard to quantify,especially if they relate to quality; metrics for improved quality, service, andaccessibility are particularly problematic. research is needed to support moreappropriate financial and business justifications and to better define the cost ofbox 7.1 guidelines for introducing innovativeinformation technology in real production lines¥ take small steps. deliver improvements incrementally, rather than striving todeliver òthe solutionó all at once. deliver improvements that can be installed withlower levels of management authority.¥ lower the risk. avoid serious disruption of manufacturing facilities while applications are being tested or while systems are being introduced onto the factoryfloor.¥ deliver real solutions to real problems; focus on the customer, not the technology. indeed, there is a great deal of good technology already waiting to be used.develop the customer òpulló in concert with the technology òpush.ó¥ develop a vision and a set of strategies that have temporal longevity. createa system that withstands the ups and downs of yearly budget plans. for example,òleanó manufacturing is still not 100 percent utilized, in spite of the fact that it wasstarted over 30 years ago!¥ work in teams with customers and suppliers. since having a viable supplierbase is a key to success, it is important to make suppliers a part of the solution,rather than regard them as part of the problem. similarly, the known (and perhapsanticipated) needs of customers should be the ultimate focus of installations ofinformation technology.¥ develop systems that build on legacy systems, unless it appears that thelegacy system is so hopelessly useless that it must be jettisoned. it is hard toquickly change the momentum of manufacturing enterprises; try to make incremental improvements.¥ where possible, buy offtheshelf information technology from commercialsuppliers. in general, it is better to use commercial vendors than to undertakecustom development projects on oneõs own. doing the latter forces one to inheritall the issues that relate to product and application support for the product lifecycle.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure147quality, the cost of insufficient quality, and the tradeoffs among quality, time,and money (box 7.2).6one mechanism that could contribute to better planning for the time and realcost involved in implementing new systems (although not necessarily changingthose quantities) would be an extension of the òbeta testó concept into manufacturing environments.7 beta tests can assess the fidelity of a product to its designspecification, augmenting a real production environment with special instrumentation to assess errors or relay feedback to developers. although pilot plants havebeen used for years as laboratories to assess production concepts, research isneeded to explore how actual production facilities, operating at normal volumes,can be used directly for achieving continuous improvements or innovation. legitimizing beta test periods would disclose the need for and real costs of a practice to manufacturing management at the proposal stage. the beta test conceptcould also provide a basis for links to research facilities, with the benefit ofenhancing the understanding of what does and does not work in a given type ofsystem or application. research could help to define the tools, techniques, andpractices appropriate to beta testing in manufacturing contexts.finally, the development of the nii may, for entirely psychological reasons,stimulate the incorporation of information technology into manufacturing. tothe extent that the nii is a medium that ordinary people use every day (e.g., tomake purchases, to read newspapers, to order and watch movies, and to transmitpictures, images, and voice and other messages), manufacturing managers willbecome more familiar with information technology, and the part of managerialresistance to information technology in factories that is attributable to unfamiliarity will likely diminish.providing for technology demonstrationsin the absence of convincing evidence that the benefits of information technology far outweigh the costs, effects of factory disruption, and time required todo the job, many managers and executives in manufacturing enterprises will beunderstandably riskaverse. for these individuals, there is a world of differencebetween a promise and a concrete demonstration of a technologyõs feasibility and6 for example, the economic production of customized manufactured products (i.e., production lotsizes of one or a few) may well depend on the adoption of new accounting systems in which theentire lifecycle cost of a product is taken into account; lifecycle costs include transportation costs,inventory costs, obsolescence costs, reengineering and retrofitting costs, and the cost of productrecall, if any.7 software developers draw on objective thirdparty users in beta tests of new products or versionsto verify functional capabilities and ensure lack of defects. explicitly applying the concept andpractice of a beta testing period into production launch activities would provide for significant firsttrials of the custom software typical of manufacturing information systems.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148information technology for manufacturingbox 7.2 information technology deploymentand justificationinformation technology was originally used in fairly narrow ways: accountingand clerical functions were automated, personnel records were placed in rudimentary databases, and controllers were developed for individual machines. for theseapplications the financial justification could be made on fairly traditional grounds,such as cost reduction (usually by machines and systems replacing people) or theimproved quality associated with better machine control. as information technology has matured, as the cost mix (hardware, software, and labor) associated with ithas changed, and as its applications have broadened, it has become more difficultto comprehend the impact that an information system will have and, consequently,to judge whether or not an investment in the technology will pay off (cstb, 1994a;kaplan, 1986, 1989). the benefits of better understanding would extend to organizations of all sizes.it has proven particularly difficult to justify the costs of providing the infrastructure required to maintain and enhance information technology. there is nostraightforward relationship between information services and the yield or qualityof the finished product. consequently, justifications for the infrastructure have tobe based on more speculative, qualitative rather than quantitative, arguments.better metrics are needed for measuring the value of support systems. thesecould also contribute to better cost management. recent efforts to develop activitybased costing may be helpful to manufacturers in this context; additional research into applications of this approach in the manufacturing context may beuseful.as companies attempt to become more agile, reduce the time required to respond to market needs, and explore the merits of òvirtual enterprises,ó they willneed tools to help determine what should be measured. how, for example, shouldone translate the metrics of agility into realistic financial terms? how can onemeasure the costs at organizational boundaries and judge whether informationtechnology will improve an operation enough to justify the costs of the system?the speed with which enterprisewide systems will be deployed will, to a largedegree, depend on how well companies are able to understand these issues. thatunderstanding would benefit from research into òexchange ratesó between agilityand financial metrics as well as case studies of enterprises that have implementedcomplex information systems.8 an advanced longrange technology demonstration differs from the advanced technology demonstration program of the national institute of standards and technology in that the latter is focusedprimarily on demonstrations of technology just before it is mature enough to support product development. the technology associated with an alrtd would generally be at an earlier stage ofdevelopment at the time the alrtd was proposed.desirability. for this reason, the committee is drawn strongly to the notion of anadvanced longrange technology demonstration (alrtd).8alrtds focus on a variety of needs, covering both technical and culturalissues. alrtds are intended to provide an active means for transferring promising research into practice and move technological concepts closer to businessinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure149opportunities; connect researchers to problems, reveal knowledge gaps, and testresearch ideas; and bridge a variety of òbelievability gapsó that keep new ideasfrom being tried in the real world. successful alrtds would be vehicles thatcould help to change manufacturing management skeptics into supporters andbelievers without making them suffer through a painful process of educationwithin their own factory domain, and they would help answer the question, isthere a performance benefit to making changes on the factory floor?for a candidate alrtd to be viable and effective, it must be focused andbounded; box 7.3 provides a number of areas in which alrtds might provehelpful. since some investment in technology will almost certainly be required(in some cases, as much as that required for a pilot manufacturing plant), it mustbe funded well beyond the level of technical research grants. so that its success(or lack thereof) can be determined, quantitative goals or metrics that can serve asyardsticks should be established in advance. moreover, each alrtd shouldhave core nontechnological content, such as a specific business activity, so thatthe technology will be the means to a clearly defined end rather than an end untoitself. finally, each alrtd should have some growth or followon potential andshould not be a dead end.each alrtd proposed should be based on a vision of what will be possibleif the alrtd is implemented, including what knowledge will be obtained if thealrtd is successful. it should have available to it the necessary physical andinformation infrastructure, including other alrtds that could be under way atthe same time or should have been completed first. it should clearly state thecapabilities that will be demonstrated. finally, it should describe expected consequences of a successful alrtd that go beyond the explicit things to be demonstrated.appendix c describes several possible alrtds that are consistent with thisdescription.stimulating the adoption of open standardsas discussed in previous chapters, the lack of standards is a major inhibitorto the use of existing information technology for manufacturing. from computeraided product design tools to realtime machine controllers, the lack ofstandards in various forms prevents data interchange, increases training costs,and impedes wouldbe product developers who have to build basic services intotheir products from scratch. smaller manufacturers, especially, stand to benefitfrom the wide promulgation and acceptance of standards for interfaces and interconnections, because such standards are likely to lead to a much wider selectionof information technology products for manufacturing applications (as more vendors will be able to develop products based on a common standard) and lowerprices for such products (as vendors will be able to avoid the cost of developingunique solutions to common problems).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150information technology for manufacturingwhat prevents standards from being adopted more broadly? one answer isthat the premature imposition of standards tends to freeze technological development and progress, and manufacturing is certainly one arena in which the use ofinformation technology is relatively immature. but a second important barrier toadopting standards is not rooted in technical issuesña company trying to differentiate its products from those of other vendors may well choose to make themincompatible with others. representing data in ways that facilitate interoperability may subject a vendor to infringement liability or require it to pay royalties.box 7.3 areas for an advanced longrangetechnology demonstration¥ executive levelstrategic analysis and evaluation of alternativesstrategy formulationplanning for implementation of strategies¥ financesdebit managementcash managementcurrency and commodities hedgingprofitability¥ human resourceshiring metricsteam managementtrainingrewardsmultinational teams¥ sales and marketinggathering customer inputforecasting sales by product and geography¥ product design and developmentr&d, design, prototyping, and verificationdesign methodologies and managementcomputeraided design toolsprocess design and verification¥ productionfabrication, assembly, logisticsdistributioninventory controlresource procurement and use planningprocurement, source qualificationmaintenance and repair of facilities¥ legal concernsalliancescontractssafetyenvironmentliabilityinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure151finally, once many competing products employ different representations andinterfaces, a company may well resist adopting a standard proposed by anothercompany for fear of ceding a commercial advantage to that company.previous chapters suggest the need for technical work on the development ofopen standards that will still allow technological progress. but there is a sociological dimension to standards as wellñeven when the underlying science andgeneric enabling technology are genuinely capable of supporting useful commercial applications, the vendor community needs to find some way to agree onstandards that will expand the market for all.many problems need to be overcome if agreement is to be reached. forexample, trends toward distributed intelligence, as well as the need to formalliances with other business entities (including outside design and engineeringservices as well as material and equipment suppliers), raise important knowledgemanagement issues. how should companies determine what proprietary knowledge to share through distributed intelligence? what are ways to share suchknowledge that protect knowledge assets and avoid disruptive interactions? howcan commercial, offtheshelf systems and technology best be combined withproprietary knowledge, perhaps in the form of software and knowledge bases?such difficulties have already appeared in the very large scale integration applicationsspecific integrated circuit industry: vendors that own significant designlibraries (for cells or òmacrocellsó) are very reluctant to disclose detailed modelsof these cells to their customers, for fear that their customersõ ability to doreliable simulations will hurt them competitively.a second problem is how to achieve an appropriate balance between reducing the costs of variation and enabling rapid implementation of new technologyñin short, the fundamental tension over whether and when to standardize.research could help to establish criteria for determining when the benefits ofrestricting options by the adoption of standards outweigh the costs.a third problem is how to generate widespread acceptance of and conformance to standards. because of the large number of parties with vested interests inthe particulars of any given standard, a careful and deliberative approach withwide representation is necessary. however, while wide representation is often afacilitator of consensus and acceptance, it is a factor that tends to slow down theconsensusforming process and also sometimes discourages the exploitation oftechnological opportunities that may spontaneously arise. in addition, once astandard is in place, a substantial amount of education is often necessary tofamiliarize potential users with its benefits and its technical implications.developing better metrics of performancemany metrics used today measure factory performance at high levels ofaggregation that do not provide managers with insight into what is going on at theactivity level. for example, metrics often used today include inventory turns (ainformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152information technology for manufacturingmeasure of how rapidly inventory flows through the manufacturing system),defect rates (how often manufacturing problems occur), and ontime deliveries(the extent to which manufacturing schedules are met). these metrics are usefulto signal the existence of problems somewhere within a manufacturing operationbut cannot by themselves identify sources of the problems, which are affected bymany factors.moreover, when the use of new technologies and approaches leads to newcombinations of previously separate activities, many traditional measures of performance are problematic at bestñand perhaps outright misleading or useless.for example, repetitive activities are much easier to measure than others, andperformance metrics are often based on what is easy to measure. how does oneuse metrics based on repetition when the very point of information technology isto increase flexibility and the ability to cope with oneofakind new situationsand new sets of circumstances? understanding in detail the impact of information technology is crucial for obtaining the best value, because only a detailedanalysis can separate the impact of information technology from the effects of allof the other factors that may also impinge on overall performance.research is needed to develop good metrics that reflect the impact of information technology on manufacturing activities; a good beginning would be research on measuring the effect of information technology applications usingexisting metrics. progress in this area will require both sophisticated technicalunderstanding and a shared understanding within the community on the appropriateness of these metrics.a related issue is that trustworthy costbenefit analyses require reliable data.obtaining meaningful data on costs is typically much more difficult than budgetanalysts anticipate. consistent definitions are lacking, and typical cost categoriesand allocations are designed in accordance with conventional accounting rulesrather than for tracking the performance of integrated business practices. newaccounting categories based on the specifics of manufacturing may well be neededif an accurate picture is to be drawn of dollar flows in manufacturing.developing new models foraccounting and valuationthe complexity of a large manufacturing business makes it very difficult formanagers to identify operations that cost more than their value warrants. it isthus necessary to develop detailed models of a business that truly relate causesand effects, costs and benefits, and problems and solutions. without such models, it will be difficult to convince anyone of the wisdom of taking certain coursesof action, especially those that may be counterintuitive.better management accounting systems are an integral part of these models.timely activitybased accounting systems can provide explicit guidance regarding where costs can be trimmed and information on design parameters that deinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure153mand resources.9 with traditional accounting, the overhead costs of operating aplant are spread over all items produced in proportion to the volume of each typeof item. but with activitybased accounting systems, the actual cost of smallvolume production can be properly attributed and thus recovered.finally, generally accepted accounting principles that businesses use to audittheir finances and operations are derived from a business philosophy in whichcapital expenditures (i.e., expenditures that relate to the longterm value of acompany) are associated with buildings and pieces of equipment. although thisphilosophy was appropriate in manufacturing 30 years ago, its relevance hasdecreased as the basis for competitive advantage has increasingly become theability to exploit information more effectively. in particular, under old accounting principles the contribution of various types of knowledge (e.g., skilled personnel, software, and organizational structure) to the book value of a firm isessentially zero, even if that knowledge is the primary enabler of that firmõssuccess.it is admittedly difficult to place a book value on assets that are intangibleand inscrutable to the layperson or that seemingly lack durability. senior management is often legitimately concerned about the potential for misleading financial reporting as a product of estimating the value of intangible assets such asknowledge, and a variety of stakeholders (e.g., analysts, investors and owners,managers of organizations using software, managers of organizations producingsoftware, tax authorities) are likely to have different judgments on what suchassets are òtrulyó worth. nonetheless, given the importance of knowledge to thefuture competitive environment, serious research to find valuation schemes thatappropriately account for the contribution of knowledge to value is well worthwhile.10emphasizing education, training, and retrainingthe obstacles described above are among the factors motivating the currentconcern of management theorists and analysts with the òmanagement of change.óaccording to this perspective, successful enterprises of the future must changerapidly and frequently. information, types of media, tools, processes, organizational structures, and so on will change, rendering knowledge and skills obsoleteseveral times in an individualõs career. continuing education and training willhave to inculcate adaptability and the expectation of change. these outcomeswill be difficult to achieve because change provokes anxiety and stress. researchinto techniques and tools to help enterprises and individuals understand and9 see, for example, nanni et al. (1988).10 similar concerns were raised for service industries in information technology in the servicesociety: a twentyfirst century lever (cstb, 1994a).information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154information technology for manufacturingmanage the process of change could facilitate the kinds of evolution of organizations and skills that many analysts anticipate.expectations for frequent change and greater employee autonomy imply thatthe manufacturing enterprise of the future will depend more on the knowledgeand skill sets of each employee. several needs follow from this assumption:¥education of senior managers, to help them make informed decisionsabout using new, expensive, and perhaps risky information technology;¥education and training of middle managers, to help them reduce barriersto trying new technology that may seem only to consume time and resources orimperil their own jobs;¥education of designers, engineers, manufacturing engineers, and toolmakers to give them an increased technical base so that they can better understand and use computer technology and design relevant software;¥training of factory workers, who are expected to use this new technologyto improve their performance and that of their facility; and¥retraining of factory workers whose skills are not compatible with theinformation technology paradigm and who may have to seek alternative jobs.even the term òfrequent changeó may understate the rapidity with whichindividuals will have to learn new things. indeed, the volume of information thatis relevant to successful individual performance is both so large and so rapidlychanging that a learning model based on discrete phases of òretrainingó may notbe entirely sufficient. another notionñwhat might be called òjustintime learningóñis based on the idea that people should learn new skills and information asthey need them to do what they must do. while such a notion has applicabilitythat goes beyond manufacturing (indeed, it has ramifications for all of education),the manufacturing domain may be one that is particularly suitable for exploringthe potential of this notion through intelligent tutoring systems, longdistancelearning systems, and multimedia experiential learning tools.education issues are ubiquitous and topical; in addition, the renewal andcurrency of employee process and productspecific knowledge have long been amajor problem for all manufacturing enterprises. needed are better means ofdelivery and better understanding of human issues such as motivation (or fearbased on inadequate technical education and the resulting wish to fall back onintuition and experience).possible approaches to addressing the need for ongoing education includeconferences and seminars for senior and middle managers; publication of educational materials; close collaboration among academicians, designers, engineers,and factory workers; and television and audio tape courses.computer aidsñcomputeraided instructionñalso may be brought to bearon the education and training requirements of an enterprise, providing efficientand customized education that allows a person to learn quickly and selectively.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational and societal infrastructure155instructional programs of the future will be more interactive and userfriendlythan the lecture and fixedsequence documentaries of today. computer aids forlearning may be built into new manufacturing technologies themselves, as well asinstalled in standalone workstations for educational purposes. multimedia andvirtual reality technology may hold promise for providing a flexible, sociallyacceptable, and nonthreatening interface for educational and skillbuilding programs; an nii and future home and factory systems offer the means to distributeand use such programs. the delivery systems will have to provide overview dataas well as fundamental knowledge. nsf support of these technologies, perhapsthrough education and human resources directorate programs, could increasethe skill base of the manufacturing sector, as well as of other sectors of society ingeneral.the challenge of providing new educational technology can easily be underestimated. but it is a complex, multifaceted task. the target population spans awide range of educational backgrounds, capabilities, and needs. some individuals will want a highlevel overview of the material, and others will want indepthcourses with detailed practice sessions. the work force today spans multiplelanguages in the domestic united states, and specific topics will also be madeavailable to people in other countries and from different cultures. thus thecontent of educational programs and information is critical, the quality of presentation must meet modern expectations, and usability must be tunable to purpose.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156information technology for manufacturing156bibliographyadvanced manufacturing program, office of technology commercialization, technology administration, u.s. department of commerce. 1989. economics, management policies and financial accounting practices for a shared flexible computer integrated manufacturing facility.u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.amello, gilbert f. 1993. òmanaging the integration of semiconductor manufacturing,ó remarkspresented at international semiconductor manufacturing sciences symposium semicon/weston july 19.bartlett, christopher a., and sumantra ghoshal. 1992. transnational management: text, cases,and readings in crossborder management. irwin, homewood, ill.bjorke, o. 1979. òcomputer aided part manufacturing,ó computers in industry 1:39.clinton, william j., and albert gore, jr. 1993. òremarks by the president and vice president tosilicon graphics employees.ó electronic mail press release dated february 22.clinton, william j., and albert gore, jr. 1993. technology for americaõs economic growth, a newdirection to build economic strength, february 22.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1992. computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) and manufacturing studies board (msb),national research council. 1993. information technology and manufacturing: a preliminary report on research needs. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993. national collaboratories: applying information technology for scientific research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994a.information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994b.academic careers for experimental computer scientists and engineers. national academypress, washington, d.c.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography157council of economic advisors for the joint economic committee. 1994. economic indicators.u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.cowger, gary l. 1991. remarks made at òthe integrated enterprise: moving beyond technologycami conference,ó orlando, florida, september 25.cutkosky, mark r., robert s. engelmore, richard e. fikes, michael r. genesereth, thomas r.gruber, william s. mark, jay m. tenebaum, and jay c. weber. 1993. òpact: an experiment in integrating concurrent engineering systems,ó ieee computer 26(1):2837.darlin, damon. 1994. òautomating the automators,ó forbes 153(4):156160.dertouzos, michael l. 1989. made in america: regaining the productive edge. mit press,cambridge, mass.division of information, robotics, and intelligent systems, national science foundation. 1993.summary report of the intelligent manufacturing research planning meeting, june 78, washington, d.c.erisman, albert m., and kenneth w. neves. 1987. òadvanced computing for manufacturing,óscientific american 257(4):163169.eversheim, walter. 1991. òstrategies and tools meeting future challenges in manufacturing,ópaper presented at òinternational conference on the application of manufacturing technologiesó held april 1719 in washington, d.c., and sponsored by society of manufacturing engineers.friedman, avner, james glimm, and john lavery. 1992. the mathematical and computationalsciences in emerging manufacturing technologies and management practices, siam reportson issues in the mathematical sciences, society for industrial and applied mathematics, philadelphia, pa.genesereth, michael r., and nils j. nilsson. 1987. logical foundations of artificial intelligence.morgan kaufmann, los altos, calif.greenfeld, i., f.b. hansen, and p.k. wright. 1989. òselfsustaining, opensystem machine tools,óproceedings of the north american manufacturing research institution 17:281292.hammer, michael, and james champy. 1993. reengineering the corporation: a manifesto forbusiness revolution. harpercollins, new york.harrington, joseph. 1984. understanding the manufacturing process: key to successful cad/cam implementation. m. dekker, new york.holland, john h. 1985. òproperties of the bucket brigade algorithm,ó proceedings of the international conference on genetic algorithms and their applications, j.j. grefenstette (ed.).carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa.initial graphics exchange specification (iges) version 5.2. 1993. u.s. pro, fairfax, va.interchem online. 1993. òa day in your nottoodistant future?ó vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 23.international organization for standardization (iso). 1994. industrial automation systems andintegrationñproduct data representation and exchange, part 1: overview and fundamentalprinciples. iso 103031. iso, geneva.jaikumar, ramchandran. 1988. òfrom filing and fitting to flexible manufacturing,ó harvardbusiness school working paper no. 88045, boston, mass. reproduced in r. jaikumar, ò200years to cim,ó ieee spectrum 30(9):2627.kahaner, david k. (u.s. office of naval research asia). 1993. òa survey and discussion of cimprojects in japan.ó electronic mail message dated january 13, 1993, to òdistributionó fromkahaner@cs.titech.ac.jp.kaplan, robert s. 1986. òmust cim be justified by faith alone?ó harvard business review64(2):8795.kaplan, robert s. 1989. òmanagement accounting for advanced technological environments,óscience 245(4920):819823.lardner, james f. 1986. òcomputer integrated manufacturing and the complexity index,ó thebridge 16(1):1016.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158information technology for manufacturingluss, hanan, moshe b. rosenwein, and elizabeth t. wahls. 1990. òintegration of planning andexecution: finalassembly sequencing,ó at&t technical journal 69(4):99109.manufacturing studies board (msb), national research council. 1988. a research agenda forcim. national academy press, washington, d.c.manufacturing studies board (msb), national research council. 1991. improving engineeringdesign: designing for competitive advantage. national academy press, washington, d.c.marks, peter. 1993. 15 key processes in the casa/sme wheel. draft copy.merchant, m.e. 1971. òdelphitype forecast of the future of production engineering,ó icirpannals 20(3):213225.miller, jeffrey g., and thomas e. vollmann. 1985. òthe hidden factory,ó harvard businessreview 63(5):142150.moore, john. 1994. òagencies, vendors split on idef3 techniques,ó federal computer week,august 1.mukherjee, amar, and jack hilibrand (eds.). 1994. new paradigms for manufacturing. nsf 94123. national science foundation, washington, d.c.nanni, alfred j., jeffrey g. miller, and thomas e. vollmann. 1988. òwhat shall we account for?ómanagement accounting 69(7):4248.national critical technologies panel. 1991. report of the national critical technologies panel.the national critical technologies panel, arlington, va., march.national institute of standards and technology (nist). 1994. putting the information infrastructure to work: a report of the information infrastructure task force committee on applications and technology. sp857. national institute of standards and technology, gaithersburg,md., may.national research council. 1994. virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges. national academy press, washington, d.c.oõlone, richard g. 1991. ò777 revolutionizes boeing aircraft development process,ó aviationweek & space technology 134(22):3461.pan, jeff y.c., jay m. tenenbaum, and jay glicksman. 1989. òa framework for knowledgebased computerintegrated manufacturing,ó ieee transactions on semiconductor manufacturing 2(2):3346.pan, jeff y.c., and jay m. tenenbaum. 1991. òan intelligent agent framework for enterpriseintegration,ó ieee transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics: special issue on distributed artificial intelligence, september.port, otis. 1991. òôthis is what the u.s. must do to stay competitive,õó business week no. 3244,december 16, p. 92.porter, michael e. 1992. capital choices: changing the way america invests in industry. councilon competitiveness and harvard business school, washington, d.c., june.sadeh, norman. 1993. microopportunistic scheduling: the microboss factory scheduler. therobotics institute, carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa.shiraishi, m. 1988. òscope of inprocess measurement, monitoring and control techniques inmachining processes,ó part 1ñòinprocess techniques for tools,ó precision engineering10(4):179189.shiraishi, m. 1989a. òscope of inprocess measurement, monitoring and control techniques inmachining processes,ó part 2ñòinprocess techniques for workpieces,ó precision engineering 11(1):2737.shiraishi, m. 1989b. òscope of inprocess measurement, monitoring and control techniques inmachining processes,ó part 3ñòinprocess techniques for cutting processes and machinetools,ó precision engineering 11(1):3947.siewiorek, daniel p. 1992. òrapid prototyping: the design process, tools, and fabrication,ópresented at òinformation technology and manufacturing: a workshop,ó national sciencefoundation, washington, d.c., may 56.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography159sousa, louis j. 1993. òevidence of a new, valueadded materials paradigm,ó journal of theminerals, metals and materials society 45(6):911.spur, gnter (ed.). 1990. production technology centre, berlin, fraunhoferinstitut frproduktionsanlagen und konstruktionstechnik, berlin.tenenbaum, jay m., and rick dove. 1992. òagile software for intelligent manufacturing,ó presented at òinformation technology and manufacturing: a workshop,ó national science foundation, washington, d.c., may 56.tenenbaum, j.m., r. smith, a.m. schiffman, a. cavalli, and m. fox. 1991. the mcc enterpriseintegration program: a prospectus. preliminary report, june 4.the economist. 1994. òmanufacturing technology: on the cutting edge,ó vol. 330, no. 7853, pp.318.trobel, russ, and andy johnson. 1993. òpocket pagers in lots of one,ó ieee spectrum 30(9):2932.u.s. air force manufacturing technology directorate. 1991. automated airframe assembly program. nb9151. northrop corporation aircraft division and wright research and development center, july.u.s. air force manufacturing technology directorate. 1993. producibility methodology and toolset (pmats) initiative: concept development and program strategy. a white paper òfinaldraftó dated may 1, wright research and development center, cincinnati.u.s. department of commerce, economics and statistics administration, bureau of economicanalysis. 1994. survey of current business. u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c., april.wall street journal. 1994. òeuropean car recycling accord,ó april 29, p. a9e.ward, elaine. nd. idef. mitrewashington software engineering center, mitre corporation,mclean, va.weiss, l.e., f.b. prinz, d.a. adams, and d.p. siewiorek. 1992. òthermal spray shape deposition,ó journal of thermal spray technology 1(3):231237.wysk, richard. 1992. òintegration requirements for intelligent manufacturing,ó presented at òinformation technology and manufacturing: a workshop,ó national science foundation, washington, d.c., may 56.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.163alist of contributorssuzanne barber, university of texas at austincraig barrett, intel corporationsteve benson, thesis inc.john birchak, intel corporationrobert e. boykin, consortium for advanced manufacturing internationaldouglas f. busch, intel corporationmark r. cutkosky, stanford universityalan de pennington, university of leedsrichard dove, paradigm shift internationalken evans, r”seautiquedavid r. ferguson, boeing computer servicesdavid files, eastman kodakdonald a. jenkins, allied signalreuben s. jones, softech inc.robert e. joy, northrop corporationrobert kaplan, harvard business schoolkarl kempf, intel corporationjohn k. korah, electronic data systems corporationalison mckay, university of leedsgreg mclaughlin, sun microsystems laboratories inc.gordon moore, intel corporationrichard e. morley, flavors technology inc.victor muglia, caterpillar solar turbines inc.mark pearson, university of leedsinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164appendix ageorge pfeil, ford motor companyjan pounds, minnesota technology inc.michael pratt, rensselaer polytechnic instituteari requicha, university of southern californiacharles m. savage, digital equipment corporationwarren l. shrensker, general electric (retired)bruce sohn, intel corporationwilliam j. spencer, sematech inc.n.s. sridharan, intel corporationjohn m. swihart, national center for advanced technologiesgeorge thompson, johnson & johnsondavid ullman, oregon state universityernest o. vahala, general motors north american truck platformsherbert b. voelcker, cornell universityfrank wilde, collaborative technologies corporationinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.165bsite visit to romeo engine plantmarch 23, 1994a factory designed to use information technologyfordõs romeo engine plant is its newest, having started production in thesummer of 1990. its 750 employees and approximately $1 billion, 3millionsquarefoot physical plant make a wide variety of v8 engines totalling about2,400 per day. the plant buys about 70 percent (by value) of what it ships anddevotes most of its energy to machining engine blocks, pistons, connecting rods,and crank shafts and then assembling everything into a complete tested engineready to install in a car. plant manager george pfeil believes that the plant couldnot be operated without information technology.information technology (it) exerts its effects in two ways: by empoweringpeople and by organizing the flow of people and parts. this is a very clean andhighly automated plant with a large number of robots performing assembly andthousands of feet of conveyor lines moving parts through a series of machiningoperations. it permits a relatively small number of people to keep all thesemachines running and all the complex operations on track. for example, one linefor machining engine blocks is 2,500 feet long and is operated by 8 people pershift. in older plants without extensive it, 30 people would be needed.when the plant was designed in the late 1980s, it was a central part of thedesign. the plant was equipped with a network of what pfeil calls òwhite courtesy phones,ó which are actually input/output consoles on which all productioninformation is available to all employees. similarly, the controllers of the machines were wired into these consoles as well as into a pager system so thatmachine stoppages could be recorded and the responsible person paged automatiinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166appendix bcally. even though several u.s. and foreign companies built the machining andassembly lines, all used a common programmable logic control (plc) systemspecified by ford and linked their machines to it.there are no firstline supervisors, and shop floor personnel are expected toanswer the pagers and keep their machines operating. in a typical day there arebetween 12,000 and 16,000 manual and automatic pages. in this way it enablesthe shop floor personnel to take command of the machinery, keep it running, andmake the necessary decisions to do so. the united auto workers union is fullyinvolved and supports this method of operation.clearly, such a system could not have been overlaid onto a previously designed factory. designers thought through how this factory would be linked byit as part of their operating philosophy and human relations strategy, and it wasup and running the day production started. pfeil says in retrospect that it was noteasy explaining to upper management why this kind of plant needed so much it,but the designers did it anyway. today the benefits can be accounted for bothqualitatively and quantitatively:¥a small number of spirited union employees can turn out a very largenumber of engines; it is a òworldclass operation.ó¥statistics on òthings gone wrong per thousand [engines]ó in the first 6months after the launch of a new engine reveal an average of over 150 on typicallaunches in the 1980s versus 37 on the first romeo launch in 1991 and 41 on thesecond in 1993.how information technology is usedin addition to the white courtesy phones, it is used in several other ways atthe romeo engine plant. for example:¥in the tool crib, an electronic display indicates how to set up each tool andadjust it for proper alignment prior to installing it on a machine.¥each time an engine must be diverted from the assembly line for minorrework, the operator records the cause and the remedy; that engine is then trackedin the warranty system after it is sold to see if any unusual problems arise.¥a bar code on each engine tells the cold test machine what equipment ison the engine so that the correct test can be used.¥when the cylinder head is bolted to the block, the bolt torque is sensedand recorded.¥a machine monitoring system keeps track of equipment status. according to the plant newspaper, 598 machines are monitored and 15,000 items arerecorded each minute. each time a machine, robot, or conveyor stops, the plcdeduces the cause from sensors and the state of the control logic; the cause isrecorded and accumulated with other causes to form the basis for the reportsinformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b167described below. pfeil notes that accurate data of this kind are essential andcannot be gathered by people, who tend not to notice short stoppages (the vastmajority) and cannot always be present when breakdowns occur to note theircause.¥each week performance data on each section of the plant accumulated bythe plcs are collected and packaged into pareto charts that identify bottleneckstations and the top 10 reasons for their failing to keep up; recent data are compared to 7week trends so that plant personnel can tell if they are making progressin improving uptime; these reports are available to all employees on the whitecourtesy phone consoles. the bottleneck is identified by a formula that comparestheoretical with actual output, adjusted for faults on other machines. pfeil decided long ago that people are poor judges of which machine is the bottleneck.scheduling is currently done using manufacturing resources planning (mrpii), but pfeil is searching for better methods that take account of constraints. amathematician by training, he is familiar with such methods as linear programming and opt (a commercial factory scheduling program that takes constraintslike machine capacity into account). pfeil notes that any success in kaizen(continuous improvement) will òcause the bottleneck to move around.ó that is,as one machineõs capacity is increased or a breakdown is fixed, the bottleneckwill by definition shift to the next slowest or most constrained machine. scheduling software must be capable of being easily reprogrammed to keep up, or elsethe schedules will rapidly become useless. currently reprogramming is not possible, or it takes so long (typically hours) that the situation has changed already.frank keene, cast iron block machining line manager, notes that by 1996there will be a step increase in production complexity as the california emissionstandards begin to take effect. managing all the machines, parts, and people willbecome increasingly difficult. an important problem is reconfiguring the plantto make a differentmodel engine. this requires shifting people from one area toanother, an action that can take 30 to 45 minutes. right now he has no accurateway of predicting how many people will be needed for each type or how long itwill take to move them. thus there is some waste in plant operations that must beeliminated in order to absorb the expected increase in complexity.training for use of information technologytraining is essential to the success of the romeo plant. it is such a strongpart of the plantõs culture that pfeil teaches one of the courses, called productivity201. training starts with operation of the white courtesy phones and proceeds tosensitize the employees to the importance of keeping the plant running. basic tothis is building an appreciation of the value of the data that can be obtained via thewhite courtesy phones. these data include the pareto charts and other data.productivity 201 and other courses utilize a simulation of a typical line written ininformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168appendix bwitness (a commercial package for simulating discrete events) by a professorfrom the university of detroit. a sample class exercise asks the students to lookat the pareto chart, identify the causes of downtime, and schedule preventivemaintenance. when the simulation is complete, the students can see if productivity has increased. this and similar exercises help teams to develop better problemsolving methods and improve team dynamics.employees do not use this system to help them decide how to schedule actualpreventive maintenance. however, pfeil and his staff use it to plan production aweek ahead as well as to see if their plans produce the anticipated production ofall the required varieties of engines. although basic training of new employees isdone using companywide course material, romeo found that it had to generateits own advanced training curricula. topics include such business issues aspreventive maintenance (discussed above), quality, basic finance, and productivity. interestingly, although other plants are copying the approach of using thewhite courtesy phones, romeoõs training materials are not being widely used inother ford plants.what needs to be improvedin addition to shortcomings in scheduling algorithms, pfeil notes that userinterfaces are too cumbersome and take too long to learn. they are also too textoriented. he thinks an interface like that on the macintosh would be better. (atproject alpha, fordõs technology transfer operation, david wood said that theyneed better òinformation ergonomics,ó meaning not only better interfaces butalso better tools for turning data into useful information so that people know whatto do.)more broadly, pfeil feels that advanced factories face huge òsociology problems.ó the plant is large and the company is even larger. it is difficult for oneperson to know what to do so that the whole thing improves. currently, u.s.management uses òincentivesó to direct employeesõ behavior. the problem isthat incentives are substitutes for really knowing what action is best. furthermore, current incentives for hourly employees are not always consistent withthose of salaried employees. it would be better if it could be used to inform allemployees about how they were doing and how their personal returns could beimproved while those of the company also improved. the white courtesy phonesare a step in that direction, but only a first step. in particular, more needs to belearned about how teams operate, how they process data and reach decisions, andhow best to present data to them. productivity 201 demonstrates an intermediateversion of what should be the better methods of the future. since the romeoplant will face increasing complexity within a very few years, such improvements are needed soon.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.169cillustrative advanced longrangetechnology demonstrationsthe projects described below are intended to illustrate the types of advancedlongrange technology demonstrations (alrtds) suggested in chapter 7. thesesketches omit many important issues, such as project size, participants (universities, companies), duration, budget, and funding mechanism; intellectual propertyconcerns; and so on. however, given the broad scope of some of these projects,support of alrtds by missionoriented agencies as well as research agencieswould be desirable. each project is described briefly in terms of its vision, theinfrastructure it would require, the objectives of the demonstration, and its significance.a manufacturing enterprisemodeling management systemvisionan enterprise faces many problems in the course of doing business. todevelop insight into these problems and to evaluate different courses of action,decision makers often rely on computerbased models of these problems as theyapply to the enterprise. today, such models are often built òfrom scratch,óbecause the problems span a set of organizational or functional boundaries thatdiffer from those related to previous problems that have been modeled. however, the model of the problem at hand still requires access to most of the samedatabases that have been used previously; what is different most often relates todata form, aggregation, granularity, period, frequency, precision, and so on. ainformation technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170appendix cmanufacturing enterprise modeling management system (memms) would manage the reconfiguration of databases and existing models to account for thesespecific needs (table c.1).infrastructurea memms would require a complete, modern digital communications system, most likely including a wide area network, a local area network with thenecessary bandwidth, network management software, network servers, and individual manmachine interfaces; also included would be bridges into databasesexternal to the enterprise. the enterprise would require a standard language anddynamic data dictionary, a distributed database management system, and digitally accessible archival systems. models of different aspects of the businesswould have to be stable enough to allow the enterprise itself to evolve.objectives of the demonstration¥to show that a memms would provide direct, tangible, bottomlinebenefits to the enterprise in flexibility, response time, and the complexity ofproblems that can be tackled. problems could be addressed quickly and efficiently when an organization had completed the upfront work of standards,common language, data elements definition, database design, and modernizationof the archival knowledge bases.¥to show that an appropriate methodology for model construction withinan enterprise involving techniques of modular design, scaling, enterprise modelhierarchy, and modeling software architecture would allow individual modelsand databases to be reconfigurable and reusable for new problems.¥to show that a memms is possible that would enable employees in allfunctions within an enterprise to manage reconfiguration of a set of models formeaningful analysis and solution of problems facing manufacturing enterprisestoday. a corollary is that a software interface for a memms is possible that doesnot require highly specialized training in its operation.significancethe memms would provide a common language and analysis tools thatwould accelerate decision making but provide all players with access to the bestand most current data and tools. organizations would thus be able to focus moreon the enterprise problems and less on the task of building new models. theinterdependence of disparate business functions within the organization wouldbecome clear, and integration of all activities would accelerate. these changeswould allow organizations to become more focused, flexible, and responsive tothe marketplace.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c171table c.1 a manufacturing enterprise modeling management systemexample modelsexample databasesresearchprocess, material, and productmaterial properties data,andconcept modelsperformance data, boundary datadevelopmentproductprocess and productmaterial performance data,designmodelsñdesign, fabrication costproduction costs, design historylibraryproductionprocess and product modelsdata on volume, mix, cost,materials, maintenance, uptimesupplierproduct and process models,statistical process data, status andmanagementproduction and throughput modelscost data, production datalogisticsshop floor productiondata on volume, condition of pathsplanning and throughput modelsof material flow, shipping schedulesfinancialfinancial modelsñproduction, debtproduction costs, financing costs,managementstructuring, investmentexternal interest rateshumancostperemployee, succession,compensation data, employeeresourcesand training modelsratings, government regulationsmanagementsales andpricecostmarket share models,customer needs; costs to produce,marketingsales forecasting modelsship, and advertise; data oncustomer needs, preferencesbusinessdynamic strategic analysis models,macroeconomic data; data onstrategy andscenario modelsmarkets, competitors, costs,planningexchange ratesalliancejointprocess and product models,data on production, processes,venturefinancial models, distribution andproducts, costs, revenues,managementflow modelstechnology usedexternallifecycle models, legislative anddata from the environmentalstakeholderregulatory modelsprotection agency, occupationalmanagementsafety and health administration,legislative records, newspapersnote: the manufacturing enterprise modeling management system would connect models andinternal databases through a network and would access external databases as necessary.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172appendix coperation of a machine shop brokerage systemvisiona machine shop brokerage clearinghouse would be given responsibility foronline brokerage policies and procedures for participating customers, permittingtheir machining needs to be matched to the available machining capacity of acertain set of suppliers. the brokerõs responsibilities would include the establishment of machine shop certification and qualification, bidding procedures, requestforquote procedures, arbitration of disputes, payment, and so on. theclearinghouse would solicit suppliers and advertise for customers; participatingcustomers and suppliers would be connected by network in a given geographicregion.infrastructurethe region served would require a wide area network and easy access ofcustomers to the network. suppliers and customers would have to be skilledenough to handle such things as computeraided design data exchange, electronicdata interchange requests for quotes and invoicing, electronic funds transfer payments, and so on. suppliers would have to be sophisticated enough to handlestatistical process and quality control techniques, provide records of employeesõtraining and qualifications, and use computerized production order tracking andstatus reporting.objectives of the demonstration¥to show that a set of policies and procedures could be developed for thepurpose of electronic brokering of machineshoptype work tasks and assurancethat this type of business could be supported by existing technology.¥to show that a clearinghouse of this nature would enable customers tofind services of assured quality and dependability and at reasonable cost.¥to show that technical and business issues between customers and suppliers (answering questions, modifying the design) could be handled over the network.consequencesthe traditional business practice in which companies deal with a small number of familiar suppliers would change. brokering would allow an enterprise tobecome more flexible and costeffective by providing a menu of certified suppliers with differing availability, cost, skill sets, and quantity attributes.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c173brokerage for national prototyping facilitiesvisionprototyping technology is being developed in a number of u.s. universities,private industries, and national laboratories. to demostrate their capabilities andto increase customer awareness of and access to these facilities, a national brokerage institute would take responsibilty for online policy and procedures such asthe establishment of prototyping site certification and qualification, bidding procedures, requestforquote procedures, arbitration of disputes, payment, and soon. the institute would solicit members and advertise for customers. if it weresuccessful, the flow of business into these facilities would help to amortize theirhigh cost.infrastructurethe institute would require a wide area network and easy access of customers to the network. suppliers and customers would have to be advanced enoughto handle computeraided design data exchange, electronic data interchange requests for quotes and invoicing, electronic funds transfer payments, and so on.suppliers would have to be sophisticated enough to handle statistical process andquality control techniques, provide records of employeesõ training and qualifications, and use computerized production order tracking and status reporting.objectives of the demonstration¥to show that a set of policies and procedures could be developed for thepurpose of electronic brokering of prototyping work tasks and that this type ofbusiness could be supported by existing technology.¥to raise the visibility of limitations in software, standards, and theprototyping processes and also pinpoint industries in which large markets for thistype of work exist. this should spur further research and development along thelines that industry really needs.consequencesa prototyping brokerage would expand access to and knowledge ofprototyping processes and capabilities. prototyping decreases design time byvalidating design decisions or providing early notice of design errors.information technology for manufacturing: a research agendacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174appendix crealtime sales forecastingvisiona company should be able to locate and query financial, economic, anddemographic databases and predict sales of one of its products by regional market. with such information in hand, it would then notify its supplier base of itsanticipated needs for a defined time period in the future.infrastructurea realtime sales forecasting system would require databases, search techniques, and modeling methods for extrapolating information that is not availabledirectly. of particular relevance are national and regional econometric data onand models of consumer behavior at the present time; data on stocks of finishedgoods unsold in a companyõs own pipeline plus estimates of stocks in competitorsõ pipelines extrapolated from other economic data; methods of determiningdemand for the companyõs products based on demand from allied economicfields (e.g., demand for electric sockets based on demand for wire, or demand forpaint and varnish based on demand for lumber); and access to statistics fromhome shopping systems.objectives of the demonstration¥to show that a company could find needed data.¥to show that a company could construct the models it needed if modelsdid not exist, or that it could find experts to help construct models.¥to show that a company could obtain valid sales forecasts more rapidlywith information technology than by former means, and/or that it could obtainmore accurate forecasts than before.¥to show that a company could integrate these forecasts advantageouslyinto dealings with its suppliers or business partners.consequencesnormal business practices would change greatly because each company aswell as its competitors would have better forecasts. thus each firm would haveto add its own capabilities to what is available to everyone on the network.relationships with suppliers would become tighter, ordering patterns wouldchange to eversmaller orders spaced more closely together, and inventorieswould become smaller, saving working capital.