detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4816the changing nature of telecommunications/informationinfrastructure240 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309050913 | doi 10.17226/4816steering committee on the changing nature of telecommunications/informationinfrastructure, national research councilthe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changing nature oftelecommunications/informationinfrastructuresteering committee on the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1995ithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific andengineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority ofthe charter granted to it by congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific andtechnical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallelorganization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the nationalacademy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. robert m. white is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members ofappropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibilitygiven to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordancewith general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy ofsciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. robert m.white are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by core funds of the computer science and telecommunications board. core support for thecstb is provided by its public and private sponsors: the air force office of scientific research (under contract n0001487j1110);advanced research projects agency (under contract n0001487j1110), apple computer corporation, department of energy (under grantdefg0587er25029), digital equipment corporation, intel corporation, international business machines corporation, national aeronautics and space administration (under grant cda9119792), national science foundation (under grant cda9119792), and office of navalresearch (under contract n0001487j1110). additional project support was provided by ameritech corporation, bell atlantic corporation, bell communications research, bellsouth corporation, hewlettpackard company, ibm corporation, and nynex corporation. anyopinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this volume are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect theviews of the sponsors.library of congress catalog card number 9466572international standard book number 030905091xadditional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)b457copyright 1995 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steering committee on the changing nature oftelecommunications/information infrastructuregeorge l. turin, teknekron corporation, chairalfred v. aho, columbia university (formerly bell communications research)alan e. baratz, delphi internet services corporationdeborah estrin, university of southern california, information sciences instituteirwin m. jacobs, qualcomm inc.robert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiativesdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyroger g. noll, stanford universitystaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorleslie m. wade, project assistantiiithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boardwilliam wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaradavid j. farber, university of pennsylvaniahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles m. geschke, adobe systems inc.james n. gray, san francisco, californiabarbara j. grosz, harvard universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, digital equipment corporationbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorola inc.robert l. martin, bell communications researchdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam h. press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.edward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise a. arnheim, senior staff officerherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjames e. mallory, staff officerjohn m. godfrey, research associaterenee a. hawkins, staff associategloria p. bemah, administrative assistantleslie m. wade, project assistantivthe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsrichard n. zare, stanford university, chairrichard s. nicholson, american association for the advancement of science, vice chairstephen l. adler, institute for advanced studysylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologysusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporationrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, rutgers universitykenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatoryhans mark, university of texas at austinthomas a. prince, california institute of technologyjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesl.e. scriven, university of minnesotaa. richard seebass iii, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratoryshmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorvthe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein 1992 the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council(nrc) decided to convene a workshop to assess the extraordinary changes in the nation's telecommunications/information infrastructure since the divestiture of at&t and to address related questions of technology andpolicy. these questions have provoked a stirring national debate about the best way to move forward inestablishing a national information infrastructure. government officials, representatives of the telecommunicationsand computer industries, users, and public interest groups have taken oftencontradictory stands. cstb hoped tobring to the debate the neutral and dispassionate platform offered by the nrc.in planning the workshop, cstb's steering committee faced two fundamental questions:1. what, in fact, is the telecommunications/information infrastructure? definitions range from rawphysical connectivity, on the one hand, to connectivity plus a vast array of network and enduserservices and software, on the other. it was decided not to prejudice the workshop with a limitingdefinition, but rather to leave the definition open to debate.2. on what issues should the workshop focus? possible foci were the exploration of potentialapplications as the driving force behind infrastructure development, and examination of the processesby which various players in its development can efficiently encourage and respond to newapplications, no matter what they are. it was decided that the workshop's focus would be onprocesses, since no one can foresee which applications will prove to be important.to make sure that the meeting was a workshop, not a series of set speeches, the committee agreed to limitattendance to about 75 peoplešinvited from various government entities, large and small companies, anduniversities and "think tanks"šactive in analysis or development of the telecommunications/informationinfrastructure. a substantial amount of time was scheduled for discussion from the floor. the workshop took placein washington, d.c., on october 12œ13, 1993, and was composed of three panels that ran consecutively. panel 1set the stage for the workshop by characterizing infrastructure trends and applications, while panels 2 and 3addressed issues of policy.panel 1 addressed such questions as: what is the infrastructure now, technologically and institutionally? howdid it get to that state? what are the states to which it might evolve in the next decade? in connection with the lastquestion, the needs of several large user communitiesšfinance, health care, education, and librariesšwerespecifically addressed, not because these applications will necessarily drive infrastructure development butbecause they are a sample ofprefaceviithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national "grand challenges" currently much in vogue. they illuminate issues of process and access underlyinginfrastructure development.panel 2 examined the role, if any, that the nation's regulatory apparatus can play in helping direct thedevelopment of the telecommunications/information infrastructure. traditionally, the role of regulation has been toallocate resources equitably and to level the competitive playing field or tilt it toward a socially desired objective.in the past decade, the encouragement of market efficiencies has been a goal of regulation. panel 2 grappled withthe roles that regulation might play in the future. the underlying question it addressed was how regulators cansimultaneously encourage infrastructure development; protect the interests of all stakeholders (including thepublic); and do so at social, technical, and economic costs that are substantially outweighed by the benefits.panel 3 considered government investment policies. the federal government has long been active inpromoting growth of the telecommunications/information infrastructure through various direct and indirect meansof investment: support of research and development, implementation of pilot networks, direct user subsidies, andpurchasing policy. panel 3 also debated such questions as: what is the range, in the 1990s, of public investmentoptions? how does public investment affect market forces and are these effects desirable?the workshop was as lively as the steering committee and cstb had hoped. there was broad audienceparticipation, some of which is recorded in this volume. cstb believes that its primary goal of shedding light onfundamental issues and tensions in the national debate on the telecommunications/information infrastructure wasachieved.thanks are due many people for their hard work and support in making the workshop a success. the steeringcommittee laid the groundwork for the workshop, designing its content and format. a subset of committeemembers who became the panel chairsšalfred aho, roger noll, and david messerschmitt (who succeededdeborah estrin as chair of panel 3 when she had to give up that role)šworked assiduously in helping choosekeynote speakers and panelists, in convincing them to participate, and in bringing together their respective parts ofthis volume. and without the determined work of the cstb staffšmarjory blumenthal, cstb's director; lesliewade; and renee hawkinsšnothing would have been accomplished. the anonymous reviewers prompted thesteering committee and several panelists to strengthen the written record of the workshop. finally, a special wordof thanks goes to the following organizations for their financial support specifically for this project: ameritechcorporation, bell atlantic corporation, bell communications research (bellcore), bellsouthtelecommunications inc., hewlettpackard company, ibm corporation, and nynex corporation.george l. turin, chairsteering committee on the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructureprefaceviiithe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents introduction and overview 1part 1š setting the stage introduction to part 1alfred v. aho 23 the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructurerobert l. lucky 25 the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcenturycharles m. firestone 34 current and future uses of information networkscolin crook 63 the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure forhealth careedward h. shortliffe 67 can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?robert pearlman 74 future roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through thenational information infrastructureclifford a. lynch 86 discussion 98part 2š regulation and the emerging telecommunications infrastructure introduction to part 2roger g. noll 107 government regulation and infrastructure developmentrobert w. crandall 118 state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructurerobert g. harris 125contentsixthe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunicationsdale n. hatfield 142 regulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but hownina w. cornell 148 the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginningthomas j. long 153 costs and crosssubsidies in telecommunicationsbridger m. mitchell 159 economic ramifications of the need for universal telecommunications serviceeli m. noam 161 discussion 165part 3š public investment in telecommunications infrastructure introduction to part 3david g. messerschmitt 175 government investment in telecommunications infrastructurewalter s. baer 179 federal investment through subsidies: pros and consbridger m. mitchell 195 telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of viewcharles l. jackson 199 an information provider's perspective on government investment in the telecommunications infrastructurewilliam f. gillis 204 economic dividends of government investment in research and technology developmentrobert e. kahn 207 perspective of the noncarrier transport providerlaura l. breeden 215 discussion 218 appendix: contributors and participants 227contentsxthe changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overviewjanuary 1, 1994, marked the tenth anniversary of the divestiture of at&t. that event started an amazingperiod of rapid change in the telecommunications industry. few predicted a decade ago the effects divestiture,deregulation, the exponential growth of technology, and increasingly intense international competition would haveon the telecommunications/information infrastructure in the united states by 1994.in 1984 it was quite clear what the telecommunications/information infrastructure was and who defined it. itwas, in essence, the telephone and broadcast networks. the defining players were at&t, the federalcommunications commission (fcc), and the broadcasters. you got only the connectivity and services that wereoffered; compared with what is available today, it was not much.all of this has changed radically. instead of being defined by monopoly suppliers and regulators, thetelecommunications/information infrastructure has become more closely defined by both market demand and theexplosion of supporting technologies that have been brought to market by myriad suppliers. there has been muchmovement away from a supplierdefined infrastructure to a user and marketdefined infrastructure.there is now an enormously complex array of networks and services, all interconnected and all changingalmost daily. the distinction between broadcast and pointtopoint services (e.g., in electronic mail) has blurred.so have the separations among classes of servicešvoice, data, video, and so onšas more services becomedigital. boundaries for the production, distribution, and use of information are vanishing. many services that werewired in 1984 are becoming wireless, and many that were wireless are becoming wired. the line betweencommunication and computation is becoming ever fuzzier. users are demanding evergreater functionality, andsuppliers are scrambling to respond to and lead these user demands.all indications are that, as revolutionary as these changes are, they are just the beginning. scarcely a daypasses without the heralding of some event by the media as an indication that the day of the "informationsuperhighway" is upon us. as we are swept along by the onrush of events, many questions arise. what, in fact, isthe telecommunications/information infrastructure?1 who defines it, since at&t and the fcc no longer uniquelydo? what are reasonable roles for the various private stakeholders in the infrastructure's evolution? what shouldbecome of the government's traditional roles of regulation and various forms of infrastructure investment? onwhom should the benefits arising from the new infrastructure devolve and in what proportions? who shouldchoose these beneficiaries? a national debate now swirls these questions.a computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) workshop, titled "the changing nature oftelecommunications/information infrastructure," explored these questions. in particular, it tried to illuminate thespectrum of opinion on a broad range of potential governmentintroduction and overview1the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.actions for nurturing the development of the infrastructure and to identify where consensus might be easy toachieve and where it might not. the workshop was not designed to delve deeply into the underlying technicalissues, but rather to identify key technical trends and questions as they relate to economic, legal, and regulatorypossibilities.2this volume captures the proceedings of the workshop, building on its discussions and those of the steeringcommittee that organized it. it contains the papers presented at the workshop, grouped into three parts reflectingthe activities of the three panels and introduced by overviews prepared by the panel chairs. the papers presentmany different perspectives, but two distinctively different ones dominate: that of the analyst/academic and that ofthe practitioner/user. the former set provides the somewhatremoved sense of direction and mission important forpolicy development; the latter is ''from the trenches," presenting the concerns of those who deal with concreteproblems of application. while the gap between the two perspective is often large, they complement each other.policy analysts must consider the broad public interest and how to serve it. practitioners must say what it means inpractice to pursue policy goals and must identify problems and opportunities that cannot be deduced from policyprinciples alone.for example, the practical experience of citibank with networks, as explained by panelist colin crook,illuminates some of the prospects presented by the availability of new infrastructure. there are huge implicationsfor the organization of economic activity (such as the ability to separate the locations for processing informationfrom the activities generating that information) that are rarely addressed systematically in discussions of policyimplications. such insights from practice can help extend and test the more abstract analyses emerging from thepolicy community.this introductory chapter summarizes the workshop discussions, capturing key panel issues and crosscuttingthemes. it draws on remarks offered by participants and places their comments and the papers into perspective byreferring to subsequent developments in industry and government.part 1šsetting the stagedefining the telecommunications/information infrastructure is not trivial, for restricted definitions canartificially limit discussion. an appropriate conceptual framework is needed. so also is an appreciation for thescope of applications, features, and benefits desired in the modern infrastructure and for the shortcomings of thecurrent infrastructure. such considerations suggest the challenges faced in developing tomorrow's infrastructure,and they were the focus of panel 1.charles firestone of the aspen institute, one of the two keynote speakers of panel 1, advanced a broaddefinition that served as a valuable foundation for the workshop's efforts and helps elucidate a number of thornyissues. the infrastructure, according to firestone, comprises the following elements of electronic communications: production of information in film, video, audio, text, or digital formats; distribution media, that is, telephony, broadcasting, cable, and other electronic transmission and storagemedia; and reception processes and technologies such as customerpremise equipment, videocassettes, satellitedishes, and computers.this unconventional definition bridges both the telecommunications and information dimensions of theevolving national information infrastructure. according to firestone, it "places attention on an increasinglyimportant but often overlooked area of regulation, that of reception. as first amendment cases move towardgreater editorial autonomy by the creators, producers, and even distributors of information, attention will have tobe focused on reception for filtering and literacy concerns." conversely, as choice at the reception end isempoweredšfor example, as the consumerintroduction and overview2the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has more power to choose a telephone service provider or which subset of 500 tv channels to subscribe toštheneed for government regulation of production and distribution is reduced.according to firestone, each of the three infrastructure componentsšproduction, distribution, and receptionšhas already passed through two stages of government regulation as the consumer has become more and moreempowered and is now embarking on a third. an understanding of this history helps to explain why certainoptions are the focus of attention today, and which of these may ultimately be preferable.stage 1 is a regime of scarce resources (e.g., information, spectrum, equipment), centralization,monopolization, vertically dominant enterprises, and the potential for anticompetitive practices. in this stage thegovernment's regulatory role is to control monopolies and to try to approximate the efficiencies of competitionwhere none exist. the agenda is dominated largely by lawyers and a search for equity in the distribution of thescarce resources.stage 2 is a regime of abundant resources, intense competition, decentralization of control, and deregulation.the government steps back from its earlier omnipresent regulatory role, and the free market starts to replacemonopolies and oligopolies. the agenda is taken over by economists and a drive for market efficiencies.firestone likened stages 1 and 2 to infancy and adolescence. in the mature and complex world into which theinfrastructure is heading, he believes that yet another paradigmšadulthoodšis needed. this paradigm mustredress the balance, as yet unachieved, among a number of cherished values: not just equity and efficiency but alsoliberty, community, and participatory access. the agenda in stage 3 might be set, firestone suggested, by politicalscientists and the quest for democratic access to infrastructure abundance.just as the conceptual framework for the infrastructure has evolved, so, too, have the technologies and thebusinesses that implement it. the second keynote speaker of panel 1, robert lucky of bell communicationsresearch (bellcore), reviewed the past century's technological evolution of infrastructural capabilities,concentrating on the explosion of technology in the past decade. along with that explosion has come the rapidgrowth of whole new industries to support itšfor example, the hundreds of software firms that specialize invarious aspects of the production, distribution, and reception of information. indeed, the movement of computerbased intelligence to the periphery of the network has made some of the distinctions among production,distribution, and reception quite fluid; for instance, some components of switchingšand thus distribution infirestone's frameworkšare being carried out on desktop personal computers connected to the network and maynow be partially identified with reception.however, lucky pointed out that the local loop has not changed much; it still represents a bottleneck. aslucky put it, unlike the backbone network, there is only one subscriber on the local loop to bear its cost: "in theend, you are on your own, and there is no magic invention that makes this individual access cheap." lucky pointedout that local access represents about 80 percent of the total investment in the (existing wireline) network and that,incrementally, it will take on the order of $25 billion to add broadband optical fiber to that access.3 yet there arepersistent efforts to bring more capability to the local exchange and to the local loop itself. "moreover," luckycomplained, "we are going to do it twice, or maybe even three times–. [that multiplicity] is called competition.''lucky's concern about access to the local loop was shared by other workshop participants. some worriedabout the effects on infrastructure development of continued monopolization of the local exchange and local loop,although new possibilities for competition in local exchange are opening up. others concentrated on theeconomic, social, and technical costs that might be incurred if access to the local loopšespecially the loop'sextension to broadband multiple servicesšis not approached by regulators with extreme care. this topic iselaborated on later in this introduction.another key point addressed by lucky was the contrast between the telephone network and the internet, theformer built primarily for voice and largely during firestone's stage 1, the latterintroduction and overview3the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.built primarily for data (but more open in architecture) and largely during stage 2. lucky highlighted thecontrast, noting the differing (yet evolving) pricing schemes:if you send a fax over the internet, it really appears to be free. you go to the telephone on your desk, and if yousend the same fax, it costs you a couple of dollars–. i can tell you honestly that i don't understand this–. i have hadeconomists and engineers digging down, – [thinking] there will be bedrock down there somewhere. i cannot findit–. the biggest single difference – is a large subsidy for residential service built into the [telephone network]tariff–. [internet] violates the rules of lifešsomeone must be in charge; someone must pay.the flatfee charging structure associated with the internet to date is consistent with the nature of the coststructure. internet costs do not tend to vary with usage, nor do they have the access and settlement fees or othercomponents found in regulated telephony.4 the internet experience may be instructive in examining how use ofdemandside policies to stimulate network growth requires sophisticated use of the pricing mechanism so that uservalues can be signaled to suppliers. on the other hand, other cost elements, as lucky suggests, may ultimately befactored in, whether to support social programs such as universal network access, or to support a growing set ofinterconnected networks and information resources, which may give rise to access and settlement fees.the value of the infrastructure derives ultimately from how it is used. four application areas examined duringthe workshop may drive infrastructure development: financial services, health care, education and schools, andlibraries. these applications are characterized by many innovations and accomplishments but also by frustrationand mismatches between desires and practical implementations. a fifth application, entertainmentšmuch subjectto mass media hyperbole but not explicitly addressed at the workshopšis also generally expected to driveinfrastructure development. however, the broadband and multimedia applications associated with entertainmentremain unproven, and market trials have been largely unsatisfying to both consumers and service providers.the four application areas addressed at the workshop span a range of private and public interests. theyillustrate an inexorable tendency toward international connectivity and place into bold relief the tension amongfirestone's five valuesšequity, efficiency, liberty, community, and participatory access.at one extreme on the scale of values are banking and financial services (described by panelist crook), whichlead in the use of modern infrastructure technology. this technology is so essential to modern banking, contendedcrook, that citibank is progressing under the "assumption that the new infrastructure for the bank essentially is anetwork." efficiency is the major driving force that has led to a banking subnetwork that supports 100 billiontransactions per year involving transfers of hundreds of trillions of dollars. with these dimensions, explainedcrook, "there are more financial transactions in the telephone network than there are in the u.s. economy,excluding lowlevel cash payments." compared to efficiency, banking places relatively little emphasis on theother four firestone values, except for the privacy component of liberty.at the other extreme on the values scale are applications in education, health care, and libraries. the verytitles chosen for their workshop papers by panelists robert pearlman, a private consultant ("can k12 educationdrive on the information superhighway?"), and by clifford lynch of the university of california ("future rolesof libraries in citizen access to information resources through the national information infrastructure")underscore the concerns many have about equity, community, and participatory access. as lynch put it, "we willbe challenged as a society to define a base level of information resources that we believe must be available to allmembers of our society, regardless of the ability to pay." this challenge was a recurring themeintroduction and overview4the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.during the workshop and was often raised in connection with universal service, as explored further in the section"crosscutting issues" below.considerable analysis, advocacy, and debate are being aimed, in the abstract, at demands for equity andaccess. conversely, developments in such specific application areas as health care, covered by panelist edwardshortliffe of stanford university's school of medicine, suggest that policy objectives in specific areas also will beimportant in determining the practical demands that will be made of the telecommunications/informationinfrastructure in the future. the "holy paradigm" for infrastructure development should be sensitive and flexibleenough to respond to both policy requirements and user demands as they evolve and interact.it is sometimes tempting to identify the information infrastructure with only the physical elements of itstechnology. the insights brought by panelists and attendees from their applications areas show how far off themark that view is. as robert pepper of the fcc observed at the workshop,[w]hen we talk about infrastructure, we tend to think about wires, hardware. infrastructure is far more than that. itis people, it is laws, it is the education to be able to use systems. if you think about the highway system, we tend tothink about bridges and interstates, but the infrastructure also includes the highway laws, drivers' licenses,mcdonalds along the roadside, gas stations, the people who cut the grass along the highways, and all of thosesupport systems. you cannot talk about infrastructure in the telecominformation sector without also talking aboutthe human support systems.part 2šregulation and the emerging telecommunicationsinfrastructureroger noll of stanford university described two foci of debate about the merits of regulation. one isphilosophical, considering legitimate boundaries to government coercion: does regulatory policy go too far or notfar enough in trading off individual liberty for collective rights? (note the reprise here of the theme of values.) theother focus is policy oriented and is concerned with an instrumental question: how will the performance of aregulated industry be changed by imposing regulation? noll suggested that even within the limited context of thehistorical use of regulation in the united states, the philosophical issue is unlikely to be resolved and is largelyirrelevant: "citing a meritorious policy objective is not sufficient to justify the conclusion that regulation iswarranted." this conclusion reflects a recognition that regulation, while intended to correct for market failures, canitself create inefficiencies, a point made by noll and others, including philip verveer of wilkie, farr, andgallagher, who remarked at the workshop:[i]f we are interested principally in efficiencyšand i think we are – we would be better off trying to clear out asmuch [regulation] as possible, recognize that there are some exceedingly legitimate issues that the local telephoneindustry confronts with respect to historic obligations that may no longer be sustainable or appropriate, and also thatthere may clearly be distributional concerns with respect to lowincome people or folks who live in highcost areas.consequently, maintained noll, the debate should focus on "how to design the details of regulation toameliorate to the maximum feasible extent the inherent infirmities of the regulatory process." he admonished that,whatever actions are taken, they must be carefully structured to be feasible within the very particular u.s. politicalsystem.introduction and overview5the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.workshop discussions during panel 2 illustrated the extent to which we have progressed into and acceptedstage 2 of firestone's schema: deregulation and the search for market efficiencyšwhat eli noam of the columbiainstitute for teleinformation, columbia university, called a "postderegulatory agenda." indeed, there werevirtually no advocates of stage 1 regulation; the acceptance of stage 2 was acknowledged (perhaps grudgingly)even among stakeholders, such as public interest advocates, traditionally in favor of strong regulatory positions. aconsensus position seemed to be that uses of regulation have been appropriately reduced in the past decade andthat in the future they should be invoked only with extreme care.despite relative agreement on the principle of regulatory restraint, workshop discussions reflected some ofthe disagreement that exists about what to do in practice; the debate on the uses and details of regulation was notonesided. the following contrapuntal quotations illustrate the differences: panelist robert harris of the university of california at berkeley: "in too many instances, state regulationhas become a major obstacle to competition, deployment of new technology, and development of newservices. the best route to the information infrastructure of the future is not through more regulation butthrough different regulation and less regulation." panelist dale hatfield of hatfield associates: "in either casešwith limited competition (betweentelephone companies and cable companies) or a twoplayer oligopolyšthe resulting rivalry would hardlymeet the test for robust competition that would justify full deregulation of the local exchange carriers.thus, policymakers and regulators would be well advised to exhibit a healthy amount of skepticismregarding the lifting of the existing line of business restrictions and deregulating local exchange carriers." panelist nina cornell, a private consultant: "[a]lthough it has become fashionable to argue that regulationof local exchange carriers is impeding the development of new technologies, the proposed curešderegulationšwould be worse than the status quo–. [r]egulation, however, needs a change of focus." panelist thomas long of the california organization toward utility rate normalization (turn): "[r]egulators should – hunker down for at least 5 to 10 years of hard work – [in] protecting consumers andcompetitors from monopoly power–. [but] managing infrastructure improvements should not be theendeavor that keeps regulators busy in the next decade."as cornell also noted, decisions about regulation should be cast within a broaderthantraditional context,considering antitrust enforcement as well as classical regulatory options. this outlook was reflected by verveer,who was lead counsel in the antitrust investigation and prosecution of at&t. "divestiture," he said, was itself "–an act of deregulation – [eliminating] the principal regulator – at&t."as noted in the quotations above, an issue of continuing uncertainty is timing: when is the transition to asufficiently competitive outcome complete, allowing for further rollback of regulation? timing has been a centralconcern in debates over lifting of the modified final judgment constraints, encouragement or permission of entryinto local exchange competition, and aspects of the universal service debate. timing of federal regulatorydecisions should also reflect actions at the state level, some of which were discussed by harris. the states appearto have an evolving and varied role in overcoming the types of underinvestment traps described by noam andbridger mitchell (then of the rand corporation) when new network technologies are either at their initialintroduction and overview6the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stages of adoption or when networks are maturing without pushing penetration to the point of achieving universalservice. a function of technology development, business development, public policy, and the interaction of thesefactors, timing is an inherently difficult point on which to achieve consensus.part 3špublic investment in infrastructurethrough several forms of direct investment, the federal government, in particular, has had and can have asignificant impact on the shape and growth of the telecommunications/information infrastructure. as panel 3keynote speaker walter baer of the rand corporation noted, federal infrastructure investments have a longhistory, often motivated by defense considerations. these investments go back at least to 1843, when morsetelegraphy was supported by a congressional appropriation.as summarized by baer during panel 3's deliberations, investment vehicles include financial incentives (e.g.,tax credits), research and development (r&d) funding, support of operating systems, development ofapplications, creation of information and associated resources, and support for agency activities related tostandards setting. each of these areas itself may present several options. as an example of the impact ofgovernment investment, robert kahn of the corporation for national research initiatives examined the history ofthe internet, beginning with the department of defense's development of the arpanet packetswitchednetwork, to illustrate how the federal government can involve itself in handson prototyping and procurement in anr&d undertaking. the government can also have less project involvement; it can undertake some form ofbenevolent partnering with nongovernmental entities or it can provide more handsoff oversight and steering of theenterprise. however, baer particularly cautioned about the need for strong market feedback through industryinvolvement and cost sharing whenever the government's role extends beyond the r&d stage.a strong point of agreement by panel 3, as articulated by baer and panelists charles jackson (of strategicpolicy research inc.) and laura breeden (then of farnet), was that public investment in thetelecommunications/information infrastructure is minuscule compared to private investment, in a ratio on theorder of 1:50. speaking for the clinton administration at the workshop, michael nelson of the office of scienceand technology policy emphasized the dependence on private investment: "the administration does not have $100billion sitting around. we are not going to build this network. we need to find incentives to encourage the privatesector to spend the money that is needed." as nelson's remarks and the discussion of regulation suggest, there areways for the federal government to influence private spending even if it does not invest directly.clearly, who in industry does the investment, when, and how will depend on the environment, itself shapedby policy. long cautioned that increasing regulated telephone rates has the effect of making ratepayers involuntaryinvestors in advanced telecommunications infrastructure. this, he asserted, has the effect of sparing the regulatedfirms from competing for capital like other firms and also results in those ratepayers who do not require advancedservices nonetheless helping to defray the costs of those who do. but jackson noted that an environment that limitsreturns on local loop investment, for example, might drive local exchange carriers to a "harvest strategy," leavingnew infrastructure construction to new entrants. a regulatory response to jackson's concern has been a movetoward pricecap rather than rateofreturn regulation, allowing carriers to increase return on investment andpresumably investments by increasing their efficiency.as discussed below, because of the rapid changes in telecommunications technologies, many think it isunlikely that regulators can accurately predict the investment behavior their policy actions will induce. thissituation gives rise to the further complication, noted by panel 2 member robert crandall of the brookingsinstitution, that forcing (or subsidizing) investments by regulated carriersintroduction and overview7the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the telecommunications/information infrastructure creates pressure on regulators to limit competition to theextent necessary to ensure a fair return on these investments. thus, subsidized investments in new technologiescan become vehicles for locking in the regulated status quo and precluding the development of competitivemarkets in advanced services.the difficulty of predicting who will do what, and when, was dramatized by an event that commenced duringthe workshop. in the middle of the workshop, an unscheduled presentation was made announcing the proposedmerger of bell atlantic and telecommunications incorporated (a major cable tv operator), an announcementthat led to much speculation and analysis in the subsequent months. the february 1994 decision by the parties notto proceed with that mergeršpartly on the complaint that new fcc constraints on cable tv pricing would makethe merger less profitablešunderscores the problems that both government and industry face in predicting andplanning.there was considerable consensus at the workshop on the need to concentrate government investment atpoints of market failure so as to maximize that investment's leverage. a basis for the consensus came from theconceptualization of three phases of network development by noam of panel 2 and was expanded on by mitchelland kahn during panel 3's deliberations. (these phases should not be confused with firestone's three stages ofregulatory evolution.)in the first phase, the startup phase when the network size is small, the cost per average user is higher thanthe benefits accruing to that user; the network has not yet achieved "critical mass." the second phase occurs aftercritical mass is attained, when enough users have joined the network to reduce the average cost per user (becauseof the spreading of fixed costs), and the presence of more users has increased the utility (benefits) to all users. thisis the regime of profitable commercial operation, where average benefits exceed average costs. as the networkcontinues to expand, highermarginalcost users join, increasing the average cost while not substantially increasingnetwork utility by their presence. these developments lead to the third phase, universal service.two concentration points for government investment, it was broadly agreed by workshop panelists, arephases 1 and 3. in the early stages of network development, before critical mass is attained, the government shouldinvest to offset network startup costs and to subsidize services (e.g., library databases) that add high utility to theinfrastructure but that may not be able to bear implementation costs by themselves. it is here that governmentinvestment in fundamental research and in experimental testbeds has traditionally had significant payback,epitomized by the arpanet and internet experiences described by kahn. during this period, explainedmitchell, investments can serve to lower costs, facilitating the expansion of supply, or they can serve to expanddemand by generating new or improved applications. at a much later stage, phase 3, investments can be made toachieve equity and universality of access by users whose marginal cost is excessive or who cannot afford the costof access. a number of participants argued that since even noam's phase 2šcommercial viabilityšhas not yetbeen achieved in the "information superhighway," it is very premature to consider investments in universal servicenow. (see "crosscutting issues" below.) a third concentration point for government investment, it was agreed, isstandards setting, an area discussed in kahn's paper.note that by focusing on the net benefit from network technology, noam's model appears to imply that thereis some way of identifying which technologies are winners and which are not, in order to target investments.furthermore, even if all technologies are winners in some absolute social accounting sense, to the extent that theycan substitute for one another, there is still the problem of picking the most beneficial. how we come by thatknowledge or determine what are useful rules of thumb for making choices among alternatives is a difficult andcritical question that was not well addressed by workshop participants. but this very question of targetingtechnologies does suggest a vital role for r&dšto evaluate options and the costs and benefits of newtechnologies. a recent nrc report suggests that it is possible to encourage development and deploymentintroduction and overview8the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the information infrastructure in ways that leave open choices of implementing technologies (cstb, 1994).when government support extends beyond the r&d stage, however, it is important to assess and respond tomarket feedback.despite the cautions expressed above, several workshop participants were passionate in their conviction thatfederal investments in infrastructurerelated r&d have been and will continue to be enormously productive. theskepticism expressed on this point by others is in part symptomatic of the broader fiscal context in which federalinvestment in r&d is being reexamined. because of changing constraints on government investment, kahnspeculated that the federal government probably could not repeat what it had done in launching the nationalresearch and education network (nren) program, which built on and fueled development of the internet. thatis, although the clinton administration's national information infrastructure (nii) initiative is sometimes perceivedas involving both substantial government investment and control, neither is realistic. kahn posed the question ofhow the process that resulted in nren and its successes could be institutionalized as part of the r&d business.the larger question is how the internet model can be leveraged to advance the nii.5crosscutting issuesalthough policymakers face choices among various options, some of which can be grouped under theheadings of regulation or public investment, several issues cut across policy regimes. such issues were raised byall three panels and include accommodating rapid technology change, standards and standardssetting, anddemocratization of the infrastructure. verveer listed a similar set of issues: interconnection and standards, openentry to the local exchange, universal service, and telephone company integration into adjacent markets.verveer's last issue relates to the others as a factor affecting timing and direction, because the telephonenetwork (and the cable networks as well) were originally built for efficient delivery of one servicešvoicecommunicationsšwhereas the emerging concept of the nii implies an architecture or technical framework that ismore general and flexible, and thus more capable of supporting multiple services (cstb, 1994). technologicalchanges and standards will be prerequisites; the nature of the technology and architecture, in turn, will affect whobenefits from the infrastructure and when, as well as what, policy intervention(s) will be most effective.accommodating rapid technological changesrapidly changing technology poses major challenges for infrastructure policy. the rapid shift in thetelephone network system from analog to digital switching technology, described by lucky, was but the first ofseveral waves of change that are transforming, integrating, and adding complexity to the telecommunications/information infrastructure. the rapid change (and uncertainty) is today underscored by the contrastsšpreviouslynotedšbetween the telephone network and the internet. as lucky and kahn explained, these networks involvevery different uses of technology and also very different technical architectures, and their cost structures andpatterns of use are also very different. complicating the situation is the fact that existing understanding andmodels were conditioned on the telephone infrastructure, whereas different technologies and architecturesšsuchas the internet approach toward networking, wireless transmission, and competition from or interconnection withcable networksšwill change many assumptions (e.g., about urbanrural cost differentials).furthermore, the emphasis on intelligence at the periphery of the network, which is characteristic of theinternet, will have implications for the logic of network operations, its structure,introduction and overview9the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and especially the types of public infrastructure services that will be in demand in the future. conversely, the needfor peripheral intelligence also highlights problems associated with variations in ability to pay. for example,pearlman's discussion of conditions in education shows how limited resources for communication outside thetraditional public information infrastructure, in this case computers and telecommunications facilities in publicschools, constrain the use of public infrastructure to promote educational policy objectives.both sets of concernsšnetwork operations and affordabilityšwill be affected by decisions about networkarchitecture. the openness of an internetstyle architecture, for example, implies a movement toward theunbundling of network facilities and services, which will, in turn, affect costs, competition, and innovations inboth fundamental technologies and the services that build on them (cstb, 1994).the rapidity of technological change is also reflectedšalong with a certain amount of media "hype"šin theproposed broadband multimedia applications of the nii. while typical internet applications (e.g., electronic mail,file transfer) and other narrowband applications are now available with no more than the current twistedpairtelephone connections, implementation of a broadband nii has enormous technical, economic, and policyimplications.6 it will require billions of dollars, but so faršsome at the workshop assertedšits applications areunproven. the skeptics therefore questioned the wisdom of the pellmell dash to an advancedfeature nii. inresponse, kahn, one of the primary architects of the internet (via its predecessor, arpanet), replied that theoriginal plans for arpanet provoked the same sort of skepticism from the research community, the very userset that initially benefited most from it. the skepticism dissolved only when an arpanet testbed was available.kahn asserted that, until a committed user community has developed for the advancedfeature nii, skepticismtoward it will remain. he felt strongly that a governmentsponsored testbed is the way to develop such a usercommunity.while infrastructure investment discussions typically focus on hardware elements, substantial portions of theemerging telecommunications/information infrastructure consist of softwarešamounting to billions of dollars ofinvestment. software will become increasingly important because it is what makes possible the development ofcommon (and differentiated) infrastructural services, which greatly enhance the usefulness of the physicalcomponents of the infrastructure. the spur to the growth in internet usage resulting from the introduction of themosaic interface to the world wide web illustrates the impact of software. but one often unappreciated problem,noted by alfred aho, then of bellcore, is that substantial amounts of embedded software present a bottleneck tochange. another problem, noted by baer, is a tax structure that sometimes makes it difficult to reward orencourage investments in developing new kinds of software; for example, federal research and experimentation taxcredits in place since 1981 have not always been interpreted to be applicable to software development.the rise of software as a vehicle for adding value to underlying network services has enabled the growth ofnetworkbased systems integration. noam, breeden, and others remarked on the competition between networkservice providers and systems integrators. reflecting on the evolving patterns of competition, several participantsspeculated about which capabilities and services could or would be regarded as commodities and whatcommoditization may mean for technology development and deployment as well as the evolution of the industry.the criticisms leveled at regulation during the panel 2 session reflected an appreciation for the associationbetween past regulation and the relatively slow innovation and modernization in telecommunications. part of theproblem is a human one, the difficulty faced by regulators trying to decide which technologies are preferable.observed crandall,[t]he technology is changing so quickly in this area and the number of players is so potentially large that trying touse regulation as the instrument for inducing investment in infrastructure is fraught with enormous dangers. even ifregulation couldintroduction and overview10the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bring about the type of investment that you think is desirable today, it would be inefficient to do it throughregulation, it would be extremely costly, and what i fear is if it turned out to be a mistake, it would be very difficult tocorrect that mistake.crandall's concerns were complemented by lynch's observations on how information technologies areinducing changes in the complex system of information providers of which libraries are a part. the process ofchange, apparent in citation and publishing practices, is ongoing. neither the end results nor their sensitivity tocoercive policy interventions, such as regulation, can be forecast.concerns about the risks of the slow pace of regulatory processes and the costs of mistakes implyassumptions that (1) the more rapidly technology advances the better and (2) there will be no cause for regret overthe outcomes if we just let natural economic forces take their course. both assumptions call for further analysis.indeed, a cstb committee that considered these issues has argued that market forces may not readily yield eitherthe unifying, open architecture or the kinds of general and flexible technology required to maximize the societalbenefits implied by much of the nii rhetoric (cstb, 1994). to minimize mistakes, commented cornell,participation by multiple players should be encouraged "so that lots of new ideas can be tried in the marketplace."the opening of the local exchange to competition is consistent with this view, although the proliferation ofalliances across industries (e.g., between telephone and cable or communications and software or hardwaresystems companies) suggests new possibilities for reducing healthy competition among approaches. also, ashatfield observed, competition will be affected by the structural and human knowledge constraints on cablecompanies providing telephone service and on telephone companies providing cable service.all this having been said, there was broad consensus on the poor fit between the political process by whichregulations are made and that of innovation. as noll noted, "technological progress is not something that happensthrough consensus and compromise. it happens with crazy people going out and doing things that others did notthink could be done." the fact that much current and anticipated technological change is not incrementalunderscores the weaknesses of "the incremental consensus approach of regulation and policymaking," according topepper, who suggested that "there may be an opportunity to have some nonincremental change on the policy side."standards and standards settingstandards are essential for making a multifaceted multiprovider infrastructure work. they can shape thenature of the services and capabilities that are available, as well as how they are implemented (see box 1).although, as noted above, many comments were made at the workshop about the difficulties and therefore theundesirability of having bureaucrats select specific technologies or players, pepper noted that that mindset shouldnot preclude a major government role in the standards arena:[t]here is a very important role for the government to establish the framework within which the smartest engineers inindustry develop standards–. [t]here is a balancing because people–who might lose in a standardssetting processtoo often try to use the process against the setting of standards that might be somebody else's standard.introduction and overview11the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 the economic role of standardsjoseph farrelluniversity of california at berkeleystandards are an explicit or implicit agreement to do thingsšsuch as encode informationšin commonways so that different services can work together, information can be exchanged easily, and so forth.standards may be dictated, benevolently or not, by an authority or powerful player (often a seller or buyer).this was historically the main mode of standardization in telecommunications, with at&t in the united statesand governments elsewhere determining the standards. but as the telecommunications industry has becomeless concentrated, authoritydictated standards are no longer available and other means of reachingagreement must be developed instead. these methods include the use of a formal or informal consensusprocess ("committees," or voluntary standards organizations) and a process of letting "de facto" standardsemerge from a positivefeedback process among many industry participants.none of these mechanisms for generating standards always generates a "good" standard, a rapidlyavailable standard, or any standard at all. governmentset standards may be unduly influenced by pressuregroups or simply reflect a lack of sophistication in underfunded government agencies, and standards set bybig players may be chosen to preserve their position. consensus negotiations may be protracted, and theoutcomes may reflect bargaining power more than technical or economic merit. finally, the economic forcesthat usually tend to make de facto marketplace outcomes economically efficient are at best weak in contextswhere standards are important, as the recent economic literature on the subject has shown.part of the problem with standards development is that standards not only make interconnection andinformation exchange easier, but they also affect the nature of competition. open standards level the playingfield, reducing the commercial advantages conferred by size or historical dominance. they also facilitatespecialization, especially specialized entry. these complex competitive effects often give participants instandardssetting efforts mixed motives, or even create incentives for sabotage.even if all participants want a standard, problems remain. perhaps likelier than a choice of ''the wrong"standard is the wrong timing of the standards decision: a choice of standard may freeze the fundamentaltechnology (although it may accelerate nonfundamental innovation), and so the timing of standardizationrequires a subtle balancing of the benefits with the foreclosure of options. with hindsight, the japanese andeuropean governments probably chose highdefinition television (hdtv) standards prematurely, slightly toosoon for full digitization, whereas the united states (fortuitously, and by a hair's breadth) probably waitedlong enough. some would say that the same is true of digital wireless telephone. but without hindsight, thetiming problem is hard: opinions will genuinely differ on the payoff for waiting (most experts in 1990 thoughtthat alldigital hdtv within the confines dictated by the federal communications commission (fcc) was notpossible, until general instrument showed otherwise), and people experience different tradeoffs betweenspeed of standardization and the technical quality of the standard chosen. moreover, if a market isdeveloping in advance of standardization, participants may become locked in and standards deliberationsbecome moot. many standards organizations, including the international telecommunications union and theinternational electrotechnical commission, have begun to pay more attention to the speed and timeliness oftheir standards development, which should reduce unintended delays but will probably do nothing formisjudgments about optimal timing.in the united states, "government" standards setting often is closer to governmentoverseen standardssetting. for instance, in hdtv, the fcc created the advisory committee on advanced television service,involving industry participants, and asked it to recommend a standard. this approach echoes the fcc'sapproach with earlier generations of television standards: indeed, the current television "ntsc" standardsare named for the national television systems committee. compared to european governments, forinstance, the u.s. government has also been quite reluctant to set standards.introduction and overview12the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government involvement may be less risky in standards setting than in some other forms of regulation,because even standards set with government involvement are often voluntary and can be ignored ifunsuitable enough: if there is a clearly superior alternative it may replace a poorly chosen standard. forexample, the u.s. government tried to use its purchasing power to encourage the use of open systemsinterconnection (osi) computer networking protocols, but attractive products were not readily forthcoming,and most other buyers continued to prefer the more established tcp/ip protocol suite. as a result, thegovernment recently withdrew its procurement specification of osi.of course, this is at best an imperfect check on errorsšthe government's choices are powerful and canimpose bad outcomes. but government involvement in standards, if properly managed, may be more like"indicative planning" and less like compulsory regulation. this can potentially help private parties coordinatewithout coercion.economics literature on standardizationeconomists have long recognized that some products are more valuable when more people use them;the phenomenon we now call "network effects" was studied many years ago by leibenstein (1950). but themodern literature took off when economists became interested in how firms might make strategic choices inthe arena of standardsšparticularly whether to try to become compatible with rivals or insist on remainingincompatible: for recent discussions, see katz and shapiro (1994) and besen and farrell (1994). furtherreferences can be found in these latter two articles and in a survey by david and greenstein (1990)..in characterizing the fcc's involvement in standards for highdefinition television (hdtv), pepper attestedto the role of functional standards in militating against overly shortterm technical solutions. similarly, kahn'sremarks addressed how government funding of internet protocol development and standardization resulted in anarchitecture that embraces heterogeneity (i.e., heterogenous hardware, software, underlying transmissiontechnologies, and capacities).several workshop participants commented on elements of the standardssetting process that they believedshould be promoted lucy richards of the department of commerce, for example, commended the fcc forpushing the hdtv standards process to involve not just broadcasters but also the computer industry and smallinnovative technology firms. vinton cerf of mci, drawing on his experiences with the internet, noted thatinteroperability standards must involve a process requiring implementation and testing that shows thatindependent implementations can, indeed, interoperate.although they have received the most attention in discussions of information infrastructure, interoperabilitystandards are only one of the many kinds of standards needed. another kind of standard relates to the encoding andformatting of the information to be transmitted, stored, and accessed via the infrastructure. comments made byshortliffe describing difficulties in the health care context appear to apply more generally; they are relevant to thedevelopment of applications in several areas. shortliffe noted, for example, that because it is difficult to encodeelectronically subjective knowledge and impressions about quality of care that are important in making informedmedical and health insurance decisions, there may be a danger that reliance on electronic formats will excludeuseful data and reduce efficiency. there is thus a need for more work on information classification orcategorization systems, which should properly be considered part of the infrastructure. shortliffe commented onthe standardslike nature of such classification systems, noting the need to eliminate inconsistencies acrossinformation classification or categorization systems thatintroduction and overview13the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.impede effective use of data already collected. his observations from health care were echoed by the more generalassertions by william gillis of motorola that investing in a uniform organization and structure for data wouldmake access to and use of data more efficient and could ultimately lower the costs of accessing and publishingdata.a wag once pinpointed the beauty of standards: everyone can have his own. the irony identifies the tensionin standards setting. were governments to have the authority and responsibility for setting unique, definitivestandards, one could easily have bureaucratic infighting leading to ossification of standards while technologyleapfrogs themšwitness the endless international bickering over narrowband integrated services digital network(isdn) standards while isdn became all but obsolete, or the federal promotion of the open systemsinterconnection (osi) scheme through gosip while markets moved toward tcp/ip in data network technology.on the other hand, if companies compete to set proprietary standards to gain market share, chaos may be theresult. a popular recent middle groundšestablishment of multicompany consortia, sometimes subsidized bygovernment, to create de facto industry standardsšhas been attacked by larger companies on the grounds ofinefficiency and by smaller companies on the grounds of exclusivity. workshop participants seemed to agree thatthe frequently referenced government roles in fostering the tcp/ip standards through support of internetdevelopment and use (i.e., setting standards by supporting testbed development and research projects) and thehdtv standard through competitive testing for spectrum allocation (i.e., setting standards by forcing competinginterests to cooperate) may be models for future government action.democratizationmany workshop participants, beginning with firestone, appeared to envision a greater democratization ofinformation access and use. this theme was explored in discussions of universal service, the changing roles ofsuch information providers as libraries, and increasing access and use in education. the internet was at leastimplicitly recognized as a model of democratization, since it has demonstrated the ability of small players tobecome providers of content to a global network market. on the internet, even individuals can make motionpicture experts group (mpeg)encoded movies available to large numbers of people; no longer is moviedistribution limited to the large studios. these features of the internet reflect its technology and architecture andtherefore cannot be assumed to translate automatically to the larger, more complex nii.the fact that existing policy mechanisms may be ill suited to promote democratization was recognized. aspepper observed, "[t]he traditional regulatory process all too often puts agencies like the fcc in the business ofrefereeing between the private interests of providers as opposed to putting users and user needs at the forefront."industry faces similar problems. crook, for example, lamented that the "most complicated part of networking – ishow to deliver things to ordinary people who walk in off the street."education represents an applications area that is fundamental to the democratization of infrastructure accessand usešand one that epitomizes the challenge of achieving that democratization. difficulties experienced inintegrating the information infrastructure into education underscore the importance of the human and institutionalfactors needed to realize the potential benefits promised by the hardware and software components. as pearlmanrecounted, there are already many examples of k12 schools obtaining access to events, people, and informationaround the world, sometimes in real time. however, since most of the enabling services and resources areunderwritten by parties other than the educators or students, "one of the characteristics that unites all thesewonderful examples is that most have truly demonstrated their commercial unavailability," pearlman pointed out.introduction and overview14the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.another route for using public institutions to democratize access to information and the informationinfrastructure is public libraries, which, as noted by carol henderson of the american library association, serveas community institutions and information providers. workshop participants suggested, however, that no singlerole was likely to emerge for libraries. reflecting on the capabilities made possible by technology, for example,linda roberts of the department of education speculated that, with access to the information infrastructure,individuals could have libraries in their own homes. moreover, based on experience in education, such personallibraries would not necessarily contain information derived only from the publishing industrythat is, not onlymight the role of libraries change, but so, too, might the role of other information providers, in part becauseindividual infrastructure users are likely to be information providers as well as consumers.the many possible ways in which libraries could change were addressed by several speakers and summarizedby lynch:[i]t is important to recognize that libraries are part of a much more complex system of information providers andconsumers which includes publishers; the government, which creates a certain amount of public domain information;scholars who use it; [and] researchers–. at the same time libraries are struggling to modernize into an environmentwhere much of their content is electronic. information technology in networks is going to cause some fundamentalreassessment of the roles of other groups within which libraries are part of the public system.fundamental to democratization is the achievement of universal service, which will be shaped by regulationšdriving private investmentšand public investment. george gilder, a private consultant, cautioned that "youcannot instantly create universal service," but the political and moral imperatives of striving for it pervaded theworkshop discussions. universal service has been advanced as an essential principle by the clintonadministration, congress, and a range of consumer, industry, and public interest advocacy groups; it was also thefocus of a set of commentaries commissioned by the administration in october 1993 and published in march 1994(ntia, 1994). despite a tendency in the public debate to polarize the possibilities with respect to those who haveaccess and those who do not, there will clearly be a spectrum of possible outcomes, which may itself evolve overtime.the recognition that network evolution passes through stages and achieves critical mass over time suggeststhat universality may naturally be delayed. as noam explained, "there is a connection between critical mass anduniversal service. and that is you would never get to that second problem without having resolved the firstproblem." moreover, although competition may contribute to network expansion, noam cautioned againstassuming it would solve the universal service problemšcompetition can help make production of networkservices more efficient, but that issue is different from allocatable distribution. competition can also complicatethe challenge of collecting funds for universal service subsidies if the current model of collection by serviceproviders is presumed to continue. alternative models for collecting and distributing communicationsrelatedsubsidies may be needed.two main dimensions of the universalservice problem were discussed by workshop participants. one, clearlythe more general concern, is access by individuals with low incomes regardless of where they live. workshopparticipants suggested that a critical factor in terms of cost and timing would be the choice of mechanismšsomevehicles for extending service to individuals who could not afford it on their own are more efficient than others;the fact that one vehicle has been used in the past should not be the basis for selecting a vehicle in the future.the other dimension, on which a greater range of opinions was expressed at the workshop, is access in ruralareas. some skepticism surfaced about whether the historic rationale for subsidizingintroduction and overview15the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rural access can be justified. commented crandall, "[t]here is no particular reason at this stage of our economicdevelopment to suggest that people who live in the country are so poor that they could not pay for the full cost oftheir telephone service."the tension among the values articulated by firestone (equity, efficiency, liberty, community, andparticipatory access) was expressed in the range of opinions on the roles for private and public action in achievingdemocratization. for example, some felt that if infrastructure access were as important to schools, libraries, andhealth care organizations as it is to banks, these organizations would rationally reallocate their resources to buysuch access at the expense of other needs. others expressed the belief that schools and libraries, if left to their ownresources, would never have the wherewithal to buy the access they need; lacking government intervention, theyclaimed, a large informationdisadvantaged class will arise. the confounding factor of politics also was invoked as aconstraint on access and use of the information infrastructure. commented noll,[i]f the world is such that the politics of education select against the delivery of information to students in favor ofsomething else, it is exactly the same politics that will drive a regulatory institution. they are not separate. they arerun by the same state legislature and governor.conclusionthe decade since the divestiture of at&t and the ensuing deregulation have wrought huge changes. inreflecting on these changes, verveer (a key player in the 1984 events) characterized some of these changes(box 2). the telecommunications/information infrastructure has become a significant and increasingly importantcomponent of the social overhead that contributes to the productivity and growth of other economic activities. thissocial overhead factor is one reason for treating the development of policies for telecommunications andinformation industries as somehow different from the development of policies for other industries.the issues discussed at the workshop illuminate several possible future roles for government. pepperidentified six government roles:1. goalsetting and leadership;2. setting the regulatory framework, which provides incentives for investment;3. facilitating or establishing the framework for the standardssetting process;4. reducing risk at the margins (e.g., by supporting r&d and developing innovative applications);5. procurement, which provides incentives for investment; and6. addressing market failures on the communications and information sides.the breadth of opinions aired at the workshop shows that decisions on each possible government role willnot be easy. as michael roberts of educom remarked, "certainly, this [workshop] has shown how primitive thepolicy space is around the nii. we have to manage that issue, not wish hopefully that it will go away." the failureof the 103d congress to pass telecommunications reform legislation underscores the value of more fullyunderstanding the issues and perspectives discussed in this report.in short, the workshop elicited lively and at times contentious discussion of key issues of governmental actionin the development of the telecommunications/information infrastructure. a surprising degree of consensus onsome of the immediate issues emerged. some of these points of consensus are as follows:introduction and overview16the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2 lessons from the postdivestiture decadephilip verveerwilkie, farr, and gallagher1. competition and its counterpart, deregulation, work.2. the modified final judgment's (mfj) institutional structure is fragile but sustainable as long as thedepartment of justice lends material support or the presiding judge is a person of exceptional abilityand background.3. realignment of the comparative authority of federal and state regulatory authorities is needed in thewake of the supreme court decision in louisiana public service commission v. federalcommunications commission, 476 us 355 (1986).4. the salient question about the line of business restrictions is not if they will be removed but when.5. the divestiture and arrangements that surround the mfj, including the line of business restrictions,made way for technological and consumer demands, just as the cast in the at&t case believed theywould. government spending on the nii, as large as it is, is still a very small percentage of total spending on theinformation infrastructure. the government should therefore not be thinking about building the nii, butrather about creating conditions that promote privatesector investment. key leverage areas areprecompetitive r&d (in which a free market tends to underinvest) and regulatory policy. the deregulatory trend of the past two decades has been basically healthy and should be continued,although with some caution; there are still roles for regulators, but these are much changed. regulationšparticularly state regulationšhas often impeded the adoption of innovative technologies.given the exponential advance of technology, incremental changes in regulation in the future could be amajor stumbling block to implementation of the nii. universal service is a longterm goal that must assist the nii's achievement of critical mass andprofitability. as emphasized by the clinton administration's nii initiative, potential applications in the areas ofeducation, health care, and libraries could serve valuable social goals, but it must be recognized that: k12 schools form a "cottage industry" that is woefully unprepared to utilize an nii; most classrooms lackeven the most rudimentary hightechnology tools, including access to telephone lines; and health care providers are typically a decade or more behind in the use of information technology. electronic distribution of information may so greatly change the economics and other aspects ofpublishing and libraries that the future forms of these institutions are unpredictable.introduction and overview17the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fundamental philosophical differences never lie far from the surface, however, indicating that the currentdebate over development of the telecommunications/information infrastructure will not soon die out. some ofthese differences are as follows: there are those who think that our inability to predict the course and outcome of technologicaldevelopments severely restricts the utility of any governmental interventionšregulation or investmentšin market processes and those who believe that we know enough about the general patterns by whichinfrastructure industries develop to make useful policy prescriptions. even within the consensus, noted above, that government investment in precompetitive r&d for the niiwill continue to be productive, a few workshop participants expressed skepticism that anything like thesuccess of the advanced research projects agency in developing the seeds of the internet could berepeated. there are those who would immediately reduce regulation to the vestigial areas where technologicalabundance has not been achieved (e.g., the local exchange) or eliminate it altogether, trusting marketefficiencies. others argue that regulators have decades of work ahead of them (e.g., in setting terms ofinterconnection, allocating costs) before they perish in the full blaze of firestone's stage 2. there are those who abhor any government intervention in the standardssetting process, claiming thatmarket mechanisms ("shakeouts") are more efficient, and there are those who insist that, without agovernment role, interoperability and compatibility will suffer greatly.the persistence of disagreement on these and other issues, and the related likelihood that policy reformrelated to telecommunications/information infrastructure will be an ongoing process, suggest that such issues arefruitful fodder for research as well as further debate.the papers presented in this volume, as well as the introductory and discussion material for parts 1 through 3,provide perspectives on potential roles and positions for the federal government, illuminating the pros, cons, andtradeoffs.referencesbesen, stanley m., and joseph farrell. 1994. "choosing how to compete: strategies and tactics in standardization," journal of economicperspectives 8(2):117œ131.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994. realizing the information future: the internetand beyond. national academy press, washington, d.c.david, paul, and shane greenstein. 1990. "the economics of compatibility standards: an introduction to recent research," economics ofinnovation and new technology, vol. 1. harwood academic, chur, new york.katz, michael l., carl shapiro. 1994. "systems competition and network effects," journal of economic perspectives 8(2):93œ115.introduction and overview18the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.leibenstein, harvey. 1950. "bandwagon, snob, and veblen effects in the theory of consumers' demand," quarterly journal of economics,vol. 64.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1994. 20/20 vision: the development of a national informationinfrastructure. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.notes1. this report uses the term "telecommunication/information" because the facilities and concepts associated historically with thetelecommunications infrastructure and more recently with the information infrastructure are fundamentally intertwined. that linkage, in fact, isfundamental to much of the discussion captured in this report.2. a recent cstb report, realizing the information future (cstb, 1994), addresses many relevant technical issues.3. this represents the best estimate available at the time, recognizing that the costs of upgrading the telephone network from copper to opticalfiber have been falling.4. see chapter 5 in cstb (1994).5. for a discussion of related issues, see cstb (1994).6. of course, there are broadband nii capabilities today, most notably in cable television systems. as typically discussed, references to "abroadband nii" embrace a bigger mix of services, greater twoway service, and more integration of services than has been typical of cabletelevision offerings.introduction and overview19the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview20the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part 1setting the stageintroduction and overview21the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview22the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction to part 1alfred v. ahothe telecommunications/information infrastructure in the united states has been evolving steadily for morethan a century. today, sweeping changes are taking place in the underlying technology, in the structure of theindustry, and in how people are using the new infrastructure to redefine how the nation's business is conducted.the two keynote papers in this section of the report set the stage by outlining the salient features of thepresent infrastructure and examining the forces that have led to the technology, industry, and regulatory policiesthat we have today.robert lucky discusses how the nation's communications infrastructure evolved technically to its currentform. he outlines the major scientific and engineering developments in the evolution of the public switchedtelecommunications network and looks at the current technical and business forces shaping tomorrow's network.of particular interest are lucky's comments contrasting the legislative and regulatory policies that have guided thecreation of today's telephone network with the rather chaotic policies of the popular and rapidly growing internet.charles firestone outlines the regulatory paradigms that have molded the current information infrastructureand goes on to suggest why these paradigms might be inadequate for tomorrow's infrastructure. he looks at thecurrent infrastructure from three perspectivešthe production, electronic distribution, and reception ofinformationšand proposes broad goals based on democratic values for the regulatory policies of the differentsegments of the new information infrastructure.the four papers that follow examine the use of the telecommunications infrastructure in several keyapplication areas, identify major obstacles to the fullest use of the emerging infrastructure, and discuss how theinfrastructure and concomitant regulatory policies need to evolve to maximize the benefits to the nation.colin crook discusses how the banking and financial services industries rely on the telecommunicationsinfrastructure to serve their customers on a global basis. he notes that immense sums of money are movedelectronically on a daily basis around the world and that the banking industry cannot survive without a reliableworldwide communications network. he underscores the importance of an advanced public telecommunications/information infrastructure to the nation's continued economic growth and global competitiveness.edward shortliffe notes that the use of computers and communications is not as advanced in health care as inthe banking industry. he gives examples of how the use of information technology can both enhance the quality ofhealth care and reduce waste. he stresses the importance of demonstration projects to help prove the costeffectiveness and benefits of the new technology to the health care industry.introduction to part 123the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.robert pearlman notes that, at present, k12 education lacks an effective information infrastructure at alllevelsšnational, state, school district, and school site. he presents numerous examples of how new learningactivities and educational services on an information superhighway have the potential for improving education. heoutlines the major barriers that need to be overcome to create a suitable information infrastructure for effectivek12 schooling in the 21st century.in the final paper, clifford lynch looks at the future role of libraries in providing access to informationresources via a national information infrastructure. he examines the benefits and barriers to universal access toelectronic information. he notes that a ubiquitous information infrastructure will cause major changes in the entirepublishing industry and that intellectual property rights to information remain a major unresolved issue.introduction to part 124the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructurerobert l. luckyi have been asked to talk about the telecommunications infrastructurešhow we got here, where we are, andwhere we are going. i don't think i am going to talk quite so much about where we are going but rather about theproblems. i will discuss what stops us from going further, and then i will make some observations about the futurenetworking environment.first, i will review the history of how we got where we are in the digitization of telecommunications today,and then i would like to address two separate issues that focus on the problems and the opportunities in theinfrastructure today. the first issue is the bottleneck in local loop access, which is where i think the challengereally is. then i will discuss two forces that together are changing the paradigm for communicationsšwhat i thinkof as the ''packetizing" of communications. the two forces that are doing this are asynchronous transfer mode(atm) in the telecommunications community and the internet from the computer community. the internet will bethe focus of many of the subsequent talks in this session, since it seems to be the building block for the nationalinformation infrastructure (nii).how the telecommunications network became digitalit is not as if someone decided that there should be an nii, and it has taken 100 years to build it. the historyof the nii is quite a tangled story.first, there was the big bang that created the universe, and then bell invented the telephone. if you readbell's patent, it actually says that you will use a voltage proportional to the air pressure in speech. speech is, afterall, analog, so it makes a great deal of sense that you need an analog signal to carry it. in the end bell's patent is allabout analog. since that invention, it has taken us over 100 years to get away from the idea of analog.a long time went by and the country became wired. in 1939, reeves of itt invented pulse code modulation(pcm), but it was 22 years before it became a part of the telephone plant, because nobody understood why it was agood thing to do. even in the early 1960s a lot of people did not understand why digitizing something that wasinherently analog was a good idea. no one had thought of an information infrastructure. computercommunications was not a big deal. the world was run by voice. but since then the telephone network has beendigitized. as it happened, this was accomplished for the purposes of voice, not for computer communication.so in 1960 we had analog voice and it fit in a 4kilohertz channel, and we stacked about 12 of these togetherlike am radio and sent it over an open wire. that was the way communication was done. but if you take this 4kilohertz voice channel and digitize it, it is 10 times bigger inthe evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure25the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bandwidth. why do we do that? that seems like a really dumb idea. but you gain something, and that is therenewability of the digital form. when it is analog and you accumulate distortion and noise comes along, it is likehumpty dumptyšyou can't put it back together again. you suffer these degradations quietly.the digits can always be reconstructed, and so in exchange for widening the bandwidth, you get the ability torenew it, to regenerate it, so that you do not have to go 1,000 miles while trying to keep the distortion and noisemanageable. you only have to go about 1 mile, and then you can regenerate itšclean it up and start afresh. sothat was the whole concept of pcm, this periodic regeneration. it takes a lot more bandwidth, but now you canstack a lot more voice signals, because you don't have to go very far.the reason that the network is transformed is not necessarily to make it more capable but to make it cheaper.pcm made transmission less expensive, since 24 voice channels could be carried, whereas in the previous analogsystems only 6 voice channels could be carried. so digital carriers went into metropolitan areas starting in the early1960s.at that time we had digital carriers starting to link the analog switches in the bowels of the network. more andmore the situation was that digits were coming into switches designed to switch analog signals. it was necessary tochange the digits to analog in order to switch them. engineers were skeptical. why not just reshuffle the bitsaround to switch them?the advent of digital switchingso the first digital switches were designed. the electronic switching system (ess) number four went out intothe center of the network where there were lots of bits and all you had to do was time shifting to effect switching.that seemed natural because all the inputs were digital anyway. it was some time before we got around to the ideathat maybe the local switches could be digital, too, because the problem in the local switches is that, unlike thetandem switches, they have essentially all of their input signals in analog form.i was personally working on digital switching in 1976. i did not start that work, but i was put in charge of itat that time. i remember a meeting in 1977 with the vice president in charge of switching development at at&t.it was a very memorable meeting: we were going to sell him the idea that the next local switch should be digital.we demonstrated a research prototype of a digital local switch. we tried to explain why the next switch indevelopment should be digital like ours, but we failed. they said to us that anything we could do with digits, theycould do with analog and it would be cheaperšand they were right on both scores. where we were all wrong wasthat it was going to become cheaper to do it digital, and if we had had the foresight we would have seen thatintelligence and processing would be getting cheaper and cheaper in the future. but even though we all knewintellectually that transistor costs were steadily shrinking, we failed to realize the impact that this would have onour products. only a few short years later those digital local switches did everything the analog switches did, andthey did more, and they did it more cheaply.the engineers who developed the analog switches pointed to their little mechanical relays. they made thoseby the millions for pennies apiece, and those relays were able to switch an entire analog channel. why wouldanyone change the signals to digits? so the development of analog switching went ahead at that time, but whathappened quickly was the advent of competition enabled by the new digital technology. there was a window ofopportunity where the competition could come in and build digital switches, so at&t was soon forced to build adigital switch of its own, even though it had a big factory that made those nice little mechanical relays.the next major event was that fiber came along in 1981. optical fiber was inherently digital, in the sense thatyou really could not at that time send analog signals over optical fiberthe evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure26the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.without significant distortion. cable tv is doing it now, but in 1980 we did not know how to send analog signalswithout getting crosstalk between channels. so from the start optical fiber was considered digital, and we beganputting in fiber systems because they were cheaper. you could go further without regenerating signals than waspossible with other transmission media, so even though the huge capacity of optical systems was not needed atfirst, it went in because it was a cheaper system. it went in quickly beginning in 1981, and in the late 1980s at&twrote off its entire analog plant. the network was declared to be digital.this was incredible because in 1984šat divestiturešwe at at&t believed that nobody could challenge us.it had taken us 100 years to build the telephone plant the way it was. who could duplicate that? but whathappened was that in the next few years at&t built a whole new network, and so did at least two othercompanies! and, in fact, just a few years ago, you would not have guessed that the company with the third mostfiber in the country was a gas companyšwiltel, or the williams gas company. so everybody could build anetwork. all of a sudden it was cheap to build a longdistance network and a digital one, inherently digital becauseof the fiber.in the area of digital networking we have been working for many years on integrated services digital network(isdn). we all trade stories about when we all went to our first isdn meeting. i said, "well, i went to one 25years ago," and he said, "27," so he had mešthat kind of thing. isdn is one of those things that still may happen,but in the meantime we have another revolution coming along beyond the basic digitization of the networkšwehave the packetizing of communication and atm and the internet.internet began growing in the 1970s, and now we think of it as exploding. between internet and atmsomething is happening out there that is doing away with our fundamental concept for wired communications.first we did away with analog, and then we had streams of bits, but now we are doing away with the idea of aconnection itself. instead of a circuit with a continuous channel connecting sender and receiver, we have packetsfloating around disjointedly in the network, shuttling between switching nodes as they seek their separatedestinations. this packetization transforms the notion of communication in ways that i don't think we have reallycome to grips with yet.where we stand in 1993 is this. all interexchange transmission is digital and optical. so is underseatransmission, which is currently the strongest traffic growth area: between nations we have increasing digitalcapability and much cheaper prices. the majority of the switches in the network are now digitalšboth the localand the tandem switches. but there is a very important point here. in these digital switches a voice channel isequated with a 64kilobitspersecond stream. it is not as if there were an infinite reservoir to do multimediaswitching and highbandwidth applications, because the channel equals 64 kilobits per second in these switches.they are not broadband switches in terms of either capacity or flexibility.another important conceptual revision that has occurred during the digital revolution has been one involvingnetwork intelligence. the ess number five, at&t's local switch, has a 10million instructions per second (mips)processor as its central intelligence. that was a big processor at the time the switch was designed, but now theswitch finds itself connected to 100mips processors on many of its input lines. the bulk of intelligence hasmigrated to the periphery, and the balance of the intelligence has been seeping out of the network. i always thinkof ross perot's giant sucking noise or, as george gilder wrote, the network as a centrifuge for intelligence. thishas been a direct outgrowth of the personal computer (pc) revolution.the bottleneck: local loop accesslet us turn now to loop access, where i have said that the bottleneck exists. loop access is still analog, and itis expensive. the access network represents about 80 percent of the totalthe evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure27the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.investment in a network. that is where the crunch is, and it is also the hardest to change. there is a huge economicflywheel out there to change access, whereas the backbone, as we have seen, can be redone in a matter of a fewyears at moderate expense.there are many things happening in the loop today, but i see no silver bullet here. people always say thereought to be some invention that is going to make it cheap to get from the home into the network, but the problemis that in the loop there is no sharing of cost among subscribers. in the end you are on your own, and there is nomagic invention that makes this individual access cheap.today everybody is trying to bring broadband access into the home, and everybody is motivated to do this.the telephone companies want a new source of growth revenue, because their present business is not considered agood one for the future. the growth rate is very small and it is regulated, and so they see the opportunity inbroadband services, in video services, and in information services, and they are naturally attracted to thesepotential businesses. on the other hand, the cable television companies are coming from a place where they wantto get into information services and into telephony services. so from the perspective of the telephone companies,not only is the conventional telephone business seen as unattractive, but there is also competition coming into it,which makes it even less attractive.there are many alternatives for putting broadband service into the home. there are many differentarchitectures and a number of possible media. broadband can be carried into the home by optical fiber, by coaxialcable, by wireless, and even by the copper wire pairs that are currently used for voice telephony.the possibilities for putting fiber into homes are really a matter of economics. the different architecturalconfigurations differ mainly in what parts of the distribution network are shared by how many people. there isfiber to the home, fiber to the curb, fiber to the pedestal, and fiber to the whatever! the fact is that when we doeconomic studies of all these, they don't seem to be all that different. it costs about $1,100 to put a plain oldtelephone service (pots) line into a home and about $500 more to add broadband access to that pots line. youcan study the component costs of all these different architectures, but it just does not seem to make a lot ofdifference. it is going to be expensive on some scale to wire the country with optical fiber.the current estimate is that it would be on the order of $25 billion to wire the united states. this isincremental spending over the next 15 years to add optical fiber broadband. moreover, we are probably going todo that not only once, but twice, or maybe even three times. i picture standing on the roof of my house andwatching them all come at me. now we hear that even the electric power utilities are thinking of wiring thecountry with fiber. it is a curious thing that we are going to pay for this several times, but it is called competition,and the belief is that competition will serve the consumer better than would a single regulated utility.because the investment in fiber is so large, it will take years to wire the country. figure 1 shows thepenetration of fiber in offices and the feeder and distribution plants by year, and the corresponding penetration ofcopper. you can see the kind of curves you get here and the range of possible times that people foresee for gettingfiber out to the home. if you look at about a 50 percent penetration rate, it is somewhere between the year, say,2001 and 2010. this longish interval seems inconsistent with what we would like to have for the informationrevolution, but that is what is happening right now with the economic cycle running its normal course.the telephone company is not the only one that wants to bring fiber to your home. the cable people have thesame idea, and figure 2 shows the kind of architecture they have. they have a head end with a satellite dish and avideoondemand player, or more generally a multimedia server. they have fiber in the feeder portion of theirplant, and they have plans for personal communication system (pcs) ports to collect wireless signals. they havetheir own broadband architecture that will be in place, and, of course, we see all the business alliances that aregoing on between these companies right now. we read about these events in the paper every morning.the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure28the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 1 evolution of fiber in the local exchange network. broad solid line, fiber; thin solid line, copper. catv,cable television. courtesy of bellcore.figure 2 fiber/coaxial bus cable broadband network. vod, video on demand; pcs, personal communicationsystem. courtesy of bellcore.the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure29the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.everybody thinks that the money will be in the provision of content and that the actual distribution will be acommodity that will be relatively uninteresting.if you look at the cable companies versus the telephone companies, cable has the advantage of lower laborcosts and simpler service and operations. their plant is a great deal simpler than that of the telephone companies.they have wider bandwidth with their current system and lower upgrade costs. they are also used to throwingaway their plant and renewing it periodically. disadvantages of cable franchises have more to do with financialsituations, spending, and capital availability.the packetizing of communications: atmasynchronous transfer mode (atm) is a standard for the packetizing of communications, where allinformation will be carried in 48byte packets with 5byte headers. this fixed cell size is a compromise: it is toosmall for file transfers and too big for voice. it is a miraculous agreement that we do it this way and that, ifeverybody does it this way, we can build an inexpensive broadband infrastructure using these little onesizefitsall cells. but it seems to be taking hold, and both the computer and communications industries are avidly designingand building the new packet infrastructure.atm has an ingenious concept called the virtual channel that predesignates the flow for a particular logicalstream of packets. you can make a connection and say that all the following cells on this channel have to take thisparticular path, so that you can send continuous signals like speech and video. atm also integrates multimediaand is not dependent on medium and speed.since atm local area networks (lans) are wired in treelike "stars" with centralized switching, theircapacity scales with bandwidth and user population, unlike the busstructured lans that we have today.moreover, atm integrates multimedia, is an international standard, and offers an openended growth path in thesense that you can upgrade the speed of the system while conforming to the standard. i think it is a beautiful idea,as an integrating influence and as a transforming influence in telecommunications.the new infrastructurenow let us turn to the other forcešinternet. the internet will be the focus of a lot of our discussions, becausewhen people talk about the nii, the consensus is growing that the internet is a model of what that infrastructuremight be. the internet is doubling in size every year. but whether it can continue to grow, of course, is an issuethat remains to be discussed, and there is much that can be debated about that.to describe the internet, let me personalize my own connection. i am on a bellcore corporate lan, and myinternet address is rlucky@bellcore.com. at bellcore we have a t1 connection, 1.5 megabits per second, into amidlevel company, jvncnet at princeton. typically, these midlevels are small companies, making little profit.they might work out of a computer center at a university and then graduate to an independent location, butbasically it is that kind of affair. they start with a group of graduate students, buy some routers, and connect to thenational backbone that has been subsidized by the national science foundation.the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure30the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the user view of internet economicsas for the user view of the internet, here is what i see. i pay about $35,000 for routers and for the support ofthem in my computing environment at bellcore. but people say that we have to have this computer environmentanyway, so let's not count that against internet. that is an interesting issue actually. i don't think we should gethung up on any government subsidies relating to internet operations, because if we removed all the subsidies itreally would not change my cost for the internet all that much.all we have to do is take the lans we have right now, the lan network that interconnects them locally, andadd a router (actually a couple of routers) and then lease a t1 line for $7,000 a year from new jersey bell. thatputs us into jvncnet. we pay $37,000 a year to jvncnet for access to the national backbone network. for thisamount of expenditure about 3,000 people have access to internet at our companyšall they can use, all they want.a friend recently gave me a model for internet pricing based on pricing at restaurants. one model is the a lacarte model; that is, you pay for every dish you get. the second model is the allyoucaneat model, where you pay afixed price and eat all you want. but there is a third model that seems more applicable to internet. if you ask yourkids about restaurant prices, they will say that it does not matteršparents pay. perhaps this is more like internet!the pricing to the user of internet presents a baffling dilemma that i cannot untangle. it looks like it is almost free.internet is a new kind of model for communications, new in the sense that while obviously it has been aroundfor a while, it is very different from the telecommunications infrastructure. if i look at it, what i see inside internetis basically nothing! all the complexity has been pushed to the outside of the network. the traditionaltelecommunications approach has big switches, lots of people, equipment, and software, taking care of the insideof the network. in the internet model, you do not go through the big switchesšit just has routers. cisco,wellfleet, and others have prospered with this new business. typically, a router might cost about $50,000. this isvery different from the cost of a large telecommunications switch, although they are not truly comparable infunction.with a central network chiefly provisioned by routers, all the complexities push to the outside. supportpeople in local areas provide such services as address resolution and directory maintenance at what we willconsider to be the periphery of the network. the network is just a fast packetrouting fabric that switches you towhatever you need.the contrast in philosophy between the internet andtelecommunicationsthe contrasting approaches and philosophies are as follows. the telecommunications network was designedto be interoperable for voice. the basic unit is a voice channel. it is interoperable anywhere in the world. you canconnect any voice channel with any other voice channel anywhere. intelligence is in the network, and theprovisioning of the network is constrained by regulatory agencies and policies.internet, by contrast, is interoperable for data. the basic unit is the internet protocol (ip) packet. that is in itsown way analogous to the voice channel; it is the meeting place. if you want to exchange messages on internet,you meet at the ip level. in internet the intelligence is at the periphery, and there have not yet been any significantregulatory constraints that have governed the building and operation of the network.pricing is a very important issue right now in internet. the telecommunications approach to pricing is usagebased, with distance, time, and bandwidth parameters. additionally, there are settlements between companieswhen a signal traverses several different domains. the argumentthe evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure31the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that the telecommunications people use is that pricing regulates fairness of use. they feel that without someusagebased pricing, people will not use the network services fairly.in internet the policy has been to have a fixed connection charge, which depends on pipe size and almostnothing else. there are no settlements between companies, and there is no usagebased charge. the internetfanatics would say that billing costs more than it is worth and that people use the network fairly anyway. that hasworked so far, but it remains to be seen, as the internet grows upšand especially as multimedia go on itšwhetherthat simple pricing philosophy will continue to function properly.before i conclude i would like to introduce an issue that bothers me as a member of the telecommunicationscommunity. there was an article in the wall street journal that said people are now bypassing thetelecommunications network by sending faxes over the internet. here is the situation: if you send a fax over theinternet, it really appears to be free. you go to the telephone on your desk, and if you send the same fax, it costsyou a couple of dollars. why is this? this paradox sums up the idea that internet really is almost a free good. is thedifference in price for the fax because internet has found a cheaper way to build a telecommunications network?or is it because internet is a glitch on the regulatory system, that it is cream skimming and that it evades all theregulation and all the shared costs of the network? i can tell you honestly that i don't understand this question. ihave had economists and engineers digging down, and i keep trying to think there will be bedrock down theresomewhere. i cannot find it. the problem is anytime an engineer like me tries to understand pricing, i have theidea that it ought to have something to do with cost.unfortunately, that is not really the case. the biggest single difference we were able to find between the costof a fax on internet and on the telephone network was that in the cost of the business telephone there is a largesubsidy for residential service built into the tariff. in traditional telecommunications the relationship between thecost of providing a service and the pricing for that service is sometimes seemingly arbitrary. furthermore, theactual cost of provision may involve a number of rather arbitrary assumptions and in any case is only weaklydependent on technology. at base, telecommunications is a service business.the arresting fact about internet is its growth rate of 100 percent. there are approximately 2 million hostcomputers connected to it. it is about 51 percent commercial usage. moreover, it violates the rules of lifešsomeone must be in charge, someone must pay. very troublesome. yet it is a worldwide testbed for distributedinformation services, and it is forming the prototype information infrastructure of our time.multimedia and the future of the internetas we look to how the internet might have to evolve in the near future, we see that the ip protocol that hasgrown up with internet is going to have to change in some small but fundamental way. as it stands now, the basicunit is the connectionless data packet, and that does not really support video and voice on internet in spite of thefact that, as we all know, those services are being sent experimentally on internet right now. however, they onlywork when there is very little traffic on the network. if the traffic grows, voice and video cannot really be sent oninternet because it presently uses statistical multiplexing of packets, so they don't arrive regularly spaced at theedges of the network. so the future ip protocol has to have some kind of flow mechanism put into it to assureregularity of arrival of certain packets. furthermore, the new protocol must support more addresses than arepresently possible. but these problems are fixable. security is also often cited as a problem, but that too can befixed.communications people are betting that the future traffic will include a lot of multimedia. that means a greatdeal of additional capacity will be required, as well as control mechanisms appropriate to the new media. atm isthe answer being propagated by telecommunicationsthe evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure32the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.companies, but internet people say atm does not really matter, because that is a lowerlevel protocol to tcp/ip.meanwhile, the computer industry is building new lans that take atm directly to the desktop. it now seemsthat we are headed to a situation where we will have atm in the local lans, but to be internetworked that atmwill be converted to tcp/ip to enter the routers that serve as the gateways to the network beyond. from there,however, it might again be converted to atm in order to traverse the highways of the network. similarly, on theother half of its voyage, it would again be converted back to ip and then to atm to reach the distant desktop. thatseems like a lot of conversions, but they will be easy in the immediate future and may well be the price ofinteroperability.the prize in the future is control of multimediašwhether telecommunications controls multimedia throughatm or whether internet is able to gear itself up, change its protocol, and capture this new kind of traffic. willpeople use the internet for voice five years from now, and if so, will that take any significant traffic away from thenetwork? those are interesting questions that i think we can debate.the evolution of the telecommunications infrastructure33the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the informationinfrastructure in the 21st centurycharles m. firestonethe thrust of this paper is that the electronic information infrastructure, which i define as the production,electronic distribution, and reception of information, has undergone two major regulatory paradigms and is readyfor a third. the first is the rather legalistic reaction to monopoly and oligopoly and is manifest in the period ofantitrust and regulatory enforcement under the communications act, culminating in the late 1960s to early 1970s.the second is the competitive period with its commensurate deregulatory paradigm, which has been present incommunications regulation since the late 1970s. these overlapping stages find expression in the regulation ofmany different aspects of the information infrastructure.my thesis is that these prior models are inadequate, by themselves, for the complexities of the 1990s andbeyond. while i do not specify a definitive new paradigm, i suggest that we might look to scientific or ecologicalmodels in beginning to sort out ways for the government to interact, in a dynamic democratic process, with thecoevolving technologies, applications, and regulatory environments of the communications and informationworld: the international information environment within which the national information infrastructure will wind. inthat sense, i call for a vision of "sustainable democracy," wherein technological developments preserve andenhance present and future democratic institutions and values.definition of the information infrastructurethe information infrastructure can be broadly or narrowly defined. for the purposes of this paper, i take abroader outlook that corresponds to the nature of the communications process, namely, the production,distribution, and reception of information in electronic form. thus, while i will allude to print and newspaper, thefocus will be on the following elements of electronic communications: production of information in film, video, audio, text, or digital formats; distribution media, most notably telephony, broadcasting, cable, other uses of electronic media, and, forour purposes here, storage media such as computer disks, compact disks, and video and audio tape; and reception processes and technologies such as customer premises equipment in telephony, videocassettesand television equipment, satellite dishes, cable television equipment, and computers.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury34the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.others might prefer to distinguish only between software and hardware, between content and conduit, orbetween information and communications.1 while such an organization is a plausible one, i favor the tripartiteapproach because it places attention on an increasingly important but often overlooked area of regulation, that ofreception. as first amendment cases move toward greater editorial autonomy by the creators, producers, and eventhe distributors of information, attention will have to be focused on reception for filtering and literacy concerns(aufderheid, 1993). i address this in greater detail below.regulation of the infrastructureregulation of the information infrastructure can also be usefully analyzed from this threepronged approach.the law of production is associated with information law, with intellectual property concerns, first amendmentcases, and issues of content. governmental regulatory policy in this area has also been affected by the expenditureof billions of dollars in governmental and public investment in programming for public broadcasting, research anddevelopment grants, creation of libraries, and software generation by the government.regulation of telecommunications has centered, however, on the distribution media. for many years this tookthe form of categorizing the form of mediaštelephony, broadcasting, or printšand placing that medium in theproper regulatory mold, namely, common carrier, trusteeship, or private. the main function of government was tomake the electronic media usable, to allocate and assign uses and users to the particular media, and then to regulatethe licensees in the public interest.2 the major intention of this paper is to describe the past, present, and futureparadigms of such regulation. at the same time, i hope to point out other levers of governmental policy, includinginvestment in technology, or other nonregulatory influences.regulation of the receiver or reception process is relatively unusual, but important nevertheless. one familiararea was the early regulation of cable television, which was a technology intended to enhance reception of overtheair television stations but was regulated to ensure that, at first, it did not undermine the economics of thebroadcast television system.3 most significant in recent forms of regulation of reception is the area of privacy,which, among other rights, protects the receiver to be free from intrusion at the reception end of a communication.4goals of regulationin each case the aim of regulation was to effectuate or bring about a set of goals for society. i find it useful tocategorize these goals into five basic democratic values, as follows.5libertyforemost among the bill of rights is the first amendment guarantee against abridgment of freedom ofexpression (speech, press, association, petition, and religion). beyond this trump card of protection, certainregulations have sought to promote first amendment values of editorial autonomy,6 diversity of informationsources,7 and access to the channels of public communication.8 a longstanding debate centers on the proper legalattention that should be paid to the underlying values of the first amendment, as opposed to the bare dictates ofthe amendment, that is, is it a sword as well as a shield?a second liberty, implicit in the bill of rights but explicit in state constitutions and in legislation, is the rightto privacy, individual dignity, and autonomy. at the federal level this hasthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury35the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.been expressed in the form of sectorbysector legislative codes; at the state level privacy is protected in commonlaw and statutes.9a third liberty, which is not often expressed as such, is that of ownership of property. in the world ofcommunications this usually takes the form of a bundle of intangible or intellectual property rights that attach tooriginal works of authorship or invention by the constitution's copyright and patent clause. traditionally,individuals have been licensed as trustees but not owners of the electromagnetic spectrum. however, this approachcould change with the auctioning of spectrum. furthermore, the application of intellectual property concepts to newforms of information has raised many new and vexing problems for future regulators.equitya countervailing value to liberty is that of equality. in the field of communications this takes the form, mostprominently, of universal service. that is, the communications act gives, as one of its seminal purposes, to makeavailable to "all the people" a worldwide communications system.10 today, the issue of universal service isforemost in the minds of regulators and legislators, who see the need for an evolving definition of whichcommunications and information services should be available to all. meanwhile, traditional schemes for assuringuniversal service are dissipating.another issue that comes within the equity value is that of information equityšis the gap between rich andpoor extending to the information haves and havenots? are the technologies that have such potential to bridge thegap between rich and poor instead going to widen it? governments at all levels have established libraries toprovide all citizens with access to a broad array of information resources. the obvious question for the future isthe level and extent that information resources will be made available in nonprint formats, and through electronicconnections to the home, rather than by extensive collections at libraries.11communitythe mass media, long attacked for monolithic mediocrity, is also seen as a key cohesive force in acommunity. the federal communications commission (fcc) has included, as a basic tenet, the concept oflocalism as a touchstone for licensing and regulating broadcasting stations.12 this includes a preference for localsobtaining the licenses initially and for stations, once licensed, to serve the local needs and interests of the servicearea.13similarly, franchising authorities often grant cable television franchises to locals, who are thought to be moreattuned to the needs of the local community. whoever receives the franchises, furthermore, usually hasrequirements to include public, educational, and governmental access channels.14 at one time, the fcc requiredcable operators to include local origination cablecasting channels on their systems.15 the access channels, as wellas some public broadcasting and other cable channels, might be viewed as electronic commons or public space forthe local community.at the same time, on a national scale, the broadcast media serve as one of the country's most significant andbinding cultural forces. the broadcast media provide common experiences and a larger, more cohesive nationalcommunity for a country that is increasingly multicultural.a third manifestation of community values is the advent of public broadcastingšgovernmental and publicfinancial support of noncommercial fare. some of that programming is aimed at better serving local communities.this aspect of "community" raises a broader issue forthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury36the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the future: what is the role of government financing of programming, information resources, and distributionfacilities?16finally, the whole concept of community is changing in the electronic world of networks and targetedcommunications. new electronic communities are being formed around the interests of individuals rather thangeographic boundaries. this, again, raises profound questions about the impact of modern communicationstechnologies on the concept of community.efficiencythe communications act specifically refers to the need for an "efficient" communications system by wireand radio.17 generally, economic regulation values efficiency as its ultimate goal and fairness secondarily. muchof the communications regulatory scheme is premised on making the infrastructure and the pricing systemefficient. title ii common carrier regulation seeks to assure that telecommunications facilities serve the entirecountry at rates that are fair, affordable, and comparable to those that would result from competition.18in the wireless realm, governmental spectrum allocation is premised on the tenet that, if unregulated, spectrumusers would injuriously and therefore inefficiently interfere with each other.19 more broadly, the governmentconsiders how communications and information sectors can maximize the citizenry's economic welfare, within thecountry and on a more global scale. recently, the united states has been concerned with its competitive positionin the world economy. the promotion of an efficient communications and information infrastructure supports thatconcern and interest.participatory accessthe communications system needs to be not only efficient but also workable and accessible to ordinarycitizens. accessibility is an undercurrent in many elements of communications regulation, from the creation of freeovertheair broadcasting stations, to access channels on cable, to common carrier regulation of telephony and itsprogeny. indeed, access could be an organizing principle for regulation, in terms of facilities, costs, and, as will beexplained later, literacy (reubencooke, 1993).finally, the regulatory scheme seeks to enable citizens to participate in the process on a fair and equal basis.the concepts of due process, sunshine for governmental agencies, and appellate review are all designed tofacilitate citizens' fair access to, and participation in, the process. by using new communications technologies,these goals will likely be enhanced.whatever regulatory scheme is employed, it will have to consider and balance the above basic values andgoals to fashion a system of greatest benefit to the public. the following sections will describe how these goalswere addressed in the regulatory paradigms of yesterday and today, along with how they might be considered andtreated in the future.regulatory paradigmsat each level of the communications processšproduction, distribution, and receptionšthere have been twoparadigmatic stages of regulation, one of scarcity and one of apparent abundance and competition. at the scarcitystage, usually obtained after an initial period of skirmishing among pioneers for position, the regulation has takenthe general form of governmental intervention in order to promote the broader public interest.20 at the abundant orcompetitive stage, whichthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury37the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overlaps the earlier stage, there has been a reversal, a deregulation to promote greater efficiency (kellogg et al.,1992). in each case the paradigm is a regulatory religion, at times demanding faith on the part of the believers. mythesis is that neither of the past regulatory schemes is sufficient alone to address the evolving complexities of thenew communications infrastructure and that a new regulatory paradigm, a new religion, will be needed for theglobal and digital convergence of the telecommunications future.stage 1: scarcitythe overriding characteristic of the first stage, "scarcity," is that in the various levels and industries associatedwith the information infrastructure there were large centralized, monolithic, topdown, commandandcontroltypeenterprises, relatively passive receivers, the formation of monopolies or oligopolies, often of a vertical (endtoend) nature, and a certain potential for anticompetitive practices. these could be symbolized by the early stages ofthe major movie studios, at&t, the broadcast networks, and ibm.in most if not all cases the tendency of the law was for the government to regulate the monopoly industry inthe public interest, either through application of antitrust laws or the regulatory apparatus of the communicationsact. usually, this resulted in the removal or regulation of bottlenecks, to try to approximate the efficiencies ofcompetition where none existed. the communications act also sought to foster the values of equality (in the formof universal service) and community (in the form of localism) under the general regulatory standard of the "publicinterest, convenience, and necessity."productionthe production of information has been the most widespread, abundant, and competitive of all of theelements of the infrastructure. in almost each case the production industries have not been subject to regulation,for first amendment and other historical reasons. rather, they are subject to normal commercial, antitrust,intellectual property, and first amendment laws. nevertheless, where economic oligopolies arose at earlier stagesof the film, telephone technology, and computer equipment industries, the antitrust laws were used to address thealleged monopolization. although the antitrust cases had only mixed success, that was the accepted method forgovernmental activity in this area. in the area of intellectual property, the law imposed a form of regulation in theimposition of fair use and compulsory licensing prescriptions. in the lone industry subject to federal agencyregulationšbroadcast programmingšthe fcc imposed both antitrustlike and contentrelated remedies.motion pictures. in the 1930s and 1940s the major motion picture studios found that vertical integrationcould enhance their ability to control their products from inception to exhibition. (some studios, such as warnerbrothers, were formed by theater chains.) the justice department, however, alleged that the studios weremonopolizing the industry by both their structure and certain anticompetitive practices.in the paramount consent decree of 1948,21 the major, vertically integrated motion picture production studiosand distribution organizations of the time agreed not to monopolize the production, distribution, and exhibitionsectors of the motion picture industry and to divest their theater chains. thus, a bottleneck at one level (e.g., majormovies or control of theaters) could not be used to create scarcities and affect competition at another. this case isinstructive to our inquiry, then,the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury38the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for its principle: to assure competition at each level of the communications process. today, the analogy wouldrequire competition (or openness) at the production, distribution, and reception levels of all communications.telephone equipment.22 shortly after the justice department litigated the paramount case, it brought anaction against at&t and its western electric subsidiary for using its patents to monopolize the telephoneequipment business.23 in an antitrust consent decreešthe original "final judgment"šat&t agreed to segregatethe company into strictly regulated businesses, forsaking competitive businesses.24 western electric's equipmentwould henceforth be sold only to bell companies. significantly, it also required that the patents be licensed toother manufacturers, a form of compulsory licensing.25broadcast programming. the broadcasting networks were regulated by the fcc and thus were subject to abroader "public interest" standard. during the 1930s and into the 1940s, nbc controlled both a red and a bluenetwork, with only modest competition from cbs. the parent network imposed a set of requirements on itsaffiliates to take what was offered. after a long inquiry, the fcc (1) ordered nbc to divest one network (therebycreating abc), (2) restricted certain abusive network practices that took discretion away from local affiliates, and(3) prohibited local stations from affiliating with more than one network.26broadcast content controls. content controls were imposed on broadcasters from the inception of the radioact of 1927 and the communications act of 1934. these included the requirement that a station afford equalopportunities to legally qualified candidates for public office to "use" the facilities27 and restrictions against certainillegal activities such as obscenity.28 after first prohibiting editorializing,29 the fcc imposed a fairness doctrine,which encouraged stations to air controversial issues of public importance and to present contrasting viewpointsfrom responsible spokespeople on such issues.30 furthermore, at the height of content regulation, the late 1960sand early 1970s, the fcc's regulations extended to changes of formats,31 to programming designed to respond tothe needs and interests of the local community,32 and programs on public affairs.33copyright. the most common form of "regulation" of the production of programming and other informationis through governmentally protected ownership rights, in the form of intellectual property laws. in the field ofcommunications the most prevalent legal issues are in the area of copyright, which relates to original works ofauthorship. here, the law provides one with a monopoly over the use and distribution of the work for a limitedterm.34but even in the area of intangible ownership, as in real property law, there are limits to the rights of theowner. thus, the public may have limited rights to use or copy a work for public interest reasons,35 just as it hasrights of access to certain properties (e.g., private beachfronts in california) for public purposes. this area of "fairuse" is vague and complicated, but even in the pure ownership of intellectual property there is a certain amount ofregulation of a monopoly for public benefit.similarly, there are certain situations where the copyright owner is entitled to compensation for use of thework but cannot restrict to whom and where the use is extended. thus, "compulsory licensing" has been extendedto cable operators and jukebox owners in order for them to access certain works that are otherwise toocumbersome to license on an ad hoc basis.36 (there are otherthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury39the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.instances of cumbersome licensing where compulsory licensing is not extended but, rather, private licensingagencies are employed. the compulsory licensing provisions of the copyright act are mainly the result ofpolitical compromises.)computer manufacturing. in the second and third quarters of this century, ibm dominated the field ofcomputer manufacturing. the ibm mainframe epitomizes the centralized, topdown, monolithic enterprise of thescarcity stage of regulation. the justice department, however, was unsuccessful in its antitrust suit against ibmand dropped the suit on the same day that at&t agreed to the modified final judgment.37 nevertheless there is ahistory of private antitrust suits that did affect, and in a sense "regulate," the computer industry.38 moresignificant, however, was the research and development work in various government agencies, particularly thedefense department, that led to many of the advances in computer hardware and software.distribution mediain contrast to the production entities and businesses, the electronic distribution media during the 1920sthrough the 1970s were characterized by direct regulatory control of centralized gatekeepers under the publicinterest standard. here the concepts of scarcity had two distinct meanings and regulatory approaches: commoncarriage, which was applied to telephony, and public trusteeship, which was applied to broadcasting. theseconcepts are explained below.telephony. in the field of telephony the building of facilities and the operation of a telephone network werethought to have natural monopoly characteristicsšlarge barriers to entry due to high initial capital costs andincreasing economies of scale. from the time of theodore vail's 1909 use of the words "universal service" toexplain his plan for exchanging governmental protection and regulation for the extension of service to all at fairrates,39 the bell system's endtoend monopoly had social equity implications. regulation of that monopoly ascommon carriers under a broad public interest standard would maintain an efficient, fair, reliable, accessible, andaffordable telephone system for the country.under the communications act, common carriers have been required to apply for permission to enter or exit amarket.40 they may not discriminate among their customers; they must provide access to all at reasonable rates,which are reviewed by the government; and they must file tariffs of their rates and practices.41 states generallyparalleled this approach for intrastate communications.42 so long as there was a monopoly carrier, the rates couldbe averaged among all the customers of a given area so that highcost areas could be subsidized within the ratesystem by ratepayers from highvolume areas. this regulatory deal, which promised stability, growth, universalservice, and restraint against competitors, reached its zenith in the late 1960s and early 1970s.43satellites. the use of satellites for communications common carriage derived from arthur clarke's model ofcovering the world by three geostationary orbiting satellites (clarke, 1945).44 the united states instigated thefounding of intelsat, an international consortium of countries to foster international communications. theintelsat agreement contemplates a monopoly carrier to handle the domestic traffic to and from the intelsatsatellites.45 this vision of a regulated monopoly was perfectly consistent with the prevailing paradigm of the time.it followed, as well,the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury40the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the tremendous federal government investment in a space communications system. thus, during the 1960s andearly 1970s. comsat was the american monopoly satellite space segment provider.broadcasting. in the use of the electromagnetic spectrum it was long perceived as necessary to have thegovernment allocate uses and users in order to avoid destructive interference on each frequency. for example, inthe mid1920s the broadcasters themselves called for federal regulation of the am airwaves (barnouw, 1975).congress responded with the radio act of 1927 and the successor communications act of 1934, regulatoryschemes whereby access to the airwaves was limited by law. only those relative few who were licensed would beallowed to broadcast. these licensees of "scarce" frequencies, however, would be deemed as trustees for thepublic and therefore regulated according to the "public interest, convenience, and necessity."46this regulatory scheme grew through the 1960s to incorporate various requirements on each broadcaster toserve its local community. it required stations to provide access to candidates for federal elective office;47 toprovide equal opportunities to opposing candidates for the use of the station's facilities ("equal time");48 to provideits lowest unit charge for political advertising;49 to air contrasting viewpoints on controversial issues of publicimportance;50 to ascertain the local needs and interests and to design programming aimed at meeting thoseascertained needs,51 including those of minority audiences;52 to air news and public affairs programs;53 to havesome prime time available for nonnetwork programs;54 to refrain from airing obscenity,55 indecent language,56lotteries,57 fraudulent programming,58 or too many commercials;59 and to concern themselves with many otherregulations considered to be in the public interest.these requirements were far more stringent than those applicable to newspapers, under the theory that aslicensees of scarce radio frequencies, broadcasters must operate under a regime where the public's interest isparamount.60 in the newspaper business, on the other hand, the editorial discretion of the publisher is the primarylegal consideration.61 while the scarcity theory has been seriously questioned by many, it is still the applicable lawtoday.cable television. as cable television grew from the hilltops in rural areas to the wiring of towns and cities,local jurisdictions were called upon to franchise cable operators' uses of the streets and rights of way. thesefranchises were often exclusive, whether de jure or de facto. once an operator obtained a franchise, it was onlyrarely that a locality granted another franchise for the same area, even if competitors knocked on the door. again,like the monopoly distribution media described above, franchising authorities exerted certain regulatory controlsover the franchisees.62 at first these included rate regulation; later, and particularly after rate regulation waspreempted at the federal level,63 franchising authorities imposed other public interest obligations on the cableoperators, which at times took the form of payments to the city for noncommunicationsrelated activities.private carriage. a third type of media entity gained prominence during the 1970sšprivate users of thespectrum and, eventually, private wirebased facilities providers. while spectrum users had to obtain licenses andwere still subject to public interest regulation, the burdens were minimal and technical in nature. primarily, theseentities were treated under the private model of regulation, left to use the medium for the purpose for which it wasgranted (i.e., a trucking company could obtain frequencies for twoway radiotelephone communications but couldnot use them for nonbusiness purposes and definitely could not "broadcast" on them).64the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury41the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.storage media. records, tapes, and disks, like print media, have been subject to the "private" model ofregulationšapplication of antitrust and other laws generally applicable to all businesses.65 while the governmentdoes not directly regulate, it can potentially impact the production and distribution of these media through large orstrategic purchases of selected titles. thus far, however, government purchases of these media are mainly throughnormal library procedures.66receptionat the scarcity stage, the law of reception was primarily concerned with integrity of the respective systems ofcommunication. with respect to telephony, at&t retained through its tariffs and its regulatory deal the ability torestrict any foreign attachment to its facilities. this went so far as excluding plastic book covers for the yellowpages directory and cups on handsets to prevent others from hearing a conversation. (for the latter, called a"hushaphone," it was possible to obtain appellate court reversal of the fcc's enforcement of at&t's tariffsunder the determination that if something is beneficial and not publicly detrimental, it could be added.)67a second major battleground during the 1950s and 1960s was the use of community cable television (catv)antennas to improve reception of nearby television stations. the fcc flipflopped on its attitude toward catvbut eventually held that it needed to be regulated as ancillary to the commission's power over broadcasting.68 in1968 the supreme court held that cable systems were enhancers of the reception mechanism for television, ratherthan rebroadcasters, for the purposes of the copyright laws.69 the commission then proceeded to regulate thesereception enhancers so as to prevent importation of certain distant television stations or to unduly fragment theaudiences of local stations servicing a particular area.70other regulatory decisions affected reception, such as the fcc's decisions selecting a particular system forcolor television71 and congress's requirement that television sets include uhf channels.72 the color televisionepisode was an example of the government setting a standard: some in the industry win, some lose, but thedetermination is made by the government.summary of stage 1in sum, the period of the 1920s to the 1970s was one of regulation in the telecommunications businessaccording to the touchstone of the communications actšthe "public interest, convenience, and necessity." themajor question, in each case, was, what was the "public interest"? this standard, according to the supreme court,was a supple instrument for guiding the industries in periods of rapid technological change.73 nevertheless, it wasadmittedly vague. thus, the agenda was essentially set by the lawyers, who would argue as to how far this vagueand lofty standard should or could extend before it exceeded the bounds of regulatory authority or the limits of thefirst amendment.in addition, the antitrust laws were used to restrict economic abuses and to promote access to bottlenecks.through consent decrees, the justice department and courts served as a kind of regulator of the movie andtelephone equipment industries. analogous regulation also appeared in other contexts, such as the fair use doctrinein copyright.finally, state, local, and private parties enforced other applicable regulatory regimes. governments had manylevers to pull and buttons to push in shaping the form and substance of the communications infrastructure. theseincluded direct regulation, governmental investments, research grants, lowinterest loans, tax incentives, and eventhe bully pulpit.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury42the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.despite the logic and general agreement that the public interest was the paramount consideration, this generalregulatory regime began to unravel in the 1970s (with certain prior indications of problems well before that).scarcity was questioned both technologically and philosophically. a deregulatory mood swept the country,symbolized by the election of jimmy carter as president. regulatory systems, such as trucking and airlines, aswell as telecommunications, were seen as less efficient than they would be under competition. there was a sensethat a new approach would resolve the country's regulatory interests better than a cumbersome, bureaucratic, andfailing system. but most particularly, there were significant technological breakthroughs in microwave, broadbandcommunications, and computerization that challenged the natural monopolies, oligopolies, and technologicalunderpinnings of scarcity.stage 2: abundance and competitionin each of the affected industrial sectors under review, the key industrial elements became abundant,competitive, or both, creating the need for a new regulatory paradigm. mostly, this process became manifest in the1970s, strong in the 1980s, and perhaps excessive by the 1990s. i will look at each sector individually, pointingout, where appropriate, the parallels among industrial sectors.productioncompared to the distribution media, the production elements of the communications process were essentiallycompetitive even during the "scarcity" stage. but by the 1970s, developments in these industries created newlevels of competition and commensurate regulatory responses.motion pictures. we begin with the motion picture industry. the paramount decree was adopted just astelevision became a consumer product. with the steady increase in viewership of television, the film industrysuffered box office declines for a while. but as the studios (1) sold movies to television as a new window for theirproducts and (2) moved into the production of television programming, they saw a resurgence in their businesses(owen and wildman, 1992).74 with more outlets (theater and television), there arose more production entities.talent agencies, independent producers, and syndicators all added levels of production entities for both film andtelevision. as new windows arose, with pay television, pay cable, and videocassette tapes, still more entitiesentered the businesses, many of which also produced film, television, and tape. the advent of increasingcompetition for production, characterized by the independent television and film producer, created an environmentof competition. this in turn led to a reintegration at the edges of the new media. paramount and mca jointlyowned the usa cable network. other motion picture companies began to own other outlets, such as the disneychannel. 20th century fox was heavily involved in film, television, and videotape production. cbs tried the filmbusiness for a while but was unsuccessful. vestron, an early leader in the videotape business, also tried but failedin the film business.the premiere case75 of the early 1980s was the final vestige of stage 1 antitrust regulation. the majorstudios, buoyed by the trend toward reintegration and the governmental attitude of relaxed enforcement ofantitrust laws, entered into an arrangement whereby the studios would provide their best movies to their jointlyowned and operated premiere pay cable network. the court determined that the studios were prima facie violativeof the antitrust laws. the fledgling network was disbanded, but the film and television production entities havesince become more andthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury43the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more integrated. the paramount decree has become all but a dead letter, and economic regulation has becomeanathema in the film industry.for whatever reason, the expanded world of television appears to be producing a diet of more violent andsexual programming. public reaction to this has taken the form of calls for content controls to minimize violentprogramming. but even here the call for regulation has recognized a competitive paradigm in production ratherthan stage 1type content controls at the production levels. for violent programming the calls have been to rateprograms, a measure aimed at enhancing consumer information instead of restricting output. another possibility isto require a chip in the receiving apparatus so that the receiving home can edit objectionable programming. thesemeasures, then, are aimed at enhancing competition and markets, consumer choice, and freedom of individuals toreceive access to a diverse array of products.copyright. the production of information enhanced by the copyright laws has also seen greater competitionand reduced regulation in recent times. fair use applications of the copyright laws became less available afterpassage of the 1976 copyright act amendments, which set forth a set of guidelines for the doctrine and expandedthe bundle of rights contained in an author's claim to ownership of his or her original works of expression.76 thishas resulted in greater use of contracts, a classic marketplace mechanism, as a means for determining the rightsand responsibilities of owners and users of copyrightable material. in the field of cable television, one of themainstays of compulsory license, cable's carriage of local television signals, was altered by new provisionsrequiring cable operators to obtain "retransmission consent" from the owner of those signals.77computers. the paradigm of competition also manifested itself in the unregulated computer industry. ibmfaced competition not only from other manufacturers of mainframes and large topdowntype computers but alsofrom clone manufacturers, apple, and others. as computer technology became smaller and cheaper, moving to theminicomputer to the microcomputer, competition grew in all aspects and levels of the industry. indeed, theindustry is a metaphor for the whole era in telecommunications regulation: increasing competition, less regulation.distribution mediathe heavily regulated distribution media saw the most dramatic paradigm shift in economic structure andregulation.telephony. first, two sets of decisions beginning in the late 1960s signaled the decomposition of at&t'smonopoly. the decisions freeing the terminal equipment market from regulation are described below in the"reception" section. the other decision was to allow competition to at&t in the intercity, longdistancemarkets.78 this determination was essentially inevitable as a result of the advent of microwave and satellitetransmission technologies. microwaves allowed signals to be transported cheaply by lineofsight relays over largedistances. the long lines of old became short waves. costs declined rapidly, and innovative entrepreneurs such aswilliam mcgowan of mci saw some openings.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury44the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.long distance. after the fcc allowed private entities to use microwave frequencies above 890 mhz to buildtheir own private transmission facilities,79 at&t filed tariffs setting discounts for large users. but these wereinflexible tariffs, and mci sought to customize transmission bandwidth for large customers over its owncompetitive facilities. in 1969 the fcc allowed mci to build a line from chicago to st. louis.80 later, itdetermined that competitors need not show the need for a new service in order to obtain a license as a specializedmicrowave common carrier to compete with at&t for longdistance business.81 mci eventually won the abilityto offer switched longdistance service,82 and others, such as southern pacific railroad, followed with nationallongdistance networks of their own (which became sprint). the flood of competition meant not only an open,competitive market for large users, who could pick and choose telecommunications providers and the types ofservice offerings they might want, but also competition and lower rates for the average subscriberša sacrosanctmarket for the internal crosssubsidies contained in the regulatory regime of the scarcity stage.satellites. domestic satellites, at the same period of the early 1970s, won an "open skies" decision by thefcc.83 as long as they were legally, technically, and financially qualified, private entities could own and operate acommunications satellite. here, the government again moved to the competitive paradigm. the domestic satellitebusiness would be a business, competitive with wireline services but free of many of the regulatory hamstringsinherent in the common carriage of old. the 22,400 feet to and from the satellite that each signal had to travelmade distances on earth insignificant. "long distance" became a misnomer. the satellite carriers, who werealready competitive in the sense of the open skies decision, also found increasing competitionšfirst fromresellers of satellite transponders, who were deregulated by the fcc,84 and then from decisions allowing privatecompetition to intelsat on the international stage.85local loop. as the interexchange and terminal equipment parts of the telecommunications network becamecompetitive and deregulated, the last frontier for competition was the heavily regulated local loop. even here,competition has emerged in recent years (entman, 1992). two cellular franchises were granted for each market,one to local wireline carriers and one to competitors.86 now, after many years of building, selling, and trading,culminating in at&t's purchase of the mccaw systems, the cellular business is not only competitive but alsomost formidable. newer competitors are on the horizon, whether they come in the form of a third cellular licensein each market, specialized mobile services, new personal communications services (pcss),87 or other, evennewer technologies.furthermore, the reduced costs of fiber optic transmission, and fcc orders requiring interconnection to localexchange facilities,88 have also made alternative carriers at the local level an economically viable and burgeoningbusiness. as cable television systems enter the local telecommunications business, with fiber backbones andbroadband connections to 65 percent of the country, and as pcss become a reality, these trends are only going tocontinue. thus, even the heavily regulated local loop is beginning to enter the next stage of rapid competition andderegulation.television, cable television, and multichannel distribution. the competition phenomenon hit equally hardin the television delivery media. the number of local television stations steadily increased over the last fourdecades. this, coupled with the advent of cable television as a common delivery mechanism, has resulted in halfthe country's viewers having at least 20 channels available to them and over 40 percent with at least 30 channels.89with the increasing number of signalsthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury45the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(over 80 national networks90), the fcc felt less obligated to regulate each one closely. indeed, former fccchairman mark fowler called television a "toaster with pictures" and proceeded to "unregulate" as much as hecould during the reagan administration. this attitude received a healthy boost by the cable act of 1984,deregulating cable to a great measure.cable television's exclusive franchises have also been subject to several new competitors and challenges.wireless cable (a compilation of multipoint microwave distribution channels) has finally entered the fray, anddirect broadcasting satellites, long heralded but nonexistent until now, will at long last pose still another newthreat to the multichannel delivery monopoly held by cable operators. meanwhile, significant legal challenges tothe local franchising monopoly are being waged both by upstart cable operators91 and telephone companies.92 herethe first amendment, which was written as a prohibition against government infringements of freedom ofcommunication, is being used to forge a wedge by industrial companies into a distribution business, with broadranging consequences.93receptionreception devices and processes are becoming more important, for regulatory purposes, during thederegulatory era. the more responsibilities and choices that can be shifted to the consumer or reception end of theprocess, the less regulation is necessary or appropriate at the production, transmission, or distribution ends. thus,the fcc and others are looking to creating greater choice and control at the user's discretion. this thirst to shift theregulatory burden to the consumer is being aided by advances in technology that allow for greater user control andtargeting.terminal equipment. the fcc broke at&t's monopolization of terminal equipment on the bell system inthe carterfone case in 1968.94 there, relying on an obscure precedent from the 1950s, the commission allowedcarterfone to interconnect its device to the bell network on the grounds that it would not be physically detrimentalto the network and could enhance consumers' choices. so long as it was privately beneficial without being publiclydetrimental, the foreign attachment could not be excluded.this decision opened up the terminal equipment market and laid the groundwork for the commission'sdecision in computer inquiry ii.95 there the agency declared that customer premises equipment was to becompetitive and therefore completely deregulated. the sole area of regulation was the commission's equipmentregistration rules, aimed at preventing harmful interference from such devices.96 the ensuing terminal equipmentbusiness is now an open and competitive one, subject to only minimal regulations.the at&t divestiture proceeding in the mid1980s prevented the divested bell operating companies fromentering into the equipment manufacturing business,97 but this preclusion is now actively under review bycongress and the courts.privacy. the law of privacy has grown from a law review article in 1890 (brandeis and warren, 1890), toprivate tort law in the states, to state constitutional and statutory provisions,98 to, eventually in the 1970s, a federalapproach.99 the federal laws, however, tend to follow industrial sectors, such as creditreporting businesses,100financial records,101 cable television,102 and others.103 the united states has thus far rejected the broad acrosstheboard regulatory approach that certain european countries have adopted (reidenberg, 1992a,b). typically,these federal laws will restrict the industrial company from maintaining certain files beyond a useful time period,will afford the subject individual with rights to ascertain what information is collected and maintained, tothe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury46the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.correct errors, and to have the information used only for the collected purposes, unless permission is granted forother uses.thus, in addition to their place in the constellation of human and (implicit) constitutional rights, privacyprotections are one means of assuring individuals that their use of the information infrastructure will be secure.they have always involved balancing against other rights and interests and therefore a kind of regulation of theuse of information.104 while the timetable for regulation and deregulation is later than with the distribution media,there is discussion today of moving to a marketplace solution to some of the privacy issues intelecommunications.105reception of indecent programs and messages. the law of indecency took shape in the late 1970s under asupreme court decision that established a nonscarcity basis for regulation. in fcc v. pacifica foundation,106 thecourt held that the nature of the broadcast medium, intruding as it does into the home, allowed the federalgovernment to impose "indecency"107 restrictions on broadcast transmissions that are more stringent than those forprint media.but when prosecutors wanted to apply the same standards to cable broadcasts, the courts took a contrary,more relaxed approach. because subscribers brought the signals into the home voluntarily, and because electroniclockboxes and other means of blocking signals were available to subscribers, the lower courts overturnedregulatory attempts to block transmission of indecent programming over the newer technologies.108summary of stage 2in sum, spurred by technological innovations that expanded the opportunities to communicate over multiplepaths, the second regulatory paradigm saw a perceived if not actual end of scarcity, an abundance of channels,frequencies, bandwidth, and competitors. the rationale for specialized economic regulation for thetelecommunications industry became weaker and weaker, while the ideological winds of deregulation blewstronger and stronger. the result, beginning in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has been a period of strongderegulation in almost all telecommunications sectors, increasingly intense competition, and new economicrelationships.nevertheless, the revolution of the newer competitive paradigm has not been absolute. strong vestiges109 ofthe first paradigm remain in the regulation of television (new requirements for educational children's television),reregulation of the cable television industry, continued maintenance of the modified final judgment in restrictingbell operating companies from entering certain lines of business, extensive regulations imposed on thosecompanies to assure that competitors can interconnect into the local exchange, protections of privacy interests, andcalls for a renewed definition of the public interest in the field of communications regulation and policy.why can't the legislators get it straight and move all the way into the new paradigm? some would faultspecial interest groups, industries each wanting their fair advantage, consumer groups wanting goods and servicesat unreasonably low rates. i would suggest something different. the thesis of this paper is that each paradigmproperly has vestiges that remain during the next stage. but in this case the competitive paradigm is only atemporary stage, a kind of adolescence with certain traits that will continue throughout life.the technological, political, economic, sociological, and scientific trends of the new age of complexityrequire a broader, more holistic approach to the subject matter. the second paradigm of competition met morecarefully the goals of efficiency and liberty. the agenda, set by the economists, cleared away the underbrush of"externalities" that are not resolved by economic solutions. but in the 1990s this approach is simply too shallowfor the issues and problems ahead. most particularly, it does not resolve distributional problems adequately andslights the values ofthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury47the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.equality, community, and participation. as we perfect the solutions of the second paradigm of abundance andcompetition, we are already late for a newage train moving out of the station carrying a variety of new trends andperspectives as its passengers.the new complexityin considering the applicability of the earlier regulatory schemes, one needs to explore the environment forwhich the regulations were designed. as i have detailed above, the lawyerly governmental intervention approachto regulation contained in the communications act of the new deal was established in an era of scarcity oftelecommunications resources and players. the public interest standard was designed to address goals ofcommunity, equity, and efficiency, while at the same time respecting liberties of communications.as the environment changed, as communications channels became more plentiful, and as many new entrantscame to offer communications services, the regulatory regime changed to a procompetitive, deregulatory milieu.this served primarily the goals of efficiency (as economists asked, what is competitive? what is efficient?), andliberty (freeing individuals to act as they chose, moving toward a laissezfaire approach).today, however, the environment is more rugged and complex than envisioned by the legal or economictheories of the prior regulatory ages. while remnants of the past paradigms will remain with us, and rightfully so,this new environment calls for a different approach to the government's interaction with the informationinfrastructure.technological trendsforemost among the drivers of change in this century are the tremendous technological changes. thetechnological trends that moved us from the first to the second paradigms were essentially those that madecommunications faster, shorter, cheaper, and better. these were the continual improvements on the processes ofcommunication at the production, distribution, and reception stages. transistors, microprocessors, microwaves,and even lasers and fiber optics all contributed to these advances.the more current technological trends that are creating digitization and convergence, however, are creating adifference in kind more than of degree. by breaking voice, video, and data all into 1s and 0s, digital technologiesare breaking down the ability to segment communications into neat regulatory cubbyholes. as nicholasnegroponte suggests, eventually all transmissions will be bit radiation, which can be shaped at the reception endinto the desired format (negroponte, 1993).this digitization, then, is creating a convergence of the production, media, and reception levels of thecommunications process. at the production stage, the movement to multimedia will further interrelate the voice,video, and data. at the distribution level, these digital bits can be packaged and sent through any pipes anddecoded at the other end perfectly. and at the reception end, the converged component televisioncablecomputerwill produce the product in the form desired by the user.a second change in kind rather than degree is around the corner: the movement to broadband interactivity.that is, the telephone and computer networks have always been interactive, but emerging information services andinteractive television are creating a new function at the reception end of broadband telecommunications: user/receiver interaction and video return transmission. even the smallest user, the individual in his/her home, can sendmovies upstream.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury48the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this interactivity creates a new dynamism in the nature of information and its relation to the communicationsprocess.that is, in the earlier stages, power and intelligence resided first at the center and moved downstream. it thenmoved steadily toward the extremities to the point that intelligence in the nodes, the terminal equipment, or evenoffnetwork is now common. as we approach stage 3, the power and intelligence are turning upstream. the userhas control and ownership of the remote control, the telephone, the television set, and the computer terminal.congress has turned its attention now to the new settop boxes that will interface with the next generation of videoon demand. and i would suggest that the consumer's ability to own or lease inside wiring will and should extendto outside wiringšthat is, the broadband drop to the curb. (still at issue, however, is the interface between thedrop and the fibers at the pedestal.)as competing fibers to the curb are economically feasible, these electronic driveways demonstrate this newbidirection of power in the network. similarly, software agents, as well as filters, send intelligence in bothdirections, adding multidirection and complexities to the communications networks of the next era.economic trendsthese technological developments and other economic trends are creating two overriding phenomena: (1) thecommoditization of information (payperminute ''transactional television" and information services on computernetworks) and (2) the paradoxical convergence and fragmentation of economic entities.communications networks are narrowing the continuum between advertising and consumption. that is, iftoday an entity advertises on television, it expects results at the store, or possibly by a telephone call. homeshopping networks and computerized shopping on online networks are moving the locus of the transaction to thetelecommunications network. as interactive broadband networks are created, with video on demand, the ability toadvertise and sell in the same process will be heightened.producers and distributors of information try to find multiple revenue streams for the supply of information.for example, programmers seek advertising and subscriber revenues for the same program, as cable televisionnetworks and commercial computer networks such as prodigy currently receive. cable television is tending toward ala carte network ordering and greater use of the payperview channels; prodigy has moved to a basic rate withaddon charges for extra services. strategic alliances, acquisitions, and business marriages raise fears of new levelsof concentration and vertical integration; at the same time, successful enterprises are arising from leanentrepreneurial ventures and cottage businesses.users will also likely increase their demand for communications services in many ways. for example,edward shortliffe in his paper, "the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructurefor health care," in this volume, highlights the increased demand likely from health care institutions as a result ofchanging policy initiatives in that sector.sociological and organizational trendsthe convergence and fragmentation trends, in fact, are more than economic. they occur in broader contextsand account, i believe, for another force that warrants close scrutiny.it is clear that the general populace is less trusting of its traditional intermediary institutions such as politicalparties and candidates, journalists, educators, religious leaders, and many other mediating institutions in thecurrent social environment. along with that distrust comes a technologythe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury49the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that allows the citizen to bypass many of those intermediaries. with the new transactional telecommunications,one can work, learn, shop, bank, pray, and even vote at home. the ability to bypass the traditional gatekeeper, to"disintermediate," coupled with increasing information overload, creates new pressures on older intermediaryinstitutions to alter their gatekeeping functions by either adapting to the new information environment or becomingobsolete and giving way to new ones.that is, there will remain a need for effective new or relegitimized old intermediaries. theseneointermediaries will have to act as agents, filters, and integrators. they will connect people and informationacross space and time, serving the functions of knowledge navigation, information analysis, and systemintegration. these functions will move in all directions, working for the individual in an informationabundantworld and as analyzers, information differentiators, and audience integrators for the entity trying to reach or targetindividuals. changes in the functions of mediation may be the most significant of the nontechnological trends withrespect to impact on the communications and information milieu.political trendsdespite the movement against politics as usual, against taxes, and against big government, citizens aredemanding greater meaning from their governments and political institutions. there is a longing on both the leftand the right for a return to traditional democratic values and, with some, to orthodoxy. some would characterizeour current era's "green movement" and its attention to sustainable development as an indication of the need torecede from the model of the marketplace as the operative religion of the world's political and economic spheres.in the communications regulatory realm, passage of the cable television reregulatory legislation over the vetoof then president bush, regardless of how one looks at the merits of the act, was an indication that purelyderegulatory, competitive solutions were no longer politically sufficient for the country's problems. in thecommunications field, i would suggest, the regulatory regime will have to address other core values besidesefficiency. these would include liberty, equity, community, and participatory access, if not others as well. themethods for doing so, on the other hand, will most likely have to be different from either of the precedingparadigms.scientific trendswhile one might consider scientific trends in the same breath as technological, they are not the same. the newsciences of chaos and complexity, drawing on teachings from quantum physics, modern evolutionary theory,ecology, and some of the newer thinking in economics, could be instructive to our thinking about new paradigmsin regulation.110one interesting approach to these topics is some recent work on coevolving complex adaptive systems. i willnot expand on that here other than to suggest that in our exploration for a new paradigm for regulating theinformation infrastructure, we should consider what that model might teach us.111 specifically, it recognizes thatthere is a need to look at the crude whole rather than individual specialties in a vacuum. it suggests that systemscoevolve, affecting each other as each adapts to the others. it recognizes that adaptive systems have memories,methods for prediction, feedback systems, and abilities to change to adapt to new conditions. it requires freedomfor chaotic behavior but does not necessarily rely on invisible hands. indeed, it bears mentioning that humanorganizations differ significantly from biological ones by the ability to apply intentionality: one can impact howsomething evolves in a number of ways.112the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury50the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the science of complexity also addresses selforganizing systems. in the communications world theemergence of the internet is an interesting example of a selforganizing, complex, adaptive system and oneengendering a great deal of attention as a possible model for future networks.the science of ecology is also forming the basis for broader thinking about human activity,113 for example,the green movement, social ecology, and political references to sustainable development. in the next section isuggest some of the major issues we must address in the government's interaction with the production,distribution, and reception levels of the communications process. perhaps they will show the way to a newcommunications landscape, conducive to a coevolution of technology, applications, and regulations to "sustain"our democratic value system.attention to scientific models is understandable in light of the current period of convergence and upheaval.the traditional boundaries of technology, of functionality, or regulatory regimes are dissolving. as monroe pricesuggests, "convergence constitutes the abolition of given categories and the invention, perhaps, of new ones. that[is] what scientists – have done: question the existing categories and reconceptualize the world unburdened bythe musty thinking of the scholastics."114 these mergers, combinations, and convergences may transform thecommunications process and the nature of their regulation.at the same time, we need to keep in mind our own ideology, a faith in the democratic process. thus, aspolicymakers look at the evolving environment surrounding the information infrastructure, they will also want toact so as to foster democratic values.toward a new regulatory paradigm for telecommunicationsregulationmuch of each of the regulatory schemes of stages 1 and 2 is still with us today. indeed, one proponent of thecompetitive paradigm suggests that the current regime is more regulatory than the past, in an effort to manage thetransition to competition.115 in any event, there is both extensive regulation currently and a strong consensus tomove to a more competitive environment for the production, delivery, and reception of communications in thefuture. the question is this: is the newer competitive paradigm the goal that has yet to be achieved, as kellogg etal. (1992) suggest, or do we want to return to a more publicinterestoriented regulation, as others long for? orshould the country turn to a still never approach to govern our most important political commerce, the delivery ofinformation?to answer that question, to find the regulatory religion of tomorrow, we have to have a vision not of thehighway but of where the highway is headed. we have to have a better concept of the environment through whichthe highway is winding and where the highway leads. we need to complement our technological visions withscenarios of our society and of our democracy.furthermore, to have a vision of the society, we need to understand the nature of the coevolving systemssurrounding the communications processes, which include, at the least, interactions among (1) the newtechnologies, (2) applications of those technologies, and (3) regulations impacting them. as each interacts,changes, and evolves, it affects each of the others in sometimes unpredictable ways.for example, in the area of advanced or highdefinition television, the technologies advanced during the1980s from an analog model to a digital one. the applications for the technology thereby changed from betterpictures to a much more flexible, scalable television, multiple channel delivery, and other uses convergingtelevision with computing. furthermore, the regulatory process (e.g., spectrum allocation and standards setting)also evolved as the changes in technology and applications took shape. finally, the technology progressed in acertain direction when the fccthe search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury51the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.specified its criteria for the new advanced television system. each of these areas, then, is impacted by the othertwo and by other influences as well.it is important, therefore, to recognize this very dynamic process and to adopt intelligent policies, in thatlight, to foster societal and democratic values. policymakers in the governmental, business, and nonprofit worldscan then design buttons and levers to adjust the landscape so that these sectors grow and adapt in the general formdesired.governmental policy tools can come in the form of financial and tax incentives; research and developmentgrants; subsidies on the demand and/or supply side; governmental loans and purchases;116 standards setting; directstructural or behavioral regulation at the federal, state, or local levels; and perhaps new forms or methods forcreating a proper atmosphere for democratic applications within the communications and information sectors.these policies will certainly have to be flexible to allow the communications networks to selforganize,evolve, and adapt to new policies (such as health care initiatives) and other new demands. they will have toreflect the movement to a new regulatory stage, from scarcity to abundance, and now to complexity.major issues aheadif the agenda for regulatory stage 1 was essentially set by the lawyers (what is in the public interest?) andstage 2 by the economists (what is efficient?), to whom do we turn for setting the agenda of stage 3? mysuggestion is that the scientists will help in providing models for analyzing the environment but not in setting theagenda for regulatory action. the new agenda setters for stage 3 will likely be the political scientists (what isdemocratic?). that is, while regulators will want to allow growth and development in every sector of thetelecommunications/information infrastructure, they will also need to judge and address them according totraditional democratic values. like the environmental movement, in the face of rapid growth in thecommunications and information sectors, the new information environmentalists will want to assure "sustainabledemocracy," or the retention of democratic values and nondiminution of our most important human andinformation resources today and for future generations.while this paper cannot suggest the specific policies to adopt at this time, it can suggest some of theunderlying values and approaches we have traditionally wanted in an information infrastructure to serve broaderdemocratic goals. correlating to the values of efficiency, liberty, equality, community, and participatory access,the approaches might include: creation of an efficient, reliable, adequate, flexible, and accessible infrastructure; promotion of communications and privacy rights and responsibilities; recognition of intellectual property interests; concern for equality and equity, particularly with respect to an evolving concept of universal service; and maintenance of public space for community discourse and as a public resource, with diverse andequitable access to that space.following are some key issues for consideration in designing a new approach to foster these goals and valuesin the networked telecomputing society of the next decade. under each element of the communications process, ibriefly address what i consider to be the three most significant issues in creating a communications landscape tosustain a democratic value system.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury52the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productionthe three most significant issues in the production realm are (1) the regime for intellectual property, (2) theuse of government to enforce content controls, and (3) the creation of public space and governmental support forprogramming and software.intellectual propertythe first issue is perhaps the most vexing of the legal issues of the new age. it places the needs and interestsof creators, authors, and inventors to protect and exploit their works, on the one hand, against the interest ofsociety in general to have access to a wide diversity of information. this tension, it could be argued, places thevalues of liberty, property, and efficiency against those of equality, community, and participation. withdigitization and convergence, the issues become blurred in several respects.first, copyright is premised on reducing an expression to tangibility. the new uses of the informationinfrastructure enable works to be fluid. potentially, they can be manipulated, reordered, and commingled fromdiverse sources. intellectual property laws of the future will have to contend with the need for attribution ofauthorship, compensation of partial authors, and the inability to control distribution channels of a work.second, multimedia programs are information gluttons, calling for thousands of works in order to be true andeffective. for example, should a historical multimedia program contain only the writings and pictures that areavailable through the public domain or through contractual agreement? if so, as the current copyright law wouldappear to require, the program itself may have to distort the nature of the historical point. for example, recentdisputes over the ownership of martin luther king, jr.'s, papers could result in a multimedia program on the civilrights movement to be largely devoid of dr. king's original works. while such a result is expected in the currentworld of intellectual property rights, it could distort the teaching tools of the next generation of students.these and other similar issues in intellectual property suggest that authors and major users will have to workout some form of group or agency licensing, technological attribution system, compulsory licensing, or othermethod of compensating authors, perhaps without their complete control of the distribution of their works.content controlswith respect to content controls, the proliferation of programming would suggest that some newprogramming reaching the market will be beneath the current standards of good taste and decency (in terms ofsexual content or violence). with the consumer's ability to control programming on the receiving end, however,the need to suppress speech at the production end should be minimized. thus, with the abundance of sources at theproduction end and additional distributional outlets, there is likely to be greater amounts of objectionableprogramming. but with the attendant movement toward deregulation and less scarcity, there is less thegovernment can or will do about it. on the other hand, there should be more options available to the consumer tocontrol information at the terminal end.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury53the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public space and informationthe third issue is the need for and willingness of the government to support communities (geographical andcommunities of interest) by the creation of public spaces and substantive products (programming, software) forconsumption within that public space. this issue is also thought of as the next manifestation of the publicbroadcasting, or public telecommunications, concept.traditionally, libraries allowed the public access to information that was otherwise available only to thosewho could afford to purchase each book. what are the libraries in the future age of commoditized informationbits? how does one connect to them, as opposed to accessing the physical collections of public book libraries?who pays and where does the information get delivered?the future of the public broadcasting system is also an issue. as the distribution systems explode, will themarket fulfill the programming needs heretofore met by public broadcasting? how do we measure market failuresfor public service programming? should programming be subsidized? if so, which kinds? who creates it? forwhat media? the current public broadcasting system is, of course, centered on the broadcast medium, wherebroadcasters are also producers. what should the future public telecommunications system look like, at what cost,and to whom? to what extent should the system extend beyond the broadcasting/video media?distributionthe issues for the distribution system revolve around the creation of an adequate communicationsinfrastructure, the ability to gain access to the distribution system, and the impact that the infrastructure has oncommunities. the first issue addresses the value of efficiency, which today is usually equated with policies forcompetition. these policies, however, will also have to consider the values of equality and community, for thepublic is unlikely to tolerate a system that does not allow all to participate or that atomizes the country to thedetriment of our community institutions.infrastructurein the expanding global information environment, the united states already has a varied, diverse, andcomplex communications system that combines switched narrowband, broadband, wire, fiber, and radio paths tothe end user. from this system to the vision of a nationwide (indeed, worldwide) switched broadband interactivevideoon demand system will take significant planning, patience, and determination. no doubt the u.s.communications and information highway is headed in that direction with only limited government involvement.but the public will have to take an active role in helping to shape significant elements of that distribution system.the regulatory principles of free flow of information, interconnection, access, diversity, and interoperabilityappear to be central to the democratic development and efficient evolution of the new international informationenvironment. at this point in time, the evolution of the internetšperhaps the most interesting and significantdevelopment of the 1990s in this fieldšhas seen a push by government in the initial research and development,subsidies, and, arguably, in creating incentives but little in the way of direct regulation. as the government beginsto pull away from its subsidization, and as access to the internet becomes more prevalent and important, theseissues should become more acute and visible.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury54the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.universal servicefurthermore, social and governmental institutions will have to determine what "universal service" meansbeyond regular dial tone. how should that definition change over time and in different environments? what itemsshould be considered essential and subject to controls to assure that most people have access? the public will haveto determine how much it wants to invest directly in a telecommunications system that should (but may not)benefit the country economically and socially. what do we want to see the system do, such as provideeducational, health care, citizenship, and cultural services? to whom and where should those services bedelivered, and at what cost to whom?communityhow do we design a system that will allow all citizens a form of editorial autonomy in the transmission andreception of communications and still have a society that recognizes value in community (however defined), incohesiveness, in participatory democracy, and in equity? the network of networks comprising the informationinfrastructure will coevolve with the advance of telecommunications technologies and the software applicationsfor which the distribution system will be used. the government's very difficult role will be to impact theseapplications in a positive direction while still allowing the flexibility for growth, adaptability, and sustainability.receptionfinally, we come to the issues associated with the reception end of the communications process. here wemight focus on the individual's interest in liberty and participation. that suggests the creation of an environmentthat empowers the individual to use the infrastructure, with the attendant benefit that the infrastructure willadvance as more individuals become literate and intimate with it.user controlthe new environment surely will promote the ability of users to exert control over the communications andinformation coming into the terminal location. although the equipment industry is essentially private and subjectonly to competitive and safety restraints, regulation may be appropriate to empower the user to have a choice ofequipment and of content over the network. this may take the form of violence chips, touchtone phones, orsignaling system 7 compatible equipment. more importantly, it may take the form of protecting against dominanceof the settop device that allows one to navigate the myriad information sources available on the new electronicnetworks, or even extending the residential users' ownership of wiring to the curb.privacysimilarly, government will likely need to remain involved in the protection of individuals' privacy interests.but the extent of those privacy rights (as opposed to comodified privacy protections) is unclear. what are thebundle of privacy rights that must be guaranteed to every individual? do they change in different environments?who bears the costs in each situation?the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury55the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information literacyfinally, in order for the individual to be able to use any of the telecommunications goods and services, he orshe will need to be information literate. this is the ability of a citizen to access, analyze, and produce informationfor specific outcomes (aufderheide, 1993); access to the communications process will have to include access interms of literacy as well as facilities and cost. this translates to the need for literacy education and awareness,along with the development of userfriendly technologies, which could be encouraged by government grants andpurchases.conclusionin conclusion, technological, economic, political, scientific, and organizational changes are ushering in a newage of complexity. the selforganizing interconnectedness of the internet, the reverse direction of power in thenetwork, and the convergence and dissolution of boundaries are bringing on a difference in kind more than ofdegree.the future regulatory system for the nation's information infrastructure will need to go beyond theregulatoryderegulatory paradigms of the past and present. it will need to arrive at a new conception of the roles ofgovernments in the evolution of the communications and information environment.the new regime might look to ecological or scientific models to allow the flexibility of the various players toevolve and adapt to each other, to encourage or allow for the creation of neointermediaries, and to relate to theoutside world. more specifically, technologies, applications, and regulations will all coevolve to form the newinformation and communications landscape of tomorrow. governments will be charged with assuring that thatlandscape retains its democratic properties for current and future generations.as u.s. society faces this process, it will have to balance the traditional values that are inherent in ademocracy's political system: liberty, equality, community, efficiency, and participatory access. unlesspolicymakers assess and address that which is undemocratic in the new information environment, these valuescould be endangered. under a new paradigm that fosters these strong values within the evolving internationalinformation environment, we can best attain a fair, efficient, and sustainable balance of private and public goals.acknowledgmentsthe author acknowledges and thanks marjory blumenthal, catherine clark, cameron graham, monroeprice, and tracy westen for their constructive comments and editorial suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper.referencesat&t annual report, 1909.aufderheide, patricia. 1993. media literacy: a report of the national leadership conference on media literacy, the aspen institute wye center, queenstown, maryland, december 7œ9, 1992. communications and society program, aspen institute, washington, d.c.barnouw, erik. 1975. tube of plenty: the evolution of american television. oxford university press, new york. (second edition, 1990.)the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury56the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bollier, d. 1993. the information evaluation: how new information technologies are spurring complex patterns of change. aspeninstitute, washington, d.c.bollier, d. 1994. the promise and perils of emerging information technologies: a report on the second annual roundtable on information technology. aspen institute, washington, d.c.brandeis, louis d., and charles warren. 1890. "the right to privacy," harvard law review 4:193.brenner, d. 1988. "cable television and the freedom of expression," duke law journal 329.brenner, d. 1991. "what about privacy in universal telephone service?" universal telephone service: ready for the 21st century? annualreview of institute for information studies (northern telecom inc. and the aspen institute), queenstown, md.brenner, daniel l. 1992. law and regulation of common carriers in the communications industry. westview press, boulder, colo.bruce, robert r., jeffrey p. cunard, and mark d. director. 1986. from telecommunications to electronic services: a global spectrum ofdefinitions, boundary lines, and structures. butterworths, boston.chiron, stuart z., and lise a. rehberg. 1986. "fostering competition in international communications," federal communications lawjournal 38(1):1œ57.clarke, a. 1945. "extraterrestrial relays: can rocket stations give worldwide radio coverage?" wireless world, vol. li(jan.dec.).cleveland, harlan. 1993. birth of a new world: an open moment for international leadership. josseybass, san francisco.dordick, herbert s. 1986. understanding modern telecommunications. mcgraw hill, new york.duggan, e. 1992. "the future and public broadcasting," the aspen quarterly 4(3):14ff.entman, robert m. 1992. competition at the local loop: policies and issues. aspen institute, washington, d.c.geller, henry. 1991. fiber optics: an opportunity for a new policy? annenberg washington program, communications policy studies,northwestern university, evanston, ill.information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993. the national information infrastructure: agenda for action. information infrastructuretask force, washington, d.c., september 15.kellogg, michael k., john thorne, and peter w. huber. 1992. federal telecommunications law. little, brown, boston.krasnow, erwin g., lawrence d. longley, and herbert a. terry. 1982. the politics of broadcast regulation. 3rd ed. st. martin's press, newyork.lawrence, john shelton, and bernard timberg. 1989. fair use and free inquiry: copyright law and the new media. 2nd ed. ablexpublishing corporation, norwood, n.j.levy, steven. 1992. artificial life: the quest for a new creation. pantheon books, new york.lewin, roger. 1992. complexity: life at the edge of chaos. macmillan publishing company, new york.marx, gary t. 1991. "privacy & technology," whole earth review (winter, 73):90œ95.mccarthy, j. thomas. 1991. the rights of publicity and privacy. c. boardman, new york.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury57the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national cable television association (ncta). 1993. national cable television developments. washington, d.c., november.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1988. ntia telecom 2000: charting the course for a new century.u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.negroponte, n. 1993. "the bit police: will the fcc regulate licenses to radiate bits?" wired mayjune, p. 112.nimmer, melville b., and david nimmer. 1978. nimmer on copyright: a treatise on the law of literacy, musical and artistic property, andthe protection of ideas. 1993 supplement. matthew bender, new york.o'toole, james. 1993. the executive's compass: business and the good society. oxford university press, new york.owen, bruce, and steven s. wildman. 1992. video economics. harvard university press, cambridge, mass.pepper, robert. 1993. "broadcasting policies in a multichannel marketplace," television for the 21st century: the next wave, charlesfirestone, ed. aspen institute, washington, d.c.price, m. 1990. "congress, free speech, and cable legislation: an introduction," cardozo journal of entertainment and communications law8:225.prigogine, i., and isabelle stengers. 1984. order out of chaos: man's new dialogue with nature. bantam books, new york.reidenberg, j. 1992a. "the privacy obstacle course: hurdling barriers to transnational financial services," fordham law review 60:§137.reidenberg, joel r. 1992b. "privacy in the information economy: a fortress or frontier for individual rights?" federal communications lawjournal 44(2):195œ243.reubencooke, w. 1993. "rethinking legal and policy paradigms for television in the 21st century," television for the 21st century: thenext wave, charles firestone, ed. aspen institute, washington, d.c.schmidt, benno c., jr. 1976. freedom of the press vs. public access. praeger, new york.soma, john. 1983. computer technology and the law. mcgrawhill, new york.twentieth century fund task force on public television. 1993. quality time? the report of the twentieth century fund task force onpublic television. twentieth century fund press, new york.vogel, harold l. 1990. entertainment industry economics: a guide for financial analysis. 2nd ed. cambridge university press, new york.waldrop, m. mitchell. 1992. complexity: the emerging science at the edge of order and chaos. simon & schuster, new york.notes1. see, for example, bruce et al. (1986), which suggests several dichotomies such as basic versus enhanced, and facilities versus services. seealso iitf (1993) (hereinafter, agenda for action), which suggets a broader definition that includes regulatory standards and people, as well ashardware, information, and applications.2. see, for example, national broadcasting company v. united states, 319 u.s. 190 (1943) (communications act of 1934 is constitutional;fcc is more than just a traffic cop of the airways).3. see hbo v. federal communications commission, 567 f.2d 9 (d.c.cir.), cert. denied, 434 u.s. 829 (1977).the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury58the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4. actually, the issue of privacy enters at each stage of the communications process. privacy as the disclosure of intimate facts, for example, isproperly viewed as a productionlevel issue and, to a certain extent, privacy could also be considered a distributional issue. for simplicity,however, this paper considers privacy issues as part of "reception".5. four of these values come from the work of james o'toole (see particularly, o'toole, 1993). the fifth value, participation, is the author's.6. see, for example, 47 u.s.c. 326; fairness doctrine report, 102 fcc2d 143 (1985).7. see national citizens committee for broadcasting v. federal communications commission, 436 u.s. 775 (1978).8. see, for example, 47 u.s.c. 312(a)(7), 315(a); cable access rules, 47 u.s.c. §§53132.9. see brenner (1991) and marx (1991), pp. 9095.10. 47 u.s.c. 151.11. see statement of senator robert kerrey, u.s. senate, introducing s. 626, "the electronic library act of 1993," march 22, 1993, incongressional record.12. primer on ascertainment of community problems by broadcast applicants, 27 fcc2d 650 (1971).13. henry v. federal communications commission, 302 f.2d 191 (d.c.cir.), cert. denied, 371 u.s. 821 (1962).14. see federal communications commission v. midwest video corporation, 440 u.s. 689 (1979).15. united states v. midwest video corporation, 406 u.s. 649 (1972).16. see generally, twentieth century fund task force on public television (1993) and duggan (1992).17. 47 u.s.c. 151.18. communications act of 1934, title ii, 47 u.s.c. §§20114.19. national broadcasting company v. united states, 319 u.s. 190 (1943).20. communications act of 1934.21. see united states v. paramount pictures, 334 u.s. 131 (1948).22. telephone equipment, at the periphery of the communications process, could be used in the initiation or reception of communicationsmessages. i consider it in the "production" section of this part of the paper, because it is used first in the initiation of messages. the same istrue of computer manufacturing, discussed below.23. complaint, united states v. western electric company, no. 1749 (d.n.j. jan. 14, 1949). see kellogg et al. (1992) at §4.3.24. united states v. western electric company, 1956 trade cas. (cch) ¶68,246 (d.n.j. 1956), discussed in kellogg et al. (1992) at §4.3.25. in the later "modified final judgment," agreeing to the divestiture of the bell operating companies (bocs) from at&t, themanufacturing of equipment went with the competitive business and was forbidden fruit to the bocs. see united states v. at&t, 552 f.supp.131 (d.d.c. 1982), aff'd sub nom. maryland v. united states, 460 u.s. 1001 (1983).26. national broadcasting company v. united states, 319 u.s. 190 (1943).27. 47 u.s.c. 315(a).28. 18 u.s.c. 1464.29. mayflower broadcasting corporation, 8 fcc 333 (1940).30. report on editorializing by broadcast licensees, 13 fcc 1246 (1949).31. committee to save wefm v. federal communications commission, 506 f.2d 246 (d.c.cir. 1974)(en bane). but see federalcommunications commission v. wncn listeners guild, 450 u.s. 582 (1981)(upholding fcc deregulation of format changes).32. primer on ascertainment of community problems by broadcast applicants, 27 fcc2d 650 (1971); office of communication of the unitedchurch of christ v. federal communications commission, 359 f.2d 994 (d.c.cir. 1966).33. see community access v. federal communications commission, 737 f.2d 74 (d.c.cir. 1984); west coast media (kdig) v federalcommunications commission, 695 f.2d 617 (d.c.cir. 1982), cert. denied, 464 u.s. 816 (1983) (failure to meet promises in public affairs andnews).34. 17 u.s.c. 102ff. see generally, sony corporation of america v. universal city studios, 464 u.s. 4117 (1984); nimmer and nimmer(1978; 1993 supp.).35. 17 u.s.c. 107.36. 17 u.s.c. 111.37. ibm corporation, 687 f.2d 591 (2d cir. 1982); soma (1983) at §4.03; kellogg et al. (1992) at §4.5, n. 7.38. see soma (1983) at §§4.024.18.39. see at&t (1909); kellogg et al. (1992) at §1.3.40. 47 u.s.c. 214.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury59the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.41. 47 u.s.c. 201214; brenner (1992), pp. 1518.42. see louisiana public service commission v. federal communications commission, 476 u.s. 355 (1986); kellogg et al. (1992) at §§2.7.2and 2.11.43. see mts and wats market structure, report and order, 2 fcc rcd. 2953 (1987); brenner (1992), chapter 9.44. see dordick (1986), chapter 4.45. intelsat agreement.46. see red lion broadcasting corporation v. federal communications commission, 395 u.s. 367 (1969); national broadcastingcorporation v. united states, 319 u.s. 190 (1943). but see federal communications commission v. league of women voters of california,468 u.s. 364, n. 11 (1984).47. 47 u.s.c. 312(a)(7).48. 47 u.s.c. 315(a).49. 47 u.s.c. 315(b).50. report on editorializing, supra.51. primer on ascertainment of community problems by broadcast applicants, 27 fcc2d 650 (1971).52. black broadcasting coalition of richmond v. federal communications commission.53. see community access v. federal communications commission, 737 f.2d 74 (d.c.cir. 1984); west coast media (kdig) v. federalcommunications commission, 695 f.2d 617 (d.c.cir, 1982), cert. denied, 464 u.s. 816 (1983) (failure to meet promises in public affairs andnews).54. prime time access rule, 47 cfr §73.658(k).55. 18 u.s.c. 1464.56. federal communications commission v. pacifica foundation, 438 u.s. 726 (1978).57. 18 u.s.c. §1304 (transmission of lottery information prohibited), §1307 (state lotteries exempted). see also united states v. edgebroadcasting company, 113 s.ct. 2696 (1993).58. 18 u.s.c. §1343 (transmission of fraud prohibited).59. see citizens communications center v. federal communications commission, 447 f.2d 1201 (d,c.cir. 1971) at n. 9. see generally,krasnow et al. (1982), chapter 7.60. red lion broadcasting corporation v. federal communications commission, 395 u.s. 367 (1969).61. miami herald v. tornillo, 418 u.s. 241 (1974), for a discussion of the contrast between tornillo and red lion, see schmidt (1976).62. city of los angeles v. preferred communications, 476 u.s. 488 (1986).63. cable act of 1984, 47 u.s.c. §§521ff.64. see 47 cfr §21.1ff; national association of regulatory and utility commissioners v. federal communications commission, 525 f.2d 630(d.c.cir.), cert, denied, 425 u.s. 992 (1976).65. see generally, geller (1991).66. purchases by libraries may affect the production of certain books, tapes, and disks in that without this market certain academic worksmight not be published. both the 1993 national performance review and the agenda for action (iitf, 1993) recognized the federalgovernment's ability to impact the directions of the infrastructure through its purchasing power.67. hushaphone v. united states, 238 f.2d 266 (d.c.cir. 1957).68. united states v. southwestern cable company, 392 u.s. 157 (1968).69. fortnightly corp. v. united artists television, 392 u.s. 390 (1968); teleprompter v. cbs, 415 u.s. 394 (1974).70. see generally, malrite t.v. of new york v. federal communications commission, 652 f.2d 1140 (2d cir. 1981), cert. denied, 454 u.s.1143 (1982) (affirming later deregulation).71. see barnouw (1975), p. 100.72. all channel receiver act, 47 u.s.c. 330. see krasnow et al, (1982), chapter 6.73. federal communications commission v. pottsville broadcasting company, 309 u.s. 134 (1940),74. see also vogel (1990), chapter 1, which shows increasing share of nontheatrical revenues.75. united states v. columbia pictures industry, 507 f.supp. 412 (s.d.n.y, 1980), aff'd f.2d (2d cir. 1981).76. copyright act of 1976, public law no. 94533, 90 stat. 2541, oct. 19, 1976, at new section 107, 17 u.s.c. §107. see lawrence andtimberg (1989).77. cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 (public law 102385), section 6, 47 u.s.c. §325 (b).78. specialized microwave common carriers, 29 fcc 2d 870 (1971), aff'd sub nom. washington utilities and transportation commission v.federal communications commission, 512 f.2d 1157 (9th cir.), cert. denied, 423 u.s. 826 (1975).the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury60the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.79. above 890 mhz, 27 fcc 359 (1959), recon, denied, 29 fcc 825 (1960).80. microwave communications, inc., 18 fcc 2d 953 (1969).81. specialized microwave common carriers, 29 fcc 2d 870 (1971), aff'd sub nom. washington utilities and transportation commission v.federal communications commission, 512 f.2d 1'157 (9th cir.), cert. denied, 423 u.s. 826 (1975).82. mci telecommunications corporation v. federal communications commission, 561 f.2d 365 (d.c. cir. 1977), cert. denicd, 434 u.s.1040 (1978); mci v. fcc, 580 f.2d 590 (d.c.cir.), cert. denied, 434 u.s. 790 (1978).83. establishment of domestic communicationssatellite facilities by nongovernmental entities, 22 fcc 2d 86 (1970) ("open skies");establishment of domestic communicationssatellite facilities by nongovernmental entities, 35 fcc 2d 844, 37 fcc 2d 184, recon.denied, 38 fcc 2d 665 (1972), aff'd sub nom. network project v. federal communications commission, 511 f.2d 786 (d.c.cir. 1975). seegenerally, note, "the satellite competition debate: an analysis of fcc policy and an argument in support of open competition,"syracuse law review 40:867 (1989), cited in kellogg et al. (1992) at §12.3.3, n. 60.84. resale and shared use, 62 fcc 2d 588 (1977), aff'd sub nom. at&t v. federal communications commission, 572 f.2d 17 (2d cir.), cert.denied, 439 u.s. 875 (1978).85. establishment of satellite systems providing international communications, 101 fcc 2d 1046 (1985). see chiton and rehberg (1986) andkellogg et al. (1992) at §§15.3.3 15.3.4.86. use of bands 825845 mhz and 870890 mhz for cellular communications systems, 86 fcc 2d 469 (1981).87. personal communications service (fcc general docket 90314, sept. 23, 1993).88. expanded interconnection with local telephone company facilities, cc docket no. 91141, report and order and notice of proposedrulemaking, released october 19, 1992.89. see ncta (1993), p. 11a. see generally, pepper (1993).90. national cable television association (1993), p. 7a (78 national cable video networks as of december 31, 1992). added to those are thefour national television broadcast networks: abc, cbs, fox, and nbc. several new cable video networks were begun in 1993, including thefood network and fxtv.91. city of los angeles v. preferred communications, supra.92. the chesapeake and potomac telephone company of virginia v. united states, civil case no. 921751a (d.e.va.) (slip op. of judget.s. ellis iii, august 24, 1993).93. see, for example, price (1990). professor price questions whether the first amendment is being extended too far in these kinds of cases.see generally, brenner (1988).94. carterfone v. at&t; 13 fcc 2d 420, recon, denied, 14 fcc 2d 571 (1969).95. computer inquiry ii, 77 fcc 2d 384 (1980), recon. fcc 2d 445 (1981), aff'd in part sub nom. computer & communications industryassociation v. federal communications commission, 693 f.2d 198 (d.c. cir. 1982), cert. denied, 461 u.s. 938 (1983).96. id. see 47 c.f.r., part 68. see new or revised classes of interstate and foreign message toll telephone service (mts) and wide areatelephone service (wats), first report and order, 56 fcc 2d 593 (1975).97. in the later "modified final judgment," agreeing to the divestiture of the bell operating companies (bocs) from at&t, themanufacturing of equipment went with the competitive business and was forbidden fruit to the bocs. see united states v. at&t, 552 f.supp.131 (d.d.c. 1982), aff'd sub nom. maryland v. united states, 460 u.s. 1001 (1983).98. for example, new york civil rights law, §§5051. see also, mccarthy (1991), pp. 64 and 65.99. see brenner (1991). see also ntia (1988), pp. 135140.100. fair credit reporting act, 15 u.s.c. 1681.101. rights to financial privacy act, 12 u.s.c. 3401.102. cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 u.s.c. 551.103. for example, family educational rights and privacy act, 15 u.s.c. 1681; video privacy protection act, 18 u.s.c. 2710.104. in that sense, the issues of privacy are not strictly within the "reception" category, but for ease of reading, the discussion of privacy isprimarily in this section and not spread throughout the paper.105. see, for example, brenner (1991).106. federal communications commission v. pacifica foundation, 438 u.s. 726 (1978).107. indecency differed from obscenity in that it had to meet only one testšo be patently offensive to community values (for the nation as awhole, according to the fcc)šwhereas obscenity had a threepart test that included an appeal to prurient interests and the work taken as awhole was without serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury61the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108. see, for example, cruz v. ferre, 755 f.2d 1415 (11th cir. 1985). the courts also restricted federal approaches to regulating "indecent"content of sexually oriented 900 numbers. see, for example, sable communications of california v. federal communications commission,492 u.s. 115 (1989), but the courts have allowed regulations in this area that provided for access codes, scrambling of messages, and use ofcredit cards. see carlin communications v. federal commuications commission, 837 f.2d 546 (d.c.cir.), cert. denied, 488 u.s. 924 (1988).nevertheless, the courts have not sided entirely with vendors on this matter, and some restrictive regulations, even on carriers, were allowed[mountain states].109. some could conclude that these vestiges are simply problems of transition, or regulatory noise. in light of the later discussion, i wouldsuggest that often they are expressions of values so strongly held that even the newer paradigm would not release the regulatory need for morethan a competitive response.110. for descriptions of the movement toward a science of complexity, or on selforganization, see, for example, prigogine and stengers(1984), lewin (1992), levy (1992), and waldrop (1992).111. see bollier (1993), pp. 46.112. see, for example, bollier (1994).113. see, for example, cleveland (1993).114. letter of monroe price to author, september 9, 1993.115. kellogg et al. (1992) at §3.116. the workshop for which this paper was written explored various investment and incentive options. see particularly, walter s. baer,"government investment in telecommunications infrastructure," in this volume. for another thorough listing of government incentives, seeiitf (1993).the search for the holy paradigm: regulating the information infrastructure in the 21stcentury62the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current and future uses of information networkscolin crookthis paper describes the uses of information networks, today and in the future. citicorp is used as a specificexample, but many of the comments are applicable across the financial and banking communities.backgroundciticorp offers banking and financial services in more than 90 countries. products and services serve bothindividual consumers (approximately 40 million) and corporations, on a global basis. information technology isfundamental to the operation of the bank. indeed, money can be viewed as an ideal information technologyproduct. in most instances, money exists as ''bits" on computer storage disks, computer processors, networks, andso forth. the sheer volume of money movement per week across the bank's systems approximates the u.s. grossdomestic product.central to the bank's structure is its communications network. the developments in information technologyand distributed computing emphasize even more the increasing role of the network. the bank serves its consumerand corporate customers via electronic network means (customer automatic teller machines, or atms, andcorporate mainframe connections). the network provides immense flexibility to the bank in serving its customers;locating its assets, independent of geography; delivering products globally; connecting with competitors andpartners; and using other companies' resources to assist the bank.the bank's networks in the united states are very extensive, providing voice, video, and datacommunications. the global reach of the bank requires that the extensive u.s. network is an integral part of thebank's global network. the communications network is rapidly becoming the bank's common infrastructure. thisenormously complex network, which actually is a combination of many national network systems, must be viewedin the context of global networks. today, however, no single company can yet offer a truly global networkingcapability. citicorp can be viewed as an acid test of true endtoend service delivery across the world.the importance of information networksthe bank's goal of total relationship banking requires that customers anywhere in the united states canaccess a customer service person via telephone. in turn, this service person must be able to access all of thecustomers' information, regardless of location. for example, a service center in san antonio offers spanish andenglish language support for the whole united states, with plans incurrent and future uses of information networks63the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.place to support overseas operations in the future. the service person can access customer information in newyork, nevada, and south dakota, where computer centers exist. the network is fundamental to this capability. anetworkbased infrastructure would also allow the shifting of business functions to locations that can provideoperating efficiencies. the bank is transferring its european credit card processing activities to nevada. that willrequire routinely moving lots of information across the network between europe and the united states, and doingso in a secure way.in terms of the bank's basic operation, its networks are already essential to its very survivalšthe bank cannotfunction without the network. however, the full impact of contemporary technology on both the bank's ownsystems and the overall economy has not yet been felt! indeed, early evidence and experience indicate that thismay be profound, affecting both the very structure of the bank and the fundamental behavior of its customers.a good economic betthe banking industry contains large amounts of inefficiencies that may be intrinsic to other industries aswell. citicorp's push for a networkbased infrastructure assumes that telecommunications is a good economic bet.we believe, in fact, that networking information technology is a very good economic bet.however, companies cannot exploit technology networking unless it is fundamentally integrated into the waythe companies actually do business. it involves a systems approach that requires a rethinking of the entirebusiness.in addition, considerable technological innovation is taking place. the creative use of these developmentscould represent significant competitive threats. however, these developments could also provide the bank with thecapability to fundamentally restructure its business processes as well as permit dramatic improvements in servingcustomers. in examining the likely developments in technology, several themes appear to be evolving that willaffect the bank.likely developmentscustomer interfacesthe emergence of an increasing panoply of innovative consumer and business information devices (screenphones, personal digital assistants, smart cards, etc.) represents opportunities for new products and services. inaddition, some form of payment system will be needed in order to support the wide range of services being sold.these new devices will be connected via networks to the service providers.in essence, network usage, which used to be dominated by the plain old telephone, will dramatically risethrough the increasing use of innovative information devices. already, considerable amounts of financial activitiesare carried out by electronic means, such as atms. therefore, financial and banking companies will seek toexploit the network to provide more effective consumer and business access to their services via the multitude ofnew information devices. customers will probably wish to use electronic means to transact their business with thebank.current and future uses of information networks64the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bank structurein addition to providing customer access, the network facilitates and enables significant new ways to structureenterprises. issues of both time and geography can be handled more effectively. for example, the processing ofinformation can be handled at specific points around the world and, via use of the network, information can bemoved quickly and efficiently. citicorp already processes information in the united states for nonu.s. operationsof the company. this trend will continue.as companies operate globally, their needs must be handled 24 hours a day. for example, citicorp isproviding 24houraday service coverage from the united states in support of its global customers' cashmanagement needs. the new awareness of systemic risk and potential threats to the bank's operations permits thebank to exploit the network to provide geographical and time diversity and risk allocation. provided that thenetwork remains available, the bank's operations can continue despite calamitous events (fire, bombs, naturaldisasters, etc.). the ability of the network to facilitate the operating integrity of the company, enable efficiency,and eliminate unneeded redundancy will grow in importance as the company grows. the network must have theneeded characteristics of capacity, resiliency, and reliability.the network as a marketelectronic commerce is increasing rapidly as companies restructure their business processes and exploit newthinking in terms of how companies can more effectively work together. the u.s. gross domestic product ofapproximately $5.6 trillion per year [as of 1993] uses around 100 billion financial transactions to support it (cash,credit cards, etc.). interestingly, the telecommunications network, in order to operate, uses approximately 100billion financial transactions each year. already the information economy has more financial transactions than theu.s. gross domestic product!as electronic commerce increases, the financial transaction volume will rise exponentially. electroniccommerce carried out across networks will represent new challenges requiring considerable innovation. alreadytrillions of dollars are transferred by the bank every weekšand most of this activity is performed not by peoplebut by machines. such volumes mandate a high level of bank control over access to its networkbasedapplications. in a networkbased business environment, protecting the application by authenticating applicationusers is critical because of the extreme difficulty in protecting the network itself. the network will have literallymillions and millions of customersšindividuals, companies, public institutions. because customers tend to dowhatever they want, the key is to build the right kind of infrastructure that can support the needs of the individualcustomer.exponential rises in electronic commerce will also lead to pressures for new legal and regulatory thinking.without such new thinking, business and commerce could be inhibited. intellectual property issues are alreadyproving to be thorny ones.the network structurea contemporary view of a network is to regard it as an information infrastructure with an array of essentialnetwork services that facilitate the flow of customer products and services across it. if the network is just viewedas bandwidth, it becomes very difficult to use. the services inside the network, such as security, directories, and soforth, are essential to its use by intelligent devices or software applications.current and future uses of information networks65the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as enterprises become more networkbased, they are seeking to have other companies supply capabilitiesthat permit the enterprise to focus on those processes that create and deliver value to their customers. the networkfacilitates the creation of the socalled virtual enterprise. here, directories are critical to permitting severalcompanies to appear to be a single enterprise. directories are central to the network.citicorp's future strategies anticipate the emergence of the virtual enterprise, and work is already in hand tomove in this direction. the future network structure of the bank will be a combination of public and privatenetworks. wherever possible, the public network will be exploited. additionally, the bank will be a combinationof the capabilities of several companies, all existing within an integrated information network infrastructure. thisvision of the bank will not be static. it will be constantly changing, according to customer and business needs.critical to the successful evolution of these ideas is the emergence of common infrastructural services that allcompanies will utilize. an example of this is a common, secure, trusted billing and payment infrastructure thatmany institutions can use. this would address issues of auditability, fraud prevention, user authentication, secureaccess control, and so forth. it is believed that progressive economies will develop such common informationnetworkbased capabilities that users and suppliers can use, obviating the need to develop multiple proprietarynetworks with no customer value.current and future uses of information networks66the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changing nature of telecommunications and theinformation infrastructure for health careedward h. shortliffeintroductiondiscussions at this cstb workshop and in other forums are confirming the notion, often voiced in medicalcomputing circles, that the use of computers and communications for health care is roughly a decade behindroutine applications of the technologies for much of the rest of society. the details about citicorp provided bycolin crook in this volume, however, suggest that the gap is closer to two decades! much is happening in themedical computing world, but the story is different from that for many other segments of society, and here i willtry to explain some of the reasons for those differences.it would be inaccurate to give the impression that the medical community has been oblivious to the potentialrole of computers and networking in biomedicine. in fact, in the early 1970s the first node on the arpanet thatwas not a defensefunded resource (either through u.s. department of defense grants to academic institutions ordirect military support) was the national institutes of healthfunded sumexaim resource at stanforduniversity's school of medicine, a machine dedicated to biomedical applications of artificial intelligence research.with the subsequent addition of many more medically oriented nodes to the national network, a small but activesegment of the biomedical community grew up with the arpanet during its transition to the internet of today.furthermore, it is revealing to look back to a prophetic 10yearold document that was produced by a longrange planning panel for the national library of medicine (nlm) in 1986. shortly after the new director of thenlm took office in 1985, he brought together people who could help devise a grand plan for what the institutionshould be doing to prepare for the decades ahead. the resulting report (nlm, 1986) dealt with the future ofmedical "informatics" and noted that "widely disseminated medical information systems will require highbandwidth communications to allow access to the computational, data, and information resources needed forhealth care and research" (p. 60). an explicit goal mentioned in the report was that "by the end of the next decade[presumably 1996], there will be a national computer network for use by the entire biomedical community, bothclinical and research professionals. the network will have advanced electronicnote: support of this work under grants lm05305 and lm05208 from the national library of medicine is gratefullyacknowledged. portions of this paper are adapted from a presentation given by the author at the 1993 annual meeting of theamerican clinical and climatological association held in sea island, georgia (shortliffe, 1994). many of the topics in thispaper were also discussed at "national information infrastructure for health care," a workshop sponsored by the computerscience and telecommunications board and the institute of medicine on october 5œ6, 1993, in washington, d.c.the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare67the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mail features as well as capabilities for large file transfer, remote computer login, and transmitted graphicsprotocols. it will either be part of the larger national network – or will have gateways to other federally sponsorednetworks" (p. 65). the report includes much discussion of the arpanet, as the larger internet was still called in1986, as a model for the national network that would facilitate a variety of applications in biomedicine and healthcare delivery.despite this explicit call for the biomedical community to embrace the potential role of a nationalcommunications infrastructure, little happened in the intervening years. the nlm expressed an interest inpursuing the topic, but it needed incremental funding to do much and the rationale for new efforts was extremelyhard to sell to the mainstream medical community and hence to the congress. yet since the passage of the highperformance computing and communications act and the election of an administration with particular interests inboth the national information infrastructure and health reform, we have seen the awakening of interest amongleaders for whom computers and telecommunications for health care had previously been viewed as an esoterictopic.stimuli to changecertain key forces are driving such changes in awareness and interest. first, the shift to managed care andcapitation is changing dramatically the requirement for communication among the parties involved in health care.insurers are demanding a basis for making comparisons among providers (both institutional and individual), andsuddenly new kinds of clinical data need to be collected, communicated, and collated. pressures to develop andmanage such comparative clinical data did not exist in the past to the same extent.second, proposed health care reform legislation, and the resulting highprofile discussions of health carefinancing and organization, are reinforcing and broadening the pressures on health care institutions and providers.when president clinton introduced his health reform proposals to the congress on september 22, 1993, hereferred explicitly to the opportunities for increased efficiency, technology assessment, and cost savings offered byinformation technology. computing and communications technologies have emerged as key elements in thestrategic plan for eliminating waste in the health care system. clearly, such an impact will be easier claimed thanachieved, but the expectations do help explain the sudden shift in interest among health planners.there are other prominent examples of a growing societal awareness of the potential role for the nationalinformation infrastructure (nii) in supporting health reform. in april 1993, the computer systems policy project(cspp), composed of senior executives from the major vendors of computer systems, released a report on therelevance of the nii to health care (cspp, 1993). during that same month, a report commissioned by the u.s.department of health and human services, and developed by a panel formed by the american hospitalassociation, was released (aha/dhhs, 1993). although the committee that drafted the report had been convenedto look at issues in the creation of computerbased patient records, it soon chose to address more broadly the issuesof information infrastructure required to support the notion of computerized individual patient records. thisbroader view is especially valid when one begins to envision longitudinal medical records that are tied to a mobilepatient rather than to a single provider's office or a hospital.for those who have been interested in medical informatics and biomedical communications for some time,now is an exciting period. key decisionmakers are listening and becoming very enthusiastic about seeing profoundchanges, both in the health care system itself and in the creation and use of an underlying informationinfrastructure. until recently, the role of regional and national communications in support of health care has been alargely grassroots activity, with limited shared national vision and leadership. some of the most successfulexperiments have been in the area of "telemedicine," in which, for example, electronic communications have beenused to providethe changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare68the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.consultation by specialists to physicians in rural, innercity, or other isolated locations. as the internet increases inits capacity, it will be able to accommodate the kinds of voice and video transmissions that are crucial for this kindof telemedicine activity. constraining progress, however, have been frequently voiced concerns regarding risks tothe privacy and security of clinical information. such concerns have led many health care institutions to resistexploring modern networking technologies, both within their own walls and when considering linkage to outsidenetworks in their communities or beyond (iom, 1994).recognizing the need for improved clinical data systemsuntil 1993, there was essentially no federal involvement in defining the role of the information infrastructureas it relates to the delivery of health care. beginning in the late 1980s, largely through the activities of the nlm,we did see the involvement of the health sector in discussions of how the nii might support research and educationin biomedicine. unfortunately, there has been little or no knowledge of the existing nii, nor an understanding ofits implications, among the leaders in the health care industry. those few hospitals that are connected to theinternet are mostly academic institutions that have sought such connections through their main universitycampuses. recently, the nlm initiated a grants program to encourage more hospitals to institute internetconnections and to begin to explore the ways in which national networking could support their clinical mission.obstacles to more effective use of the existing nii in health care, and to an informed anticipation of howemerging communications and computing technologies will affect health care, are largely logistical, political, andfinancial, rather than technological. about two years ago i was asked to give a talk at a conference on gigabitnetworking. my message was that, for the present, we can largely ignore biomedical gigabit networking issues andsimply work to make better use of the technologies that we have today. that is not to say biomedicine could not domore with gigabit speeds in the future, but that is not the major need at present.one way to make progress in dealing with the logistical, political, and financial barriers to acceptance ofcomputing and communications technology has been to demonstrate the relevance of such technology to costsavings and to health reform. we are beginning to see data in the literature that demonstrate how computing holdsthe promise of impressive economies. one recent report, from physicians at the regenstrief institute at the indianauniversity school of medicine, describes a welldesigned controlled clinical trial demonstrating more than $800 insavings per patient stay at wishard memorial hospital in indianapolis during which some physicians usedcomputers to order tests and to receive reminders, whereas other providers did not use the technology (tierney etal., 1993). as the article notes, extrapolation of these effects suggests "savings of more than $3 million in chargesannually for this hospital's medicine service and potentially tens of billions of dollars nationwide" (p. 379). theproblem is that large complex systems such as the one built at the wishard memorial hospital and connected tothe regenstrief medical record system over the past 20 years could not be duplicated simply for implementationat another hospital. in the absence of standards for systems integration and data sharing among institutions,transporting a highly tuned technology from one hospital to another can be next to impossible.data such as those from the indiana study are clearly needed to demonstrate the value of interinstitutionalnetwork connections and the role that the nii could play. such fiscal data make hospital ceos pay attention, andthey are having much to do with a reassessment of how hospital data systems need to be designed and especiallyhow they might become more clinical in their emphasis, departing from a traditional administrative and financialorientation.also driving the need for more clinically oriented data systems is our current lack of data to gauge the qualityor cost of health care. employers and insurers are increasingly choosing tothe changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare69the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contract with the hospital that can show the highest quality at the lowest cost; if an institution charges more, itmust be able to show that the higher cost is associated with higher quality. if provider institutions lack the datasystems that allow them to demonstrate improved outcomes over competing hospitals, they may increasingly findthat they are unable to win the managed care contracts required to keep their beds full. subjective impressions thatone hospital is "better" than another hold little sway with an employer or insurer that is fighting frantically tocontrol health care costs.there are generally no communitywide databases that store information on providers and patients, althoughthere are a few experiments to develop regional health databases (iom, 1994). when there are pooled data forregions, they tend not to record patientcentered information on topics such as consumer satisfaction or functionaloutcomes after treatment. similarly, there is generally no reasonable way to determine whether doctors areperforming safe, appropriate, and effective care, despite demands that we begin to develop the kind of data setsthat allow such information to be released.we clearly need better data collection methods than we have today. for example, clinical data sets derivedfrom insurance claims and depending on voluntary submission of diagnostic and outcomes information byproviders are often rendered useless by inconsistent compliance and information of questionable accuracy. severalrecent studies regarding the health of our nation are based upon data submitted to medicare on claims forms.clinical information on such claims provides a limited proxy for medical reality. this helps explain the medicaresystem's recent pressure for the creation of a uniform clinical data set (audet and scott, 1993). we clearly needbetter ways of collecting comprehensive clinical data than to depend on insurance claims submissions. this is oneof the many justifications for the recent push to see the creation of computerbased patient records (iom, 1991).attracting physicians to information management toolsa colleague and i recently argued that clinicians are inherently "horizontal" users of information technology(greenes and shortliffe, 1990). by this we mean that they require a critical mass of functionality from the systemthey are using before routine use of the computer will be viewed as worthwhile to them. if the computer is usefulonly occasionally, say for one or two patients per day, then the inertia involved in going to the machine willtypically prevent the effective use of that technology. but if the computer provides functionality that is useful foressentially every patient seen, and if that use is as good as or better than the manual methods previously available,then it is reasonable to assume that physicians will begin to turn to the computer for support. it is also important torecognize that physicians seek help with the noxious tasks associated with data management but are not interestedin having computers infringe on valued tasks. furthermore, they require intuitive interfaces that require little or notraining (similar, for example, to the training required to use the telephone or, more topically, an automated tellermachine).part of this critical mass of functionality will be made available not within the physician's local environmentbut via the nii. imagine the model shown in figure 3, in which providers are linked, either directly or through thehospitals at which they practice, to research and public health databases or to national repositories of patient data.when people become sick away from home, there would be tremendous utility to a system that permittedauthorized health workers, say in an emergency room, both to identify you and to access key clinical data aboutyour medical problems, allergies, medications, and the like from a centralized data resource provided via thenetwork. physicians could also be provided with access to thirdparty payers, to medicaid/medicare, to the foodand drug administration, to the centers for disease control, to medical schools and theirthe changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare70the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.continuing education activities, to a variety of vendors such as pharmaceutical companies or software companies,to information resources such as medline, and to patients themselves. if the network provides health workers,patients, and the public with access to all these kinds of information sources, as well as twoway communicationthat allows retrieval of data plus submission of information (e.g., claims), one can begin to imagine the appeal andacceptability of the nii and its health care role. there has been remarkably little planning initiated regarding theimplementation of these kinds of connectivity, but i believe that figure 3 demonstrates that the for a major impacton health care.figure 3 a view of the resources that could be made available to practitioners, patients, and the public via anational information infrastructure for health care.example uses of the nii for health and health carea workshop sponsored jointly by the computer science and telecommunications board of the nationalresearch council and by the institute of medicine ("national information infrastructure for health care," october5œ6, 1993) offered a variety of possible uses of a national information infrastructure for health and health care. iclose by summarizing them here since they follow naturally from the discussion above: information distribution and access, including bibliographicretrieval software for searching the medicalliterature; population databases (regional, state, and national) with specialized interfaces that allow retrieval ofsubsets of patients meeting particular search criteria; access to longitudinal, sharable, standardized health records for individual patients, particularlyimportant for providing continuity of care for our highly mobile society;the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare71the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. telemedicine, especially to provide enhanced care and information access in underserved areas such as inrural regions or inner cities; personal health information systems, which would provide individuals, whether sick or healthy, witheducational materials plus a personally maintained health database; databases for research and outcomes assessment, as previously described; systems to handle billing, finance, reimbursement, and eligibility determination; multimedia communication and videoconferencing; implementation of practice guidelines and outcomes management advice with specialized software at thepoint of care that allows access to the individual guidelines that may be available locally or over thenetwork; and submission of clinical reports to federal agencies, such as reportable disease information to the centersfor disease control or adverse drug reaction reporting to the food and drug administration.conclusionthe future world that i have described here (assuming appropriate safeguards to protect patient privacy andconfidentiality of data) offers a set of features that many observers believe would not only be acceptable topractitioners but also would enhance their practices in positive ways while helping to reduce some of the waste inour current health care system. unlike other technologies that have played a role in escalating the cost of healthcare in this country, there is reason to believe that computing technology, coupled with a standardizedcommunications infrastructure, could actually eliminate waste and reduce the total health bill. to achieve thesegoals, however, various enabling activities are required. among these are the need for improved nationalleadership and a greater understanding of the federal role in guiding the development of standards, the educationof practitioners and others regarding the role of the nii for health care, the creation of incentives, and attention tohow the health care system should reimburse those who use the information infrastructure in support of health caredelivery. several observers have noted the need for preemptive federal legislation in the areas of privacy andconfidentiality in particular, but also to deal with authentication of electronic signatures to assure theiracceptability for legal documentation. the goal of developing centralized longitudinal lifelong medical recordsthat could be accessed by providers (when authorized to do so by individual patients; see iom, 1994) requires thatwe address the need for national patient and provider identifiers while balancing that need against the civilliberties issues involved in linking health care identifiers with other identifiers used in our society.there is clearly a major need for training and education, not only of health professionals but also of thepublic. in addition, we need a new cadre of medical computing professionals who not only understand thetechnological issues involved but also have practical experience in clinical settings (if not formal training in one ofthe health professions) so that they are knowledgeable about the realities of health care practice, ethics, andfinancing and can incorporate resulting sensitivities into the systems that they design and build. finally, there is amajor need for demonstration projects to help prove the technology's costeffectiveness and its impact on thequality of care. one complicating factor in the evolution of this field has been the difficulty in developingdemonstration projects with sufficient scope, penetration, and generalizability to assure that they can providemeaningful data regarding the technology's potential impact on cost and quality.the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare72the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesamerican hospital association (aha)/u.s. department of health and human services (dhhs). 1993. toward a national healthinformation infrastructure. work group on computerization of patient records. american hospital association, chicago, april.audet, a., and h. scott. 1993. ''the uniform clinical data set: an evaluation of the proposed national database for medicare's qualityreview program," annals of internal medicine 119:12091213.computer systems policy project (cspp). 1993. information technology's contribution to healthcare reform . computer systems policyproject, washington, d.c., april.greenes, r.a., and e.h. shortliffe. 1990. "medical informatics: an emerging academic discipline and institutional priority," journal of theamerican medical association 263:1114œ1120.institute of medicine (iom). 1991. the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care, r. dick and e. steen, eds.national academy press, washington, d.c.institute of medicine (iom). 1994. health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacy, m.s. donaldson and k.n. lohr,eds.national academy press, washington, d.c.national library of medicine (nlm). 1986. long range plan on medical informatics. national library of medicine, washington, d.c.,december.shortliffe, e.h. 1994. "clinical information systems in the era of managed care," transactions of the american clinical and climatological association, vol. 105, pp. 203œ215.tierney, william m., michael e. miller, j. marc overhage, and clement j. mcdonald. 1993. "physician impatient order writing onmicrocomputer workstations: effects on resource utilization," journal of the american medical association 269(3):379œ383.the changing nature of telecommunications and the information infrastructure for healthcare73the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?robert pearlmanif they build it, will we come? if government, the telephone and telecommunications companies, and the cableindustry join to develop the backbone of the information highway and its local access ramps, will schools andschool districts invest in the local telecommunications infrastructure that will ensure universal participation by thenation's over 40 million k12 students and their teachers?while the government's goal to "extend the 'universal service' concept to ensure that information resourcesare available to all at affordable prices" (iitf, 1993) may be a reasonable shortterm policy for federalgovernment action, it is at best only a first step toward the more appropriate goal of universal participation (bolt,beranek, and newman, 1993) on the information superhighway by the nation's students and teachers.the universal service goal, which borrows an analogy from telephone service, means that governments useregulation to require private companies with regional monopolies to provide the public with access to minimalservices at affordable prices. still, after 100 years of telephone service and over 60 years of regulation, there arefew telephones in schools today. few school districts in the country have seen the educational and communicationservices on the telephone network that would justify both the ongoing service costs and the upfront investment in alocal schoolbased telephone infrastructure that would ensure universal participation by students and teachers.many more factors than access will be needed to justify an investment in a computerbased telecommunicationsinfrastructure that provides the pathway to universal participation on the information superhighway.the national debate on education today stresses as its goals not just access to education but instead highstandards of what students know and can do. it is the active participation on the information superhighway thathelps students develop the planning, interpersonal, informational, technological, and communication skillsrequired by the knowledgebased citizens and workers of the 21st century. if such skills are the goal of longtermfederal policy for k12 education, then universal participation is the appropriate strategic goal of federal policy.neither federal nor state government action can assure k12 education both universal access to andwidespread student utilization of the information superhighway. smart regulation and investment can, however,encourage organizational change in schools and the emergence of new educational service providers on theinformation superhighway. these new services will, in turn, provide the incentive for local communities to investin the development of an adequate and sufficient local school and school district telecommunicationsinfrastructure.government goals, at both the federal and state levels, must be to ensure k12 access to the future nationalinformation infrastructure (nii), to provide equity for all students, and to support the development of informationresources for education. such goals, however, will not be realizedcan k12 education drive on the information superhighway?74the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.unless public and private initiatives combine to enable the development of a real economy of schools and learningenterprises on the information superhighway.k12 education is a totally different sector, economically, than banking, health, or libraries. though educatorstoday know well the effective learning activities that can take place on the information highways, there remainmany roadblocks to significant k12 traffic. k12 is still very much a cottage industry of some 100,000 disparateschool units, not easily subject to economic integration or rationalization. while banking, health care, libraries, andhigher education have all invested substantially in data networks, k12 lacks a telecommunications infrastructureat all levelsšnational, state, school district, and, most important, at the school site. while other economic sectorsprovide obvious markets that the nii will facilitate, such as money transfer, medical information and reportsharing, information resources, research, and video on demand, k12 opportunities will not emerge withoutstructural changes in school organization and the parallel development of new educational enterprises that utilizethe new telecommunications potential.what will be the triggering event for schools and school to reallocate current expenditures and invest newdollars to equip their students and teachers with the vehicles, training, local roads, and online ramps to thesuperhighway? can government investment and regulatory activity be designed to spur the organizational changesin schooling and encourage the growth of new educational service providers that, in turn, can combine to exploitthe educational potential of the future information superhighway?no mystery as to the effective applications of new communicationstechnologiesthere is no mystery today among educators as to what the effective and powerful applications ofcommunications technology in education are. using technologies such as computers, cdroms, videodiscs,phones, cable, broadcast, satellite, local area networks, and widearea "internetworking," students and teacherstoday in exemplary technologyusing schools can do their work, access information, communicate via electronicmail with each other and with mentors, engage in professional collaboration and student collaborative projectwork, go on electronic field trips, create virtual learning communities, and receive and use course and minicoursesfrom any number of educational service providers. some exemplary uses include the following: in july 1990 a teacher named nikolai yakolev got on a train with five other teachers and 20 students inmoscow and traveled 25 hours north to kem, a town at the rim of the arctic circle. they went therebecause that was the best place on earth that year to view the solar eclipse. there, with only someremmants of the red army and some black flies as companions, they established a scientific plot andcollected data before, during, and after the eclipse on the behavior of the animals and plants and thechanges in light and temperature. they collected this data with probes connected to a portable personalcomputer (pc) and used kem's only phone line to transmit the data to a computer at the technicaleducation research centers (terc) in cambridge, massachusetts, where it was stored and madeavailable for schools throughout the world to compare with data from the forthcoming 1991 solar eclipsein hawaii.this project, conducted by the moscowbased institute of new technologies (int), was a forerunnerto the global lab project. boris berenfeld, int's associate director, subsequently came to the unitedstates to work at terc, where he now directs the global lab project, a project highlighted recently inthe clinton administration's report, the national information infrastructure: agenda for action (iitf,1993). today, students in the global lab project's 101 schools in 27 states and 17 countries establishenvironmental monitoring stations to study climate change, monitor pollutants, and measure radiation.schools then share the date over the network with each other and with scientists to gain a globalperspective on environmental problems.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?75the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. students at mckinley high school in hawaii gave a presentation in japanese to a real audience ofstudents in kanazawa, japan, in real time. after they finished with this hourlong presentations, the classin japan likewise gave its presentation back in english. both presentations were transmittedinexpensively by video telephones through a project called teleclass international. students at each siteprepared for their presentations for a few months in advance. the fact that they were able to link up withtheir peers in real time and see their faces made an enormous difference in the whole learning effort. a group of 25 teachers met in indiana in the summer of 1993 for a weeklong school restructuringinstitute. they were researching exemplary nationwide school restructuring efforts and developing aresource report. using a "pictel" videoconferencing system, they held daily twohour seminars withschool restructuring experts in massachusetts, rhode island, california, and elsewhere. the externalexperts were able to talk with them and to transmit video showing scenes of innovative schoolsthroughout the country. students in the midwest have worked on scientific projects and have communicated via audio, video,data, and pictures over the internet with scientists at various universities and in industry. the project,covis or collaborative visualization, uses scientific visualization software to enable students andconsulting scientists to share and display their data and, at the same time, in a video window, engage in arealtime, twoway active discussion. via satellite links in museums, schools, and universities and through cable, over 1.5 million students andteachers from around the world have participated in real science through interactive video and audio linkswith scientists from the jason project. they have observed scientific expeditions and communicated withpracticing scientists, in real time, in the mediterranean sea and at the galapagos islands, the bottom oflake ontario, the site of the wreck of the titanic, and the coast of baja california. the jason v classroomnetwork planned to air expedition planet earth belize via satellite and the mind extension universitycable network in the spring of 1994. students throughout the country watch daily 12 to 15minute news programs through cnn newsroomand whittle's channel one program. cnn newsroom schools are able to receive a daily textualcurriculum guide via any kind of telecommunications service or via the cable line. in addition, the cableindustry's cable in the classroom organization provides educational use of cable programs throughout theunited states. over that same cable line, using a special modern, students are able to receive anassociated presslike service called xpress xchange, which gives them news, in a steady data stream,from all the major news agencies of the world. they can capture whatever stories they preselect bysubject into their computer and save them to disk. to facilitate a debate about what is going on insomalia, for example, they would collect stories from ap, reuters, tass, xinhua, agence francepresse, and so forth. the teams from the school would take different national perspectives in the debate. students take satellite and cable courses in foreign languages, mathematics and science, and thehumanities. distance learning, usually with oneway video and twoway audio but sometimes also withtwoway video, provides courses not available to schools because of geographical isolation or economiclimitation (ota, 1989). many of the organizations delivering these courses are star school grantees, suchas the satellite educational resources consortium, tiin united star market, and the massachusettscorporation for educational telecommunications (mcet). mcet also delivers curriculum modules thatsupport teaching via satellite, picture tel, videodisk, and videotape.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?76the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. students in fairfax county, virginia, have taken electronic field trips to germany since the fall of theberlin wall, to china, to wales, to the countries of the former soviet union, and to nasa (nationalaeronautics and space administration) space centers. these live, interactive visits use video and satellitecommunications, telephones, computers, and cable for local distribution. fairfax has shared these visitswith schools around the country.these new learning activities and educational services on the information superhighway have expandedsignificantly over the past several years. over 1.5 million students around the world have participated in the jasonproject. over 14,000 schools watch the daily 15minute news program, cnn newsroom, and 10,000 schoolsreceive whittle's channel one. together, these news programs reach nearly 25 percent of u.s. schools. accordingto the u.s. department of education, distance learning is now used in 6,000 schools for 20,000 elementary and20,000 high school students. the tiin network, transmitting video via satellite from texas, reaches 1,100schools in 40 states (bruder, 1991). mcet reaches 37 states with its curriculum modules.these applications, whether carried on phone lines, cable lines, broadcasts, satellite, or through the internet,are the wonderful side of these communications technologies. the unfortunate characteristic, however, that unitesthese examples is that few have demonstrated independent commercial viability. customers for these servicesinclude schools and state agencies. most of the schools that receive these services pay a user fee that is notsufficient to cover costs. states, as the governmental unit responsible for schools, add support, as do foundations,and federal government agencies like the national science foundation or the u.s. department of education.the emerging industry of educational service providers is frail and fragmented. the real market, fromschools, school districts, and states, is too limited today to support the range and quality of services that schoolsneed. the midlands consortium, one of the early star schools grantees, shut down after the star schools moneyended. schools are not paying customers for the daily news programs. they receive the cnn newsroom program,which is subsidized by turner broadcasting, by paying minimal or no cable use fees and the channel one newsprogram by agreeing to have students watch two minutes of advertising. there are other factors, however,including the current organization of schools and the lack of a telecommunications infrastructure at school sitesand school districts, that impede these developments. state and federal support will, of course, continue to benecessary to encourage this emerging industry, but we are going to have to look at the k12 industry a lot closer tosee how market niches might emerge to foster the development of the new educational service providers.snags, barriers, and roadblocks on the information superhighwayimagine what the information superhighway looks like to a teacher in one of our 100,000 k12 schools in theunited states. first, most teachers don't even know about it. few have external phone lines and most schooldistrict business offices will not approve the openended purchase orders needed for phone service. some teachershave phone lines but have outmoded apple iie's or early ibm pcs as workstations, with interfaces that cannotsupport the newer software for easy navigation on the internet. some teachers have a phone line, a computer withan effective interface,can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?77the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a modem, and a connection, through a local university, to the internet. but while they can communicate withcolleagues in moscow, they can do little with their primarily unconnected colleagues and students and the parentsof the students in their own district. few teachers in the country use computers that are on local area networks(lans) connected to wide area networks (wans), as is common in higher education, business, and the researchcommunity.market data retrieval reports that 49 percent of school buildings have lans. most of these, however, arerelegated to a single lab for limited instructional purposes, such as drill and practice or remediation. occasionally,an entire building is wired for administrative purposes, including the reporting of attendance data and grades.while a survey by the california technology project found that 10.6 percent of 400 schools surveyed had lansconnected by modem to wans, further research showed these connections were for administrative purposes andthat there were "no connections between instructional lans and instructional uses of wide areanetworks" (newman et al., 1992).typically, schools and group of teachers who might want to develop the local infrastructure for schoolnetworking do not have budget control at the school site level. they have difficulty paying for the phone lines. thebarrier to putting the nation's 100,000 schools on to the internet is not the capacity of the internet, but the lack oflocal school and school district infrastructure and the difficulty in any locality of financing the enduser equipmentand the lans that represent the vehicles and local access roads to the information superhighway.many states are currently developing plans to give all schools access to the internet. in most cases this meansdialin access by single computers and modems and use of data but not video communication. some states, such asiowa, plan a more extensive fiber optic backbone with county points of presence to which local schools canconnect, permitting both data and video communications. this is the kind of infrastructure states should build.this still leaves, however, two tasks for local school districts. first, districts will have to run the fiber to the "curb"of the local school and, second, wire the school and build the inschool voice, data, and video distribution system.for all members of a school community to "drive" on the information superhighway, schools will need their ownlocal telecommunications infrastructure, including an internet server and router, cable, and satellite connections,and internal voice, data, and video distribution, all of which requires significant investment. the most extensivewiring of schools in the country, by whittle's channel one news program, has, unfortunately, done little to meetthis need. channel one schools get a fixed satellite dish, receiving equipment, 19inch monitors in every room,and a limited video distribution network, with only the ability to send out two signals to classrooms and onlyreceive from one satellite. it is much too constraining, not the real video distribution that schools need, nor does itdo anything to set up a schoolwide data communications network.the costs of providing real access to all u.s. students on the future nii are significant. educationalresearcher henry jay becker estimates the annual personnel, hardware, and software costs at nearly $2,000 perstudent for developing expertise in technology use among teachers and providing students with a learningenvironment characterized by projectbased learning, gathering information from diverse sources, and electroniccommunication with "students all over the world, with scientists engaged in real world inquiry, and with databasesof enormous magnitude" (becker, 1993).that is nearly onethird the current annual cost per student in most u.s. school districts and would amount toapproximately $90 billion in additional costs annually for all the nation's schools. such an investment is unlikely tohappen, except in wealthy districts or in schools and districts where there is a clear understanding that the upfrontinvestment will yield real and rapid dividends, such as better and more appropriate student outcomes andeconomies in the costs of schooling.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?78the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications industry and k12 educationin the real economy, building the homeschool, schoolcommunity, and widearea connections will requirepartnerships between the phone companies, cable companies, the schools, and the states to plan the local andregional infrastructures.cable shows how the real economy works. the spread of cable to u.s. schools has little to do with theschools as a current market for cable products. instead, schools are the beneficiaries of a struggle for public policyleverage and regulatory advantage between the cable industry, the regional bell operating companies, and theother telephone and telecommunication companies (telcos). displays of public spirit and partnerships are thecurrency in this battle. to its credit, the cable industry competes by providing excellent educational programmingto schools and, through cable in the classroom, an industry organization, obtains and identifies program rights forrecording and use in schools. cable in the classroom and cnn have also done a wonderful job of encouragingregional and local cable multiple service operators to wire schools and their classrooms, not just run a cable dropto the school door, as was the practice until recently.in the distance learning sector, there are many good examples of programming services that are encouragedby the federal government's star schools initiatives, but in most cases none of these are real commercialsuccesses. federal and state support is critical to nurture the development of these service providers.by providing video equipment to schools in exchange for students watching two minutes a day ofcommercial time, whittle's channel one program tapped an economic niche by giving advertisers access to awelldefined teenager audience. for this service, advertisers pay $157,000 a halfminute to reach 8 millionstudents, yielding channel one a daily gross of $628,000 (kubey, 1993). this has been very controversial inschool districts and states all over the country, but it did demonstrate that there was a small niche in themarketplace. it also shows the limit of that niche, as there is hardly any room in the school schedule to expand thatkind of advertisersupported educational programming into schools.many companies are now eyeing the potential of the nii as the delivery system for future electronic andvideo educational services such as customized curriculum, thematic units, customized textbooks, courses,modules, and electronic field trips. some of these companies come out of the educational technology sector, likethe educational management group, but most represent new alliances from companies in the publishing, printing,cable, and telecommunications sectors.the organization of schooling"informating" is organizing to exploit information technology.šshoshana zuboff, in the age of the smart machine (1988)besides the substantial cost of building the local school telecommunications infrastructure, there is also theproblem of the organization of schooling. schools are not really organized to exploit this new world. schools andschool districts need to change profoundly in order to exploit these new technologies, to "informate." for studentsof today to become the citizen knowledge workers of tomorrow's global economy, and for students to acquire thehighperformance skills set forth in the scans1 report, what work requires of schools (scans, 1991), schoolswill have, in a sense, 24hour school days and 365day years, operating around the clock by telecommunications.education in what james mecklenburger calls a global village school (gvs) would be appropriate to bothtoday's and tomorrow's world. according to mecklenburger, "a gvs will becan k12 education drive on the information superhighway?79the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concerned roundtheclock for learning. a school building will not define the school; a building may be the'headquarters' of a community of learners but not the sole location. electronically, through voice mail and variousnetworking schemes, there are many ways even today that home, school, and other institutions near and far can beintimately connected –" (mecklenburger, 1993). changing schooling requires the changing of all elements ofschool practice and organization simultaneously, including "school organization, curriculum, assessment,technology, and the learning environments" (pearlman, 1993).students have to be the real workers in education, the ones who actually produce and do the work. there is avery good vision of how schools might be organized in british management expert charles handy's book, the ageof unreason (1989). handy describes how the "shamrock organization," or what others are calling a virtualcorporation, would operate in education. it should be stressed that "virtual corporations" are not synonymous with"virtual reality''; instead, they are real corporations that are becoming leaner, more engaged in core activity and areoutsourcing much of their work to other companies or to consultants. it is in this sense that the "virtual school"may emerge, functioning as handy says, "as a shamrock with a core activity and everything else contracted out ordone part time by a flexible labor force. the core activity would be primarily one of educational manager, devisingan appropriate educational program for each child and arranging for its delivery." much of that delivery could beon the future nii.k12 education is in much the same place today as the service industry was in the mid1980s. despite someof the great capabilities available in schools today (including single desktop machines with associatedcommunication links), critical mass is nowhere in sight. schools and school districts in the united states arespotted with technologyusing teacher pioneers, but widespread utilization and its associated productivity gainsremain distant and elusive. the school site communications infrastructure is not in place and, even if it were,schools are not organized to exploit it.if schools are to change in the direction of shamrock organizations, they will need to outsource those learningactivities not provided at the school site. this means that new educational service providers will have to ariselocally, regionally, nationally, and internationally to deliver courses, minicourses, project activities, curriculum,materials, and apprenticeships to meet the range of learning needs and learning styles in the shamrock school.enabling this new industry of education providers is, of course, the potential of the information superhighway, ornii.k12 education and the real economynobody heard the story on the news wires that the los angeles unified school system bought out the sanfrancisco unified school district. no one heard about the whittle bid for majority control of the new york citypublic schools. nor the merger of the washington, d.c. public schools with those of fairfax county, virginia,and montgomery county, maryland. but everyone has heard about the rash of mergers in the health industry, inbanking, in telecommunications, and in many other sectors of the global economy. no one heard about any ofthese kinds of economic developments in k12 education because it is a distinct kind of economic andorganizational entity, not easily subject to economic rationalization. while schools are governed by local, state,and national entities, in no sense is any of these a system in the way that banking enterprises are integral nationalor global economic units. chris whittle's stalled efforts to establish a national network of edison schools didaspire to such systemic economic and organizational integration. despite its failure to raise sufficient investmentfunds, the edison project does raise the proper question of how, whether private or public, to put together anetwork of schools, whether in one location or around the country, that actually work together and produce somesavings by sharing curriculum, programming, and teachers through a national delivery system of educationalservices.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?80the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the clinton administration's nii initiative aims to loosen the regulatory noose around phone and cablecompanies in order to get the private sector to build the information superhighway, yet retain regulation as a wayto ensure a "public right of way on the information superhighway" for schools, libraries, and museums (new yorktimes, 1993).schools, of course, will need much more than a "public right of way." "universal access" to phone servicehas not led to phones in schools nor to significant investment in teacher and student workstations, school anddistrict lans, internet nodes, and training among k12 schools and school districts, as it has in higher educationand in the research community. the "public right of way" to the information superhighway only deals with aportion of the costs. what will be the triggering event for schools, school districts, and local communities toreallocate current expenditures and invest new dollars to equip their students and teachers with the vehicles,training, local roads, and online ramps to the superhighway?getting to critical mass: building the 21stcentury infrastructure forschoolingthe first person with a telephone gets little productive use if his or her neighbors and family are withoutphones. the first person with a car in a remote region doesn't get much local benefit until the neighbors alsoacquire them and local society and government build roads for the local infrastructure. so, too, in schools, thingsdon't take off until most teachers and most children are using technology to do their work, when they cancommunicate with each other and with parents and communitybased mentors as easily as pioneer technologyusing teachers and students can today share data and reflections with counterparts in moscow on the global labproject. schools today lack the critical mass of skilled information highway "drivers" that will lead toorganizational changes in schooling and to a new industry of educational service providers. besides a lack ofphysical infrastructure in schools, school districts, and states in terms of localarea and widearea networks,another serious problem is that schools today are filled with outmoded technology equipment. more than half ofthe computers in schools today are five or more years old. according to quality education data (qed), less than30 percent of the computer equipment in schools can support graphical user interfaces (guis) such as windows ormacintosh. the gui is critical to today's applications, whether in the creation of multimedia documents or in"internetworking" around the globe.to realize schools for the 21st century requires that state and federal governments develop the policies andinvestment that will spur local school and school district investment in local school network infrastructure and thatwill assist schools in the process of envisioning, reorganizing, and redesigning themselves. local communitieswill not make the enormous local investment in a school telecommunications infrastructure unless there is a clearpublic understanding of its perceived benefits. despite the acquisition of some 4 million microcomputers in u.s.schools, technology has not resulted in many economies in the cost of schooling. in k12 education about 80percent of school budgets have to do with personnel, mostly teachers. some private companies that are making abusiness of managing schools are realizing economies on custodial or food service personnel, but significanteconomies in schooling would require reductions in teacher personnel. this has not happened as yet, even intechnologically rich schools.the only way to realize that is by totally reorganizing schooling and making a significant upfront investmentin communications technology. what would it take for schools to work effectively with fewer teachers? studentswould have to be able to work much more on their own, with teacher advisors managing their education with thesupport of external mentors and service providers, as in handy's shamrock organization. to support this, schoolswould have to establish up front a communications infrastructure with a local area network in the school connectedto thecan k12 education drive on the information superhighway?81the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet and with connections throughout a wired local community. with that kind of structure in place, it ispossible to imagine that significant economies could occur in school personnel. schools today, however, face thedilemma of investing up front significant funds and incurring ongoing costs for a communications infrastructurebefore there exists the availability of sufficient educational services on the information highway that are costefficient and effective.this, of course, is the critical mass, or chicken and egg, problem. without widespread local schoolinfrastructures, no one will invest in creating new educational service companies. without widespread and costefficient educational services, local school districts won't invest in local school infrastructures. to solve thecritical mass problem requires the progressive and simultaneous development of: the information superhighway and the "public right of way" (highway and onramps); a new industry of educational service providers that deliver distance learning, curriculum, educationalresources, projectbased learning activities, and so forth (program); a reorganized system of schooling and schools (organization); and the local school telecommunications infrastructure (local roads and vehicles).there are many attempts today to reinvent and redesign the american school. these include efforts by schooldistricts to build new kinds of schools (pearlman, 1993), the efforts of the design teams sponsored by the newamerican school development corporation, schools launched by charter school legislation in many states, andprivate efforts, like the edison project. all of these attempts focus on the question of how to develop schools thathave both better student outcomes and outcomes more appropriate for the 21st century; that are more economicaland are each tied to a system of schools, whether in one location or around the country; that actually work togetherand produce some savings by sharing curriculum, resources, teachers, project activities; and so forth.today, k12 education, despite the governance of school districts and state systems, is effectively a cottageindustry with 51 state units, 15,000 school district units, and 100,000 school units that exhibit little or no economicintegration. these school districts and state systems will have to evolve in a way that goes far beyond their currentgovernance and regulatory role to use the new information infrastructure to provide services and bring aboutefficiencies in the way that a global corporation like citibank or a large health maintenance organization utilizesnetworks to rationalize and economize on the delivery of services.as a nation, we will need many experiments on the new design of schooling and the utilization oftelecommunications network services over the next several years in order to understand how to exploit itspotential. these experiments will come from both government investment and private and public partnerships.despite the fact that the current internet owes much of its development to prior governmental support, thenii of the near future will be largely a private venture and will swamp the current internet in size and power.universal digital access and the "public right of way" for schools, libraries, and museums will come about lessthrough government investment than through private development.the key sectors of the telecommunications industryšcable and the telcosšare actively engaged with schoolpartnerships in their contest for public policy leverage. smart schools, school districts, and states will use thesepartnerships to show what can be done effectively and productively in k12 education with an advancedcommunications infrastructure.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?82the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government investment and regulation tools to get k12 to criticalmassgovernment has a key role in enabling the development of an information superhighway that fosters thesimultaneous development of new school organizations and the educational service providers to serve them. butfederal or state investment can never be of the scale to provide nationally to local schools and school districts thenecessary level of school site workstations and lans, training, and nodes to make them full partners on theinformation superhighway.federal and state policy initiatives should be aimed at overcoming the critical mass problem so that localschools and school districts see the benefits of investing in the local infrastructure. today, few classrooms havephones. tomorrow's schools will have digital links not just between denver and moscow but also, and moreimportantly, between the local school and its own community, parents, students, and teachers, so that students willbe able to communicate with teachers, parents, community mentors, and international mentors and resources andshare messages, ideas, data, and multimedia student work. to raise the funds needed to build the localinfrastructure, local schools and school districts will have to understand the benefits of these informationage skillsand activities and be able to persuade the local citizenry to invest, through special bonds and appropriations, insuch a capability.federal and state government policy can support these developments. government can be a customer of newservices and can invest directly in, and promote through grants, the following: public educational information resources; longrange planning by states, school districts, and schools; staff development; software and interface development for internetworking; projectbased learning modules; new educational enterprises; and research on the effectiveness of the new learning activities and enterprises.the federal government can increase existing support through direct nsf or national telecommunicationsand information administration grants, through defense conversion funds or the high performance computing andcommunications initiative, the star schools program, and the u.s. department of education. in the regulationsector, tariffs could be regulated and targeted subsidies established to enable school consumers less costly accessto the information highway. the state of georgia gives schools the same belowtariff rate as state agencies and,together with a less than 1cent surcharge, has generated $35 million annually for an education technology trustfund (kessler, 1993).government must respect that the most significant investment will come from the private sector, when privateinterests coincide with the public interest, and not because private sector subsidies are specifically required byregulatory rules. linkage requirements to builders of the information superhighway to give schools a "public rightof way" can, however, be used smartly to foster winwin publicprivate partnerships between schools and thetelephone or cable companies. k12 education also needs to develop partnerships with other public servicesectors, including libraries, museums, social services, and health care; to press for government action; and to lobbyeffectively with the telecommunications and cable companies.building the information superhighway, the internet, and the future digital nii is not enough. that is justinfrastructure. the key development, besides national, state, and local infrastructure, is the availability of qualityeducational programs and services.few technologies have made any impact on the organization of k12 education, whether radio, broadcasttv, satellite tv, cable tv, or computers. accompanying these developments,can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?83the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, have been an increasing number and quality of both public and private, but free, programming services.with the development of the nii and "shamrock schools," one can envision the parallel development of local,regional, and national program providers that are part of the real economy, that is, neither public supported noradvertiser supported but instead paid for through service fees by schools that have been able to reorganize andreallocate their expenditures to pay for such services. these services would include direct instruction courses,minicourses and modules, thematic blocks for projectbased learning, and an array of curriculum materials andinformation resources for school and home use. they could also provide the basis for companies that managenetworks of public or charter schools dispersed throughout the country.a seat at the tablelike other economic sectors, k12 education is faced with a critical mass problem. while commercialviability of niibased services is evident in such sectors as banking, financial services, and new videoondemandservices, k12 education will require substantial state and federal support to nurture the development of schoolsite telecommunications infrastructures and new educational services. k12 education needs a seat at the table innational efforts to develop the nii. to be effective, k12 education will have to get its voice together in a betterway as a sector and in coalition with other public service sectors. the federal government could aid that process byfinancing national teleconferences for the education sector to learn the issues of the nii and build its collectivevoice.state and federal governments are critical players in promoting universal access to and widespread studentutilization of the future nii. through investment and regulation, states and the federal government can promotethe new school organizations, the new educational enterprises, and the local schoolsite telecommunicationsinfrastructures that will make the information superhighway a roadway for today's and tomorrow's students.referencesbecker, henry jay. 1993. "a truly empowering technologyrich educationšhow will it cost?" educational irm quarterly (fall).bolt, beranek, and newman inc. 1993. getting the nii to school: a roadmap to universal participation. bolt, beranek, and newman,cambridge, mass., december.bruder, isabelle. 1991. "a guide to distance learning," electronic learning (november/december).handy, charles. 1989. the age of unreason. harvard university press, cambridge, mass.information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993. the national information infrastructure: agenda for action. information infrastructuretask force, washington, d.c., september 15.kessler, glenn. 1993. "treat schools as state agencies for telephone rates," inventing tomorrow's schools (may/june).kubey, robert. 1993. "whittling the school day away," education week (december 1).mecklenburger, james a. 1993. "to start a dialogue: the next generation of america's schools," phi kappa phi journal 73(4):42œ45.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?84the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.newman, dennis, susan bernstein, and paul a. reese. 1992. local infrastructure for school networking: current models and prospects, bbnreport no. 7726. bbn systems and technologies, cambridge, mass., april.new york times. 1993. "gore views the data highway," december 22.office of technology assessment (ota). 1989. linking for learning: a new course for education, otaset439. u.s. governmentprinting office, washington, d.c., november.pearlman, robert. 1993. "designing the new american schools," communications of the acm 36(5):46œ49.secretary's commission on achieving necessary skills (scans). 1991. what work requires of schools. u.s. department of labor,washington, d.c.zuboff, shoshana. 1988. in the age of the smart machine: the future of work and power. basic books, new york.note1. scans (1991) defines a framework that can serve as the foundation for the establishment of education goals and objectives in future u.s.citizens. whether they work on a shop floor on in an executive suite, they will need to master the following competencies and foundationsskills:competencies:1. resources: identifies, organizes, plans, and allocates resources.2. interpersonal: works with others.3. information: acquires and uses information.4. systems: understands complex interrelationships.5. technology: works with a variety of technologies.a threepart foundation: basic skills: reads, writes, performs arithmetic and mathematical operations, listens, and speaks. thinking skills: thinks creatively, makes decisions, solves problems, visualizes, knows how to learn, and reasons. persons qualities: displays responsibility, selfesteem, sociability, selfmanagement, integrity, and honesty.can k12 education drive on the information superhighway?85the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.future roles of libraries in citizen access to informationresources through the national information infrastructureclifford a. lynchintroductionthis paper critically examines several popular assumptions about the national information infrastructure(nii) vision that i believe are not entirely consistent with the evidence available to date and current trends. theseassumptions include the following: ensuring universal access to the nii and the resulting benefits are largely synonymous with ensuringuniversal connectivity, as has been the case with the electrical power grid or the telephone system. if suchuniversal connectivity can be provided, immediate benefits in terms of improved access to informationresources and services will follow. the nii will greatly increase the public's (free) access to information. the public will access digitallibraries that will supplant the functions of traditional (physical) libraries. the digital libraries on the niiwill be enormous storehouses of information that will include (but not be limited to) much of the existingliterature of the world. forwardlooking traditional libraries are already transforming themselves intosuch electronic storehouses. in the new environment of the nii, libraries will continue (and expand) their current role as the keyproviders of information to the public (regardless of economic status). libraries will be the mechanismthrough which we will balance the increased commodization of information with the public's need tohave access to information. libraries will benefit greatly from the nii. the new technology will facilitate efficiencies in resourcesharing that will help to alleviate the budget crises facing libraries of all types and will improve thequality of library service nationwide, in part by reducing geographically based inequities among libraries.universal access in the networked information contextthe nii enterprise has two components. one component is the upgrading of the existing nationaltelecommunications infrastructure to incorporate very high speed computercommunications facilities that willefficiently (and hopefully cheaply) move large amounts of digital information, including digital video. this is therealm of integrated services data network, asynchronous transfer mode, fiber to the curb and the home, "videodialtone," and similar technologies. the issues arefuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure86the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.numerous and are well covered elsewhere in this volume; they include such basic public policy concerns as how toencourage the rapid deployment of the infrastructure on a broad basis, how ubiquitous the new infrastructure mustbe, and regulatory issues related to competition and monopoly.the second component of the nii initiative is the set of applications that will be enabled by this upgradedtelecommunications infrastructure. these applications must drive and justify the initiative: the new applicationswill engage and excite the public to support the effort. indeed, the initiative has been justified with visions of acitizenry informed and empowered by greatly improved access to information and studentsšbe they children inrural areas or adults engaged in lifelong learning activitiesšexploiting ubiquitous access to the world's literatureto facilitate their learning. these visions have been eloquently sketched not only by the research and educationcommunity but also by political leaders such as vice president gore. they are indeed worthy goals for publicpolicy, and, technically, the visions are challenging but not unrealistic. from social, legal, political, and economicperspectives, however, they are much more problematic. the difficulties are not widely understood and have notbeen well addressed.curiously, services such as persontoperson electronic mailšwhich are quite similar to the services offeredby voice telephony, and for which we do have some understanding of demand, usage, and economic basisšarenot often cited as justifications for moving forward with development of the nii, either by analogy to currentphone service as a universal citizen right or as an example of a clearly viable commercial service that could beenabled by a ubiquitous nii. perhaps they are not enough: not sufficiently compelling in their impact, not excitingenough as a potential marketplace, not challenging enough in terms of the base telecommunications technologynecessary to support them.the new telecommunications infrastructure will enable other informationcontentintensive applications thatmay create entire new business sectors. these are more compelling to the corporate world and are not oftenmentioned as public policy justificationsšin particular, the creation of a marketing paradise on a previouslyunimagined scale. such enterprises will succeed or fail based primarily on the marketplace; their success or failureis not a public policy issue. my opinion, which is somewhat at odds with the view represented by the enormousinvestments currently being made in the alliances and acquisitions involving regional bell operating companies,media companies, and cable television companies, is that the marketplace viability of many of these commercialservices (and the time frame in which they will become profitable) is still uncertain.in framing access to information services and resources through the nii as a public policy issue, we arefundamentally in conflict about what we are trying to accomplish. we welcome the economic growth that sales ofinformation access through the new networks are likely to represent. for those who can pay, it seems clear that thenii can only increase the range of information that is accessible for purchase, since it will add to all of the currentsources of information, and the nii forms a hospitable environment for a wide range of fundamentally new typesof information content and information services.but as a society we have beliefs about the rights of citizens to have access to a wide range of information andthe importance of such access in contexts like education. the nii is particularly appealing because it offers atechnological environment that can expand such public access to information to support the visions of greatlyimproved education discussed earlier and can facilitate equal access to knowledge by citizens in rural as well asurban areas. in today's world we welcome and support the diversity represented by libraries, bookstores, broadcasttelevision and radio, and printed newspapers and magazines sold both at newsstands and by subscription. whileall of these enterprises compete with each other to a limited extent, they have come to coexist fairly comfortably(though with continuing minor conflicts around the boundaries). in a new world of widespread distribution ofelectronic information through networks (under business terms we can only guess at today), it is unclear that allthese institutions will continue to maintain independent existences. theyfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure87the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may converge and coalesce in complex, competitive ways. with the exception of libraries, all of the otherinformation providers and distributors mentioned above are basically profitoriented enterprises; even theexceptions, such as scholarly societies, compete with public and research libraries, which usually are publiclysupported nonprofit organizations. the trajectory of competition and convergence among the forprofit enterprisesis primarily a business question (though not without some public policy implications in terms of, for example,ensuring diversity). the future role of libraries in the nii environment may represent a conflict of publicandprivatesector interests. the stakes in this conflict are potentially high, not only in impact on privatesectorrevenues but in terms of our future society.the conflict is not just over direct revenuešit is over the library's purchasing of information and giving it toits user community, thus depriving the information provider of the opportunity to collect revenue from sales of theinformation. the library is also preventing the information provider from establishing a relationship with eachpurchaser, which can facilitate the collection of marketing and demographic data (valuable in its own right). thelibrary continues to provide its patrons with privacy through anonymity in a marketplace that is increasinglymoving toward the massive collection of data about the behavior and interests of customers.beyond the admittedly compelling visions of public good that are being presented to justify the nii program,our government seems to be establishing some fundamental policy objectives for its development, such as verybroad access to this new infrastructure. the need for "universal" access to redress the increasing gap between theinformation "haves" and "havenots" has become an issue. to some extent this universal service objective makesexplicit the universal service goals that have been evolving for voice telephone service over the past few decadesand extends the entitlement for basic telephone service to an entitlement not only to nii connectivity but also tosome poorly defined set of information services on the future network. the discussion of policies andimplementation strategies for the nii to address the universal service objective has really focused on how toachieve largescale connectivity; it has not addressed what, if anything, this connectivity will provide to the userother than an opportunity to access whatever services may be generally available on the nii, on whatevereconomic terms these services may be offered (which may include free services supported by advertising andsome set of free or very low cost "public access" services).the nii is something completely new. in our quest to gain insight into the development of this infrastructureand to continue to inform our policymaking and planning, we have studied historical analogies. these include thetelephone system, the electric power grid, and various transportation systems such as highways and railroads.these analogies are often confusing and misleading because they fail to capture the essential character ofcomputercommunications networks, such as the internet, as the new medium of communication and informationdissemination. if applications for the new telecommunications infrastructure are to be driven by information, onemust carefully evaluate the societal and legal structures that have developed around ownership of and access toinformation resources. i think that access to information services and resources on the nii will quickly come todominate issues about connectivity in the universal service debate.consider the implications of universal access to voice telephony. roughly speaking, such universal accessmeans that everyone has a phone, can receive calls, and perhaps can make local calls. access to additional servicesis based on the ability of the end user to pay. universal access does not guarantee anything other than the mostlimited enjoyment of the intellectual property of others. universal access to the services that we expect of thefuture nii (and indeed the services we have used to justify its development) are fundamentally different and gobeyond simple connectivity. they involve universal access to information resources, which (except for publicdomain and other freely accessible information resources) are someone's intellectual property. the widely ignoredprecedents here are advertisersupported broadcasting (both television and radio), which provides the public withaccess to a rather limited set of information resources and artistic works under a veryfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure88the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.peculiar "contract" that requires the public to endure a certain number of minutes of advertising (or pledge drivesin the case of public broadcasting) along with the viewed content.indeed, in the nii context we will be challenged as a society to define a base level of information resourcesthat we believe must be available to all members of our society, regardless of the ability to pay. access to some ofthese resources will probably be subsidized by advertisers; others will be made available directly by local, state,and federal governments; still others will be provided by a range of nonprofit groups, including, perhaps, somefuture "corporation for public network information" and its local "public network information" affiliates. accessto those resources not provided through other means will have to be subsidized by government, just as itsubsidizes public libraries to provide access to a good deal of information not available through othermechanisms.library roles in universal access to electronic informationlibraries defend intellectual freedom, the right to privacy in accessing information, and the public's right tohave access to a wide range of information and viewpoints. over the past century libraries have been effectiveadvocates and defenders of these values. today libraries successfully provide access to a very broad and diversebase of information. individual units of information such as books are fairly inexpensive, and a wide range ofmaterials can be acquired for a library's collection. the interlibrary loan system essentially permits a library tooffer its patrons a range of information that goes far beyond locally held materials, which greatly expands thescope of materials available to every library's users. ensuring unlimited public access to a given electronicinformation resource, on the other hand, appears to be a very expensive proposition, and for reasons to bedescribed later in this paper, it appears that such electronic resources will not be able to be shared among librariesthrough interlibrary loans. as we look toward the issues of information access on the nii, one danger is that thegoal will be reformed from an assurance that the public has access to a broad range of information to a definitionof specific information resources that the public must be able to access. such subsidized access may be limited to afew selected electronic information resources in much the same manner as school systems today acquire textbooksand the government creates and develops reports on specific topics of public interest. in the future the governmentmay develop and mount electronic information resources or contract for these resources from the private sector forpublic use. in the future, support of wideranging intellectual curiosity and openended exploration of diverseviewpoints may no longer be part of the publicly supported program. one of the most troubling possibilities is thatthe government will select a base set of information resources to be guaranteed to the public, rather than simplysubsidizing some amount of access to the broad base of "commercially published" information.to be sure, governmentsubsidized information sources will not be the only voices to be heard for free on thenii. this information will be complemented by a wide range of information offered by various public serviceorganizations and indeed by any organization with a message to deliver and the funds to support the delivery ofthat message. (organizations will include advertisers; the difference between advertisers and public serviceorganizations providing information grows more and more blurred.) further, the cost to an individual ororganization offering information to the public through the nii should be much lower than the analogous costs forprint distribution or dissemination of information through the broadcast media today. but a reliance on thesevarious free sources of information does not seem to be a sufficient substitute for the broad access to publishedliterature provided by libraries today. libraries not only provide access to a wide range of current information butthey also conserve and provide access to a cultural and historical record. those providing "free" informationthrough the network will neither maintain such a record nor guard its integrity, accuracy, and balance.future roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure89the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ensuring access to an appropriate range of information resources and services is not the only issue, althoughit may be the most difficult longterm problem. connectivity issues must be addressed as well. people will need toinvest in technology to access the nii, but many will be unable or unwilling to make such investments. librariesmay be a natural place to make available the information technology the public needs to use the network, at leastat some minimum level of functionality. i also anticipate the development of a number of personalized directinformation distribution services that assume their users have personal ''information appliances" of some type. theability to exploit these new types of information services will be limited in a public access environment. such anenvironment will support today's userdriven searching type of information access but not the emerging modelthat includes software agents continually working on a user's behalf to ferret out and sift information. users inrural areas may face continued problems with network access or with the cost of that access, depending on howvarious policy decisions shape network deployment and economics. and training and user support issues,particularly for those who have not grown up with the technology, will be of major importance. meaningfuluniversal access will require a major education and outreach program. such a program will require not onlyincreased emphasis on information technology literacy as part of the basic k12 curriculum but also a means ofreaching the adult population.libraries, intellectual property, and electronic information in anetworked environmentthe majority of information has never been available for free use. someone owns it. it is worth noting thateven for works that are hundreds of years old and out of copyright, publishers have used a great deal of ingenuityand have gone to a great deal of trouble and expense to be in a position to claim ownership (through editededitions, translations, packaging of outofcopyright works with newly commissioned introductions and notes, andso on). and there is a substantial body of information that is created or compiled by the government at variouslevels that is "owned" by the public. i have no doubt that the internet today and the nii tomorrow willtremendously facilitate public access to these important information resources. legislative initiatives and projectsby the national libraries and federal agencies are making many of these information resources available today. butthere is also a great reluctance to see the government expand its role as a creator and compiler of information veryfar. i would speculate that there would be little support for a governmentsponsored encyclopedia to compete withthe private products available today. most of the information that the government collects, creates, or compiles isclosely related to its operations or to specific legislative mandates and public policy objectives.for most of the 20th century, libraries have provided the public with "free" access to a great deal of thisprivately owned information. (more precisely, the public has funded libraries; these libraries then acquireinformation and make it available to the public without charge.) the basic enabling mechanisms have been thecopyright law and the doctrine of first sale: the library purchases a copyrighted work. while the library cannotcopy it, it is free to loan it to anyone (including patrons and other libraries). the impact of the role of libraries onthe revenue to rightsholders has been limited by the fact that only one person can borrow (read) a copy of a workat a time, plus the fact that material purchased by a given library is primarily accessible only to those in fairlyclose geographic proximity to that library. while in theory the work is available nationwide through interlibraryloan, realistically the delays and inconvenience of moving material physically from one library to another havebeen such that use of library materials, just like use of the libraries themselves, has had a strong geographic bias. itis only someone with a very strongly felt and typically rather specialized information need who will pursueinterlibrary loan from a publicfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure90the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.library to a research library, and research library to research library interlibrary loans are typically in support of arelatively small community of scholars.further, the cost of travel to a distant library has historically been much greater than the cost of acquiring agiven unit of information. with the exception of a few scholars who needed to use particularly rare, fragile, orvaluable material that did not travel through the interlibrary loan system, people would not travel far to usematerial in a library. again, this served to limit the economic effects of libraries providing access to material onthe rightsholders.we are already seeing this set of assumptions change with electronic information resources. in many casesthe cost of gaining access to electronic databases is so high that users will travel to a research library that offers itsuser community (which typically includes walkin patrons as well as their specific institutional user community, inthe library or accessing the resources remotely) to use them rather than to pay the prices charged to the generalpublic. we still have a very limited understanding of how this shift is really changing revenues to rightsholders; itis unclear the extent to which users are physically traveling to libraries with electronic information resources toavoid paying, as opposed to the extent to which they are making the journey to get access to a resource that theysimply could not afford under any other circumstances.congress has also played a role in making sure that information is available to the public. the copyrightlaws, following the constitutional mandate that congress "promote the progress of science and useful arts," havecrafted a balance between the need to reward rightsholders for creating intellectual property and the needs ofsociety to make use of this property. the elements of this balance include limited duration of copyrights andspecific exemptions for fair use, teaching, and preservation of the nation's intellectual heritage under certaincircumstances. some of these specific provisions in the copyright law, as supported by the interpretation of thecourts, recognize that there are differences between information published primarily for mass markets andinformation published primarily to support scholarly communications.in an environment of networked access and electronic information this entire framework changes. electronicinformation is virtually never sold; it is licensed, and its use is regulated by a contract between the rightsholderand the user that typically limits access to the information to specific uses (and perhaps even for specificpurposes), to a specific, defined, limited user community and for a limited duration of time.two of the major factors in determining the price of a license for a given resource are the size of a library'suser community and (sometimes) the maximum number of patrons that will be permitted to access the resourceconcurrently. costs are high; a system like the university of california pays about $100,000 a year for the right toprovide its user community with access to a large citation database or the full text of a few hundred periodicals. inmany cases the electronic resources are unique offerings (and critical to scholarship in a given discipline), andthere is little competition to drive prices down. many of the public policy compromises that characterize copyrightlaw are not usually accommodated in licenses for electronic information resources. no one knows how suchcompromises and the broader objective of the free flow of scholarly information can be effectively implemented inthe electronic environment without unacceptable damage to the revenues of the rightsholder, barring largescale,systemic restructuring of the scholarly publishing system. with mass market information (which includes suchthings as newspapers, which are also important to the scholarly community), there is even less experience and lessclarity regarding terms and impact of licenses for electronic information. very little of this mass market materialhas been licensed electronically to institutions such as libraries except in standalone formats such as cdromdisks.a few other points should be stressed. libraries cannot begin wholesale digitization programs to convert theirexisting print collections into electronic form; it is not permitted under existing copyright law for material that isstill under copyright, and most of the most heavily used information is still under copyright. rightsholders areunder no obligation to make their informationfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure91the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.available to libraries in electronic form under any terms (regardless of whether the library already holds a printcopy). availability is much more of an issue for electronic information than it is for print: if a publisher makes aprint product generally available, it is difficult to prevent a library from acquiring it under the same terms it isoffered to the general public. (differential pricing for librariesšparticularly of journal subscriptionsšhas beenimposed by publishers for a number of years; the ethics and legality of this practice remain a very vexed topic,although the practice is now widely accepted. it is hard to distinguish where differential pricing ends and a refusalto license to libraries begins; a library subscription that is 3 times the cost of an individual subscription may still beaffordable, but a library subscription priced at 100 times the cost of an individual subscription likely representswhat is in effect a refusal to make the material available to libraries.) in many cases, rightsholders are making acomfortable profit from print publications and perhaps from some limited direct electronic licensing to specificusers (such as the business community). they have little, if any, incentive to make their information availableelectronically to libraries; and if they are willing to do so at all it may be at a premium of many times the cost ofprint. libraries, already strapped for funds to continue any sort of acquisitions program, may be unable to affordor at least cost justify an investment in many publishers' electronic information, particularly if it is alreadyavailable and affordable in print form. and the publisher has little incentive to lower the price because the printprofit is already sizable. also, publishers are being cautious about making electronic information available becausepricing patterns are not well established, even for backlists or journal backfiles. they may not make retrospectivefiles available to libraries at all, or only at very high costs. libraries, concerned with their ability to maintaincurrent acquisitions, will likely assign a very low priority to funding relicensing of materials in electronic formatsthat they already own in print or can get through interlibrary loan.further, any license agreements that a library may be able to negotiate typically do not accommodate thepresent interlibrary loan system. information licensed by one library cannot be shared with another library's patroncommunity. this is particularly frustrating since technically electronic information can be moved much moreswiftly and economically than printed materials through an interlibrary loan system, thus promising improvedservice for library patrons nationwide and reduced costs for libraries that are increasingly relying on theinterlibrary loan system to compensate for their dwindling local purchasing power. in some ways the interlibraryloan model does not even make sense for electronic information resourcesštechnically, any patron at any libraryshould be able to access resources at another library across the network without involving an interlibrary. throughthe ability of networks to erase the accidental constraints of geography, anyone in the world has potential access toelectronic information offered by a given library on an equally convenient basis. electronic library collections arefreed from their geographic anchors by networking technology. but facilitating such access, which clearly runscounter to a rightsholder's interests in maximizing revenue, is prevented by license. indeed, part of the motivationto shift from sale to license has been specifically to address this issue. but although some license terms couldwork, to an extent, in an interlibrary loan environment (such as ensuring that only a fixed maximum number ofpeople have access to an information resource at one time), the information providers have not been enthusiasticabout experimenting with such agreements. what motivation do they have, after all?in a networked environment libraries are being forced to be much more explicit in defining their usercommunities as part of their license negotiations. for a research library it is typically phrased "the faculty,students, and staff of university x"; for a public library it might be "the residents of township y or county z."these definitions can get cumbersome. are affiliated hospitals included in the case of a university library; arepeople included who work for businesses in a city but don't reside there? there is still some recognition of publicaccess, though this tends to be structured around geographically based traditions. for example, many libraries stillpropose to include as part of their user community anyone who is physically present at the library, regardless offuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure92the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.who they are and how far they have traveled. many rightsholders have been willing to accommodate this kind oflimited public access provision. but such definitions ignorešindeed run directly counter tošmany of the realadvantages of the networked environment.threats to public libraries in the networked environmentthe public libraries have always been on the front lines in making information accessible to the generalpublic. typically, the research library community has supported them in this effort and has also done a great dealto make information directly available to the public, though preferably through the interlibrary loan system ratherthan by largescale direct service to the general public. in the new world of the nii it is natural to try to continue tokeep the library community in this role and indeed to call for an expanded role particularly for public libraries inproviding access to electronic information, both that provided by the government (building, for example, on theprecedent established by the federal depository library program) and that made available on the network bycommercial and noncommercial rightsholders and information providers.of all the types of libraries, however, public libraries may be in the deepest trouble. their budgets have beenslashed nationwide over the past decade, leading to massive curtailments in services. unlike research libraries orcorporate special libraries that are typically service units within their parent organizations and viewed as providingessential services to those organizations, public libraries are sometimes valued as providing a service to acommunity that is relatively peripheral compared to such services as public safety. because of the very large sizeof their user communities, public libraries often face large costs for licensing electronic information resources.because they tend to provide a great deal of access to mass market rather than more purely scholarly information,they are considered by some information providers as potential competitors to the information providers' efforts tomarket information (particularly electronic information) directly to the public, and prices for licenses are setaccordingly. in order to meet the challenges of the information age they will need to make massive investments inboth information technology and staff training. it is not simply a matter of ensuring that the network reaches publiclibraries, but also that the public libraries have a sufficient installed base of hardware, software, and sufficientcompetent staff to make use of these network connections as an effective way of providing access to informationfor their patrons.the basic funding mechanisms for public libraries are also likely to come into serious question in thenetworked information environment. historically, most public libraries have drawn their support from theirgeographically defined user community through various forms of taxes. in a time when any person in the worldcan potentially use any public library through the network, geography no longer defines the user community for apublic library, and thus geographically based funding may no longer make sense as a means of supporting theselibraries.there is a great irony here. in the print world each community funded its local libraries, and these librariesserved as access points to the national library collections through the interlibrary loan system. in the networkedenvironment, collections are local to a specific library and its user community, and each library can competeequally with all other libraries on the network for patrons who would join their user community (and presumablypay for such membership as a means of funding the library). commercial organizations are also free to appear onthe network to compete with libraries for patrons. given the opportunity to aggregate a critical mass of interestedcustomers for information in any imaginable specialized area because of the national and international scope of thenetwork, a wide range of newly economically viable niche commercial information providers may evolve on thenetwork, much as such providers exist as specialty publications and shops that do most of their business by mailorder. it is interesting to speculate about the potential effects of users "joining" the library or libraries of theirchoice through the network. many geographic localesfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure93the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that currently fund libraries are quite diverse, economically, demographically, and culturally. one wonders if suchdiversity will continue to be found in the electronic communities that fund electronic libraries or whether we willsee a much greater homogeneity among the patrons of a given "library" on the network.realistically, another aspect of this problem is that the economically disadvantaged or those uncomfortablewith technology are least likely to own the network connections and information technology needed to accesslibraries over the network. they will continue to visit the library physically and to use it as a place where they canobtain not only access to information generally but also the information technology necessary to use electronicinformation resources on the network (which might include important community resources, such as listings ofemployment and educational opportunities or information about social services). the more prosperous,technologically literate people may have abandoned the geographically local public library for remote electroniclibraries on the network, thus eroding the community commitment to continue to support the local library.digital libraries and library servicesi am not fond of the term "digital library." the term "library" is used to refer to at least three things: acollection, the building that houses that collection, and the organization responsible for it all. as organizations,libraries acquire, organize, provide access to, and preserve information. these are the primary functions of alibrary, though in many cases they have been augmented with more extensive responsibilities for training andteaching, for providing or facilitating access to social services, or for managing certain types of government orinstitutional information resources. when one considers libraries as organizations, it is clear that they deal withinformation in all formatsšprint, microforms, sound recordings, video, and electronic information resources. fromthis perspective, the term "digital library" doesn't make much sense and provides a very onesided view of themission and operation of a library.it is certainly true that an increasing part of the collection of information that many libraries acquire,organize, provide access to, and preserve will be in electronic form, and as this proportion increases it will havewideranging effects on all aspects of library planning, operation, policy, and funding. how quickly this transitionwill move and how soon a critical mass of information necessary to serve various classes of library users willactually be available in electronic form are subject to considerable debate. i think that it will take longer than manypeople believe. there are a number of obvious situations in which much of the primary data in various areas isavailable and heavily used in electronic form, including space sciences, remote sensing, molecular biology, law,and parts of the financial industries. in some cases these data can only be meaningfully stored and used inelectronic forms. but even in many of these areas much of the journal literature (as opposed to primaryinformation) is still available only in print. already there are massive data and information archives available onthe network, containing everything from planetary exploration data to microcomputer software. while these areoften referred to (rather grandly) as digital libraries, they are really not, in many cases, part of any actual library'scollection and are not really managed in the way in which a library would manage them. in a number of cases theyare actually the volunteer efforts of a few interested and energetic individuals, and there is no institutionalcommitment to maintain the resources.it is important to recognize how little of the existing print literature base is currently available throughlibraries in electronic form, even to the limited and wellspecified user communities that are typically served bythe still relatively well funded academic research libraries. libraries have been investing heavily in informationtechnology over the past two decades, to be sure, but most of this investment has been spent on modernizingexisting systems rather than acquiringfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure94the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic content. the most visible results of this program of investment are the online catalogs of variouslibraries that can be freely accessed across the internet today (although they often contain a mix of databases, suchas the catalog of the library's holdings, which are available to anyone, and other licensed information resources,such as databases of journal citations or full text, which are limited to the library's direct user community). theseinformation retrieval systems allow a user to find out what printbased information a library holds; while they arevery heavily used, their end result is normally citations to printed works rather than electronic primaryinformation. even a system such as the university of california, which operates a sophisticated systemwideinformation retrieval system and had been aggressively investing in electronic information resources for someyears, only offers access to a few hundred journals and virtually no books in electronic format. it holds activejournal subscriptions to over 100,000 journals and its online catalog contains entries for over 11 million books.(in many cases the journal articles are only available to the uc community a month or more after printpublication; in most cases the electronic form of the article does not include graphs, equations, or illustrations.)the conversion of the major research libraries to electronic form is years away and is less a technological problemthan a business and legal issue.interestingly, it seems likely that conversion of critical masses of electronic information may occur first forspecific, often modest communities that are willing to pay substantially for access to the information resources andthat are willing to pay personally (or at least organizationally), rather than through the support of an intermediaryagency like a library. in these situations it also seems fairly common for individual users to be willing to pay foraccess to information transactionally (i.e., by the article retrieved or viewed or by the connect hour) rather thanunder the flatfee license model favored by libraries. in many cases primary rightsholders feel much morecomfortable with an arrangement that gives them income for each use of the material, rather than trying to decide"what it's worth" in advance as they would have to do in a flatrate contract agreement. indeed, this conversion ofinformation resources to electronic form is already well advanced in the legal community. this area has movedquickly because it seems that the user community is not price sensitive and because of some unusual situationswith regard to concentrated ownership of much of the key material by corporations that are both rightsholders andproviders of access services directly. and, as has already been discussed, it may prove impractical or evenimpossible, for a variety of reasons, for libraries to provide much patron access to these electronic informationresources once they are established. certainly this has been the case in areas such as law (with the exception of lawschool libraries, which benefit from special arrangements intended to familiarize future graduates with theelectronic resources).it is important to recognize that these commercial information providers are not libraries, though they mayoffer access to immense databases that represent key resources in a given discipline. they acquire and mountinformation to make a profit and remove it if it does not generate sufficient revenue. they will not preserve littleused information just because it is an important part of the historical or cultural record. and many of theseproviders have followed a marketing strategy that emphasizes sales to a limited market at very high prices ratherthan a much larger volume market at much lower prices per unit of information.in considering the conversion on the existing print base to electronic form, one basic issue that must beconsidered is the negotiation for license with the rightsholders. in most disciplines there are many publishers whocontribute to the print base. the notion of a major research library negotiating and managing contracts withthousands of publishers is clearly absurd, as is the notion of negotiating a contract for a $100/year journal. (it willcost much more than that to negotiate the contract, in the absence of a "standard" contract that all parties couldjust accept unmodified. such standard contracts do not exist today, and there has been little success in developingone, despite the efforts of such organizations as the coalition for networked information.) a number ofcompanies have begun to act as rights aggregators for libraries: university microfilms inc. and informationaccess company, for example, will license libraries' fulltext databases containing material theyfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure95the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.have, in turn, licensed from the primary publishers. but coverage of these fulltext databases is limited, and thematerial is not sufficiently timely to substitute for print subscriptions (or electronic access directly from thepublisher). until libraries can acquire electronic information under some framework that matches the simplicityand uniformity that characterizes the acquisition of most printed material today, the growth of electronic librarycollections will be slow.the limited amount of library collections available in electronic form is already beginning to have effectsthat cause concern. networkbased access to electronic information is unquestionably convenient, and users tendto use electronic information resources that are available without consideration that they may be incomplete ormay not represent the highest quality or most current work on a given subject. to some users, electronic librarycollections are already being viewed as defining the literature in a given area; these users have been too quick toembrace the transition to electronic formats.in the next decade we will be dealing with a mixed transitional environment for libraries, where some parts ofthe collection exist in electronic formats but a large part continues to be available only on paper. this will greatlyincrease the complexity of managing the provisions for library services, defining priorities, and developingpolicies and strategies to position libraries to function effectively in their role as information providers to thepublic both in today's geographically bound, printbased world and in the future environment of electronicinformation on the nii.conclusion: the broader context of information publishing on the niiit is important to recognize that libraries are part of an enormously complex system of information providersand consumers that also includes publishers, government at all levels, scholars and researchers, the general public,scholarly societies, individual authors, various rightsbrokers, and the business community. even the much moreconstrained and relatively homogeneous scholarly communications and publishing system is vastly complex.libraries play an integral part, but only a part. there may be an expanding division between the world of massmarket information, much of which is bought and sold as a commodity in a commercial environment, andscholarly information, which is primarily produced and consumed by nonprofit institutions that place great valueof the free flow of information (although there are currently many forprofit organizations involved in thescholarly publishing system).there are vast changes taking place throughout this entire system as a result of the possibilities created bynetworks and information technology. organizations are reassessing their roles: scholarly societies that onceviewed themselves very much like commercial publishers are now rethinking their relationships with theirdisciplinary knowledge base, their authors, their readers, and the libraries that have traditionally purchased muchof their output. individual scholars are exploring the possibilities of various types of networkbased publishingoutside the framework established by traditional publishers, and in some cases also outside the customary socialconstructs such as peer review. indeed, processes such as publication and citation that were relatively wellunderstood in the print world and that are central to numerous areas in our society are still very poorly defined orunderstood in the network context.libraries are still basically oriented toward artifactbased collections and toward print. they are struggling torespond to the new variations on publishing and information distribution that are evolving in the networkedenvironment and to determine what their roles should be with regard to these developments. considering thatlibraries have played a relatively minor role in anything involved in television or radio in this regard, i wouldsuggest caution in predicting their roles in a system of information creation, distribution, and use that is beingtransfigured by the introduction of networks and information technology based solely on the effects of thesetechnologies on existingfuture roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure96the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.library operations and services rather than on the system as a whole. i do not believe that libraries are going todisappear, but they may change substantially in their roles, missions, and funding in the coming years. certainlythere is going to be a growing demand for properly trained, innovative, technologically literate librarians in manynew roles in the networked information environment.it is clear that the visions of information access through the nii are attractive and represent worthy societalgoals. in many regards they build on the tradition of public libraries and their essential role in our society as it hasdeveloped during the 20th century. but without outright subsidy of access to electronic information or majorchanges in the framework that determines the terms and conditions under which the public has access to suchinformation, these visions of the nii's potential may be difficult to achieve, and it may be unrealistic to assumethat libraries have the resources to step up to these challenges. it seems clear that libraries have a number ofpotentialšperhaps centralšroles to play in implementing the public policy objectives that have been articulatedfor the nii. but they may not be the route to achieve all of these objectives, and in any event their roles and effortswill need to be complemented by investments from other sources, such as the federal government, in thedevelopment of public access information resources. we need to be very clear about who the user communitiesare, who is to be subsidized, what is being subsidized, and how that subsidy will be financed.future roles of libraries in citizen access to information resources through the nationalinformation infrastructure97the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussionrobert kahn: bob lucky, if your model of the internet being free is really going to hold for the rest ofthe country, how are we going to get it into the 70 million homes in america at $37,000 plus $7,000 each?robert lucky: i don't know. that is where the cost is going to be. the model is really based on businessuse, where we pay an average of $5 per person per month for everything that we can associate with the internet,while the telephone might be closer to $100 when you throw in the longdistance charges and so forth. but intrying to get them into homes, particularly if there is a separate line involved, you face this enormous cost andbottleneck of that access, and so i simply do not know.paul mockapetris: i was struck by your comments about the difference between the phone companymodel and the internet model. you said that the local loop is what is expensive and the long distance is not, in thephone company case. in the internet case, you said you pay for access but then the internet is free, so it seems likethose two are the same model in the sense that the local loop is the thing that is dominating the cost, and i was justcurious whether i was wrong or not.lucky: i am not sure i understand, but it is sort of the same form as bob kahn's question. the costs are inthat access. in business you have a model that is able to share that cost among many people because you have onet1 line into a big building and then you have the local area network where most of the costs are. but most of usassociate those costs in the local area with our computing environment and not the communication. i spentmillions of dollars keeping up all the local area networks and all the people that run them and so forth, but i say, ihave do that for computers anyway and the communication in the internet just comes out for free from that.a totally different model applies for the home because it is one on one and i don't know how you would dothat unless you overlay it on your voice. i mean, if you share that line and you have a flat rate, then again youcould conceivably have internet access that is rather cheap.mockapetris: i have one other question. a lot of people have different metrics about what part of theinternet is commercial and what part is not. what is the right way to count? we have numbers about how manyhosts are registered that are not entirely sound in some waysšsort of like sampling license plates and seeing howmany are commercial and how many are government. what would be the appropriate way to think about that?packets or packet miles?lucky: i do not know; we do not know. i do not think you can count packets and distinguish which iswhich right now, so again i am sorry not to be able to answer these questions. in fact, no one knows how manyinternet users there are really. people say 20 million, but all we know for sure is the number of registered hosts. ihave no idea, even in our company; i said 3,300discussion98the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.people. we have 3,300 addresses, but we think maybe only 1,200 are active. we really do not have good statisticson a lot of the stuff.george gilder: how many hosts?lucky: about 2 million hosts.gilder: the concept of universal service confuses me. it took 50 years and about a trillion bucks to getuniversal service, something like that. to proceed forward with some requirement for universal service wouldstifle all progress. you cannot instantly create universal service. universal service is something that can happenwhen you get sufficient volume so that incremental costs are very low. you have to start as an elite service almostnecessarily. i wonder, when you speak of universal service, just what kind of requirement is meant or how that canbe defined.charles firestone: i think that what you are going to see is a dynamic concept of universal service.you are rightšsomething that is new and innovative but eventually becomes necessary or heavily penetratedmight become universal service in a future year.one of the big issues that we are going to be facing is to figure out what should be included in the bundle ofuniversal service (just like we need to figure out what should be included in the bundle of privacy rights), and this, ithink, right now is just a connection, a dialtone connection. one of the issues, for example, is touchtonetelephone service. is that something that in some states is considered universal service? people have to have accessto touchtone or they have to have a touchtone connection into their homes, because otherwise they cannot availthemselves of the services i think you have in mind.but eventually there may be some governmental serviceši am thinking down the linešsome access to localinformation, your community. i know, for example, that santa monica has had the pen [public electronicnetwork] system. now, universal service may only mean having free access to the santa monica city council ortheir local networkšan ability to access without having to pay extra for it. but it is something that has to bedynamic and i am sure will be.the other question is the application to libraries. what is the library equivalent in the electronic era? how doyou connect into information, and what information should be a public resource as opposed to something that isavailable strictly on a paybythedrink or perbit basis. that is something that i think we as a society we are goingto have to come to grips with.michael roberts: there is a lot of clamor these days for improving the security of the network,especially the internet, so i think colin crook has got it right. especially in a network that has to have universalaccess, you assume the network is at some level insecure and you secure the applications. the question is, forpublicsector areas that are critical, such as health care, libraries, and also intellectual property, what sort ofprocess should we be thinking about from a policy standpoint in securing those applications? is it possible, forinstance, to have the sort of certification of applications that the financial people can do very privately and behindclosed doors applied to privatesector applications? is it possible to apply product liability sorts of considerationsto that area even in the public sector?edward shortliffe: i have some thoughts about it. one of the intriguing problems about privacy andconfidentiality of health care data is that the issue is not necessarily the security of an application per se but whatsomebody who has access to the data does with them. in other words, there is a potential for abuse by people whoare authorized to access patient data. that is why legal remedies with criminal penalties are required whensomeone misuses privileged medical information to which they have access. there are no national standards inthis area at present. as a result, one of the big emphases i have heard in the medical area is that we need to beginto introduce some uniform penalties, probably with preemptive federal legislation about the misuse of data towhich people do have valid rights of access.as for the more generic issue of trying to prevent people from breaking into data sets, instituting appropriatecertification of software has a valid role. what you are talking about isdiscussion99the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.simply having databases out on the network with lots of different applications that could access them. of course,you run into the question of what should be the nature of the varied access methods that you could use to get tothose data sets, independent of specific applications that may have been written to access them.mary jo deering: i have a question for ted shortliffe, whose clear vision i have always appreciated,but also for people in the audience who are on both the engineering and content side. it picks up on something thatcharlie firestone said this morning about the process of disintermediation that is going on in society with regard toinformation. the same thing is going on in health, actually, and it is a process that is parallel to thedeinstitutionalization of health care. health care reform is really going to continue pressure in those directions,with an emphasis away from hospitals and highend acute care providers, toward primary care and preventivemedicine and home care, for that matter.my request specifically to ted right now concerns that wonderful sketch [figure 3], where you actually beganto paint what the health information infrastructure would look like. it did not really include any of the linkagesthat would reflect that type of new reality in health care, that would provide the linkages that would be necessaryamong nonhospital institutions, nonspecialty providers, and perhaps the consumer. i think we would all like to seewhat that would look like.shortliffe: you are absolutely right. as you know, we had a meeting on the subject of the nii and healthcare last week that the national research council sponsored [''national information infrastructure for healthcare," october 5œ6, 1993] at which i think the message was driven home loud and clear. i personally am inprimary care, and therefore i am sensitive to it as well. good point.kahn: i have a twopart question, one part for cliff lynch and one part for ted shortliffe. i know, cliff,that you are very well aware of the importance not only of accessing information but also of delineating what youcan do with itšwhen you get it, not only whether you can copy it or distribute it or make derivative works, but allthe things that are typically covered under copyright. in your talk you really did not get into that, and i amwondering what your own views are as to how that particular aspect of library development is going to proceed.how are we going to know what we can do with this stuff?clifford lynch: i think that this issue of what you can do with information is already a major problem.as soon as you move into a mode where you are licensing information rather than purchasing it, and licensinginformation from different sources with different contractual provisionsšand, just to add to the fun, do notnecessarily have a standard sort of taxonomy of things you can došyou are into a situation where it is verydifficult to know what you can do beyond reading the information once and then purging it from memory andnever printing it.i think that this is a particularly troublesome trend, as we start thinking about much more intelligent ways ofhandling information. as people start building personal databases and using intelligent agents, "knowbots," thingsof that nature, that correlate information from multiple sources and refine it, this sort of trend may be a majorbarrier to making intelligent use of information. it is something i am really concerned about. another dimensionof this is multimedia. i keep hearing about multimedia, but at least on bad days, i think the only ones who will beable to afford it are groups like major motion picture studios because only they can afford enough lawyer time toclear the rights.robert pearlman: this issue is very, very big in the education sector, because one of the things thatkids are doing these days is making multimedia reports, combinations of video and text and graphics, and they justgrab images and text from everywhere, and it is a tremendous ethical problem.but what has happened is that an industry is developing now, and cdroms are out that basically provideimages that you can use. in other words, an industry is growing up that says, "sure, national geographic will sellit to you at a big price, but we will give you similar imagesdiscussion100the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that you can buy and use for practically nothing," so there may be this kind of development in other sectors aswell as competing sources of information.kahn: we have heard from bob lucky that the internet, to certain kinds of businesses, essentially looksalmost free and from bob pearlman that to the educational community it is virtually uneconomic at the moment.the other part of my question for ted shortliffe is where the technology fits in the case of the medicalcommunity. i think we heard from ted that there is a strong motivation on the part of physicians in the hospitals togain access to this technology. the medical profession itself, and i believe you, could provide a good, strongjustification for that. in fact, i see it coming. the question i have is whether there is any economic justification forthe end patient, namely, the user of the health care system, in having some coupling to the internet and, if so, atwhat level of capability?shortliffe: this relates to mary jo deering's question. first, when you look at what the health care fieldis spending on computing right now, the amount of money that it would take for any given institution to hook up tothe internet is minuscule compared to what it is spending overall in information technology, so i don't see cost as abarrier per se. it is more the perceived benefit and how you actually would make use of the national network, giventhe lack of standards for actual connectivity and data sharing.the same kind of argument could be made as we begin to see the evolution of new health care delivery plans.it may well become economically beneficial for health care providers to pay for linkages into the homes in order toprovide patients with access to information that would prevent them from becoming more expensive users of thehealth care system. a lot of visits to doctors are unnecessary. if people only had more and easy access to the kindof information they might need, you can imagine how this might have an impact on overuse of certain kinds offacilities.the problem with that approach is that you are hypothesizing not only an availability but also an education ofthe enduser patients and health care users which right now is unlikely. the biggest users of health care are thepeople least likely to have the facilities in their homes at present and the ones least likely to have the educationthat would allow them to make optimal use of such technology. so we are talking about a major social issue thatwould facilitate allowing patients in their homes, and people who are nonpatients who simply need access to healthinformation, to make good use of the kind of information that might be made available.kahn: is that a practical suggestion you just put out, that the doctors or hospitals literally pick up thatmantle somehow?shortliffe: it is not going to be the doctors. if you think the doctors are in charge of the health caresystem, you are a few years behind. it is going to be health plans as they begin to look at how they can competefor patients in large areas, especially in the big metropolitan areas. how this will play out in more rural areas isanother matter that i think is a great worry to people, because the emphasis tends to be on the competitivemarketplaces around the big cities. however, the health plans will pay for these technologies if they find it is totheir competitive advantage to do so.linda roberts: i am trying to look for the common thread in all that we have heard this morning. itstrikes me that in most cases what you have been talking about is doing what we do better. but i think there reallyis an opportunity to do better things in every one of the sectors that have been talked about this morning. i amthinking about the library as one example. we really have public libraries as a compromise that, if i understand it,was reached between the publishers and the communities that really wanted everybody to have their own library.there were people who had libraries and who did not need public libraries, and they were the exceptionrather than the rule. what is so interesting about what could happen in the future is that there really could be amuch more decentralized system of libraries. everybody could have their own in their own home, and what is evenmore fascinating about some of the things that arediscussion101the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.happening in education when you talk to teachers is that a lot of the material that could be in these libraries doesnot necessarily have to be controlled and produced by the publishers out there.so it seems to me that one of the things we really have to think about for the future is what we haven't beendoing that we ought to be doing and that might create new opportunities for business and industry, but might alsocreate new opportunities for learning more broadly.vinton cerf: with respect to something bob pearlman said, that somehow it was not economic for theschools to be a part of the network environment, i am a little puzzled because i assume that we spend, as acountry, a great deal of money on education, so it is not like there are zero dollars out there. a lot of dollars arespent for education, so it is obvious a tradeoff is being made about the utility of being a part of a networkenvironment and spending money on other things. maybe you can help us understand a little bit about how theeducational dollar is spent. is it mostly for personnel? do we find networking not so useful until all of the teachersare trained in its use, as opposed to throwing equipment into the schools and expecting somebody to do somethinguseful with it with no adequate software, and so on?i want to suggest that we are like parents of teenagers when the kids are out late and we do not know wherethey are and we're worried. there are a thousand different possible things that could have happened to them eventhough it is probably the case that most of those things are mutually exclusive, and yet we still worry about allthousand of them.we worry about how this technology will finally reach critical mass, will finally get to the point where thereare enough people who have access to it for good, sound economic reasons that we can start doing some of thethings that we have heard about this morning. i would like to suggest that we actually do not know yet which ofthe things will trigger the regular availability of all of the technology. the computer scientists got it first becausethey had to have the stuff to write programs. then they got to do all these other neat things with the networks.bob, what in your mind is the triggering event for making this economically interesting for the schools?pearlman: this, of course, is a very complicated question. if you look clearly at technology in u.s.schools, it has not resulted in many economies. for instance, in the mid1980s there were some companies thatwere trying to market what were called integrated learning systems in the schools, on the basis that they wouldactually save in the use of teachers. in general they did not really save in the use of teachers, which is where thereal economies are.in schooling, about 80 percent of school budgets have to do with personnel, so the only way to reasonablysave money is by saving on personnel. some are saving on, say, custodial or food service personnel, but in themain you have to save on teacher personnel, and the only way you really get at that is by totally reorganizingschooling. i was associated with one of the new american school design awardee groups in cambridge for the lastyear and a half. we came up with a design that we think in the long run is going to save money. it requires quite anupfront investment in communications technology.for our kids to be able to work much more on their own with teacher advisors managing their affairs and withmentors, we had to establish up front an infrastructure in our design of a local area network in the schoolconnected to the internet with those upfront costs and with connections in the community, which meant that thecommunity had to be wired properly. all of these upfront costs had to be borne by somebody.with that kind of structure in place, we felt that all sorts of economies could occur in personnel in schools,but we had to test the proposition. the problem is that from the point of view of a school that exists right now, weare only talking about additional cost addon. i don't mean that people really cannot afford to get onto a network;it is just hard for them to justify it. there are not real economies nationally. you get on the internet, and what doyou see? you are really just bringing in more programsšmore kinds of things to look at, more curriculumpossibly. but you are not really enabling a saving at that site.discussion102the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what we really need is some real, serious innovation in the organization of schooling. that may take a lot offorms, and the charter school development may help. i am not a partisan of whittle's efforts, but i am not happythat he cannot make it in the new design world. in fact, i would like to see some private player actually try to doit, because the question is how to put together the package, how to develop a school that is more economical whenit is tied to a systemšmeaning many, many schools, whether in one location or around the country, that actuallywork together and produce some savings because they are sharing curriculum, curriculum costs, developmentcosts, and teachers through the media. that is what has to happen.although we have things called school districts, or states that pretend to be school districts, they don't reallybring about efficiencies in the way that a corporation like citibank is trying to accomplish, looking at how to make anetwork that really makes all that blend together. so my answer is only that we are going to have to have lots ofexperiments and new designs for schooling over the next several years in order to actually exploit informationtechnology properly.carol henderson: i want to pick up on an earlier question by bob kahn and tie together a couple ofstrains that we heard this morning in connecting the health care sector and the library sector. we often hear aboutpatient records and telemedicine, but i do not know that it is widely realized how often people go from the doctor'soffice to the public library to try to get information about what it is they have just heard, what their child has beendiagnosed with, or what they are looking at in terms of caring for their aged parents down the line, and so on.when you look at the kinds of questions they ask, they really want to mine the medical field's information,but they want to do it, in a sense, outside the medical field because they want to know whether there are alternativekinds of treatment and what the literature says about this drug that they are supposed to be taking if they are alsotaking something else.the usefulness of a neutral source of information about information is something that i think is veryvaluable, and perhaps we should not give up too easily. access for patients, or people before they becomepatients, to preventive health care information and to information about their conditions is something that librariescan be a big help with.i think perhaps we also passed over the idea of libraries as community institutions and as informationproviders. it is often the libraries that have mounted databases not just about their collections but also aboutcommunity information and referral sources. libraries are often the central source of information on where in acommunity you go for various government and social services across agencies as well as an institution that, forinstance, reaches out to newer immigrant groups and helps get them into the mainstream.discussion103the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussion104the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part 2regulation and the emerging telecommunicationsinfrastructurediscussion105the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussion106the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction to part 2roger g. nollnational policy regarding the information infrastructure is often debated as if it were a novel idea; however,the current debate is in many ways old wine in new bottles. the backbone of the information sector of theeconomyšthe telecommunications networkšhas been regulated by both national and state governments since thebell system first perfected reasonably high quality longdistance interconnection in the first decade of the 20thcentury. from the beginning, at the center of the policy debate has been the importance of nationwideinterexchange traffic to the welfare of consumers and the longterm economic growth of the nation. thus, anyattempt to implement a dramatic new initiative regarding the national telecommunications infrastructure must dealexplicitly with the presence of an elaborate regulatory superstructure that, despite two decades of liberalization,still extensively controls the decisions of the most important players in the telecommunications industry regardingprices, investment, technology, and system integration. and, in the mid1990s, many of the policy proposals forencouraging enhancements to the telecommunications infrastructure amount to recommended changes inregulatory rules and processes.the purpose of the papers in this section is to examine the role of regulatory policy in shaping the evolutionof the nation's information infrastructure, with special attention being given to how regulation affects the rate andpattern of technological change. in both public discourse and the scholarly literature in law, economics, andpolitical science, the debate about the merits of regulatory policy deals with two quite separate and distinct issues.the first is philosophical and deals with the legitimate uses of the coercive power of government. the second ismore prosaically practical and deals with the actual effect of regulation on the performance of industry. althoughthis section deals primarily with the latter, we must first briefly deal with the former in order to clarify the range ofissues of concern.regulation and political legitimacythe first focus of debate about the merits of regulation concerns the enduring philosophical question aboutthe legitimate boundaries to the use of the coercive powers of government. regulation makes rules about howpeople can spend their incomes, use their wealth, and engage in transactions, and so infringes upon privateproperty rights. from this fact has emerged a debate concerning whether regulatory policy goes too far, or not farenough, in making a tradeoff between individual liberty and collective welfare. thus, this form of the debateabout regulatory policy deals with the principles that should be adopted through a nation's constitutional and legalsystem to define the proper role of the state in economic affairs.introduction to part 2107the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an important feature of this debate is that the instrumental value of regulationšits effects on theperformance of regulated industriesšplays a minor role. causing the trains to run on time is not regarded as acompelling defense of fascism, for example, nor is the production efficiency of antebellum southern agricultureregarded as a serious argument against the emancipation proclamation.more importantly, this form of the debate about regulation is most likely incapable of resolution regardingsuch prosaic issues as how, or even whether, government should attempt to control the development ofinfrastructural industries. whereas the philosophical debate about the proper scope of state interference withprivate property rights does provide a compelling case against the more outrageous forms of authoritariangovernment, it does not contribute much to the debate in advanced western democracies about the appropriatemethods for making and implementing economic policy. among advanced western countries, for example,although no nation leaves the sector totally unregulated or has nationalized every aspect of it, nationaltelecommunications policy does vary from near laissezfaire (new zealand, united kingdom) to an extensivenationalized enterprise (france, italy). one cannot convincingly argue that any of these nations have organizedtelecommunications policy in a morally indefensible way. hence, because the philosophical debate about theproper scope of government is, and is likely to remain, unresolved among the range of policies that are likely to beconsidered in a modern western democracy, this aspect of the debate about regulation is largely irrelevant andforms no part of the analysis in the remainder of this section.instrumental analysis of regulationthe papers that follow examine the second focus of debate over regulatory policy, which is concerned withthe instrumental value of regulation.1 at the most general level, the instrumental issue is how the presence ofgovernment supervision of an industry, regardless of the details, affects its performance. the existence ofregulation redirects the time of a firm's management from ordinary business activities, such as productionsupervision, technological innovation, and customer relations, to dealing with and strategizing about politicalaffairs and the regulatory process. an inherent feature of regulation is that, no matter how enlightened, it createscosts and affects the rate and pattern of technological change in an industry.some specific instrumental issues are how the performance of the regulated industry depends on the detailsof regulatory policy, such as the decisions about who will be regulated, what powers will be given to theregulators, how the regulatory authority will be organized and what procedures it will be required to follow, whichlevel of government will be responsible for each element of regulatory policy, and what role will be assigned tothe courts in overseeing regulatory policy. in the case of telecommunications, examples of specific issues that havebeen especially prominent in recent years are the debates about the jurisdictional separation of regulation of pricesand entry between the federal communications commission (fcc) and state public utilities regulators, thecontinuing judicial intervention in structuring the market for telecommunications services and equipment arisingfrom antitrust litigation, and methods for regulating prices by a monopolist (e.g., rate of return, price caps, residualpricing, and so on).the instrumental issues about regulation can be phrased in either a negative or a positive way. the negativeversion inquires about the extent to which regulatory policies and institutions distort the evolution of thetelecommunications infrastructure, to the detriment of the welfare of society. the positive version seeks to identifyways that regulatory policy should be changed to improve the performance of a regulated industry. of course, theway in which the question is put is primarily a rhetorical device, revealing more about the conclusion of the personaddressing the issue than the actual nature of the debate. regardless of how the issue is phrased, the core of therelevantintroduction to part 2108the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy debate is the following question: what will be the effect of different approaches to regulatory policy on theperformance of regulated industry?some general caveatsby way of introduction to the papers that follow, the current debate about the national informationinfrastructure should be considered in the context of over a century of u.s. experience with regulatory policy in avariety of infrastructural industries. economic regulation in the united states takes a peculiar form that is notfound anywhere else in the world. it evolved as it did because of certain unique features of the u.s. political andlegal system: the federalist system of government, the separation of powers among the three branches ofgovernment, the unusually strong role of the courts in the american system, and the specificity of certain rights inthe u.s. constitution, such as the guarantee of the sanctity of contracts, the protection against expropriation ofproperty without compensation and due process of law, and the guarantees of free speech and freedom of thepress. these special features of the u.s. system thwarted numerous attempts to establish economic regulationduring the 19th century and continue to affect how regulation is implemented today.the first important consequence of the u.s. system of government is that it makes policymaking verydifficult. a significant change in policy requires a statutory mandate, and statutes are very difficult to enact. bothhouses of congress and, in the absence of a twothirds majority in either, the president, elected on the basis ofdifferent principles of representation, must agree before a statute can be passed. and, if someone then protests thenew statute, the supreme court can declare it invalidša power that was controversial at the time it was assertedby the court early in the 19th century, and that is shared by almost no other high court anywhere in the world.the second important consequence of the u.s. constitution is the elaboration of economic protectionaccorded citizens in the constitution, as enforced and interpreted by an especially powerful court. numerousstatutes, mostly enacted by states, have been overturned by the supreme court because they were judged tointerfere with one or another constitutional provision. judicial skepticism of regulatory interference with theprivate economy persisted into the early years of the new deal, when, under the threat of increasing the size of thesupreme court to accommodate a more interventionist political philosophy, the "switch in time to save nine"finally permitted extensive interventionist policies. but even the postnew deal courts placed importantconstraints on economic regulation. these constraints have been derived from both constitutional principles ofeconomic rights and the details of statutes that elaborate how the constitutional role of the courts and protection ofindividual rights should be embodied in the details of regulatory policymaking.constitutional and statutory requirements impose substantial burdens on regulators to prove that theirdecisions are justified. regulators bear a legal burden to show that their decisions are based on a constitutionallyvalid statutory mandate, and an evidentiary burden to show that their decisions are rational means to pursue astatutory objective and take into account all of the relevant facts and arguments presented by those who might beaffected by the decision. again, the structure of the constitution has the effect of making policy change slow anddifficult, and subject to veto by the courts. moreover, these requirements advantage large business interests with amajor financial stake in regulatory outcomes, because they are more likely to provide detailed evidence in supportof their interests than are consumers and other less wellorganized user groups, and more likely to appeal adverseregulatory decision to the courts.2the history of telecommunications regulation illustrates these points. the origins of telecommunicationsregulation can be traced to the middle of the 19th century and the battle to establish railroad regulation.3 manystates attempted to regulate railroads for the purpose of eliminating the "longhaul, shorthaul" price differential inrailroad prices. typically, railroadsintroduction to part 2109the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.competed for longhaul traffic but were monopolists at intermediate rural terminals along their networks.railroads exploited these local monopolies by charging far higher prices for shipments to and from these rurallocations than for more competitive transportation between large urban centers. except for a brief period between1877 and 1886, the supreme court persistently declared as unconstitutional these attempts by states to deal withshorthaul monopolies.in 1887, after the 1886 wabash decision in which the court declared all state regulation of any aspect of aninterstate railroad to be an unconstitutional interference with interstate commerce, the federal government enactedthe interstate commerce act (ica). this statute had two important elements. the ica established federalregulation of railroads, and it gave states the authority to regulate railroad tariffs for shipments between terminalsin the same state.two decades later, the scope of the ica was expanded to include telecommunications.4 the mannelkinsact of 1910 enabled the interstate commerce commission (icc) to regulate the interstate portion oftelecommunications; however, this business was then so inconsequential that the icc ignored its newresponsibility. the important effect of this extension of the statute was that it legalized state regulation of intrastatetelecommunications. then, in 1934, the communications act created a new institution to regulate the interstateportion of the industry, the federal communications commission. but most of the telecommunications sections ofthe 1934 act were transferred wholesale from the ica, despite many failed attempts within congress to alter theseprovisions to match the differences in the technologies and market structures between railroads and telephones.5in the ensuing decades, congress has made numerous attempts to rewrite the communications act to reflectthe realities of new technologies and changing market structures in the industry. except for a handful ofexceptions (laws dealing with satellites, cable television, and radio telephony), these attempts have failed. in 1994,congress again failed to pass a reform bill (s. 1822, sponsored by senator ernest f. hollings) that died in thesenate after passing overwhelmingly in the house. consequently, the 1934 statute remains the basis for almost alltelecommunications regulation today, including the scope and methods of regulation by the fcc and separation ofauthority between the fcc and the states. thus, as the united states attempts to make policy about the informationinfrastructure of the 21st century, it does so in the context of a regulatory statute that was written in the 19thcentury to deal with local railroad monopolies.the significance of the u.s. courts is clearly evident in telecommunications regulatory policy. most of theimportant changes in telecommunications regulation since the passage of the communications act of 1934 are theresult of court decisions, rather than new statutes or policies adopted by the fcc. examples are the execunet6decisions, which led to competition in ordinary longdistance telephone service, the restructuring of the industry inthe settlement of u.s. v. at&t,7 and the louisiana8 decision, reversing 50 years of precedent to give moreregulatory authority to the states over aspects of the local exchange that have a significant effect on interstateelements of the industry.the preceding history is crucial to understanding why the academic literature is so skeptical about the valueof economic regulation, both in general and with respect to telecommunications. as an instrument of publicpolicy, regulationšat least in the u.s. system of governmentšhas inherent properties that limit its effectiveness.regulation is intrinsically slow, and changing regulatory policy is extremely difficult. the u.s. system ofgovernment exalts the status of individuals and private property like no other, and so imposing costly rules onanyone is difficult. in the united states, policies are developed and changed by an elaborate process that isdesigned to protect individuals against significant, targeted economic harm by government, and to allow changeonly when a broad consensus supports it. thus, regulation is especially problematic as an institution for channelingthe development of an industry in which technology is evolving rapidly and involves an everchanging cast ofcompanies and user groups.9the fact that the "information superhighway" of the 21st century is being constructed under the aegis of a19thcentury statute for regulating railroads is not the result of stupidity, corruption, orintroduction to part 2110the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inattentiveness on the part of government, but a highly significant example of a fundamental feature of u.s.governance. the united states operates under a system that is based on a deep skepticism of governmentintervention in economic affairs and that makes rational national planning of industrial development extremelydifficult.it is important to note that making industrial policy difficult and cumbersome, and hence less extensive, isnot necessarily bad. to illustrate the point, consider the differences in the performance of the telecommunicationssector in japan and the united states10 in japan, judicial supervision and authority over economic policy are farless extensive, and legislative and executive functions are not formally separated. as a result, the legislature canmore easily change policies by statute, and the implementing bureaucracy is less constrained about the scope of itsdecisions.in 1986, the japanese passed new laws that in many ways are very similar to the combination of courtdecisions and regulatory policies that took place in the united states in the previous two decades. by statute thejapanese created a structurally competitive telecommunications industry, but they retained their traditional systemof ubiquitous government control over prices, investment, and entry into facilitiesbased telecommunicationsservices. as a result, the number of facilitiesbased domestic telecommunications companies grew from 1 to 38 in 6years, counting all satellite, wire, and overtheair carriers.because the core economic decisions of the industry continued to be controlled by the government, the newstructural competition did not lead to real economic competition. the new entrants were permitted to charge muchlower prices for dedicated circuits, which are typically purchased by very large, multifacility businesses; however,in other aspects of the industry companies were prohibited from competing on the basis of either price or thequality of service. the objectives of this policy were in part to allow more companies to participate in the lucrativetelecommunications services business, and in part, like u.s. policy objectives, to encourage more rapiddevelopment of a ubiquitous, integrated, highperformance telecommunications infrastructure.by the criteria most americans would use to evaluate the success of the japanese policy change, theoutcomes are not attractive. in 1992, a japanese customer of telephone service paid about $560 for the installationof new telephone service, which is about 10 times the price charged for initial residential installations in the unitedstates. consequently, the number of telephones per capita in japan is about 20 percent lower in japan than in theunited states. thus, the more extensively regulated, less competitive system does a significantly worse job ofachieving universal service.after paying $560, a japanese residential subscriber paid about $20 a month for basic access service in 1992,but this service does not include any calling. in addition, a japanese consumer paid 8 cents for each 3minuteinterval of a local telephone call, a charge that has since risen to 15 cents. in addition, the japanese consumer facessignificantly higher prices for longdistance calls, especially for calls at distances over 100 miles. as a result ofthis pricing system, the japanese use their telephone system much less intensively than do americans. minutes ofuse per line per year in japan are about onesixth the amount of usage in the united states. the japanese placemany fewer telephone calls and have much lower average connect time than is the case in the united states.higher prices, lower penetration, and less usage in japan obviously result in lower consumer welfare;however, the problems with japanese telecommunications policy go beyond these effects. if an important socialobjective is to facilitate the introduction of new telecommunications services, the japanese policy thwarts them.new services require more calls and connect time, and their ubiquitous availability requires universal service. thejapanese system accommodates neither, and so serves to retard the evolution of the japanese informationinfrastructure in comparison to that in the united states.japan differs from the united states in many respects other than the legal and institutional structure ofindustrial policy, and so broad conclusions drawn from these facts need to be strongly qualified. nevertheless, aslowmoving but limited regulatory system, coupled with greater relianceintroduction to part 2111the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on competition, actually produces relatively good performance in comparison with the systems in other advanced,industrialized nations.implications for evaluating regulatory strategiesof course, the preceding observations do not fully resolve the debate about regulation. regardless of theproblems associated with regulation, both citizens and government officials will seek to interfere with privateeconomic decisions if they believe that these decisions do not adequately take into account important collectivevalues. although regulation has inherent features that limit its effectiveness, these effects are only one part of alarger concern. inherently imperfect regulation can be better than nothing when dealing with a firmly entrenchedmonopoly or an economic activity that imposes significant social costs, such as creating pollution.this introduction is intended to make a simple point that is often overlooked in the debate about regulatorypolicy: citing a meritorious policy objective is not sufficient to justify the conclusion that regulation is warranted.moreover, even a strong case for a serious market failure leaves another important issue unaddressed: how todesign the details of regulation to ameliorate to the maximum feasible extent the inherent infirmities of theregulatory process. questions about how best to divide jurisdiction between federal and state authorities, orbetween regulators and the courts, and about what principles to adopt in controlling prices and service attributes,must be answered in part on the basis of their feasibility in the u.s. legal and political system. because the processof policymaking is important in the american system, the instrumental value of regulatory policies is oftenstrongly influenced by the details of its implementation.an important illustration of these points is the ongoing debate about cable television regulation. in 1992,congress enacted a statute, over presidential veto, to reregulate cable television. a vetoproof twothirds majoritywas obtained by constructing an elaborate statute, carefully defining what could and could not be regulated, howregulation was to be implemented, and who was to implement each aspect of regulation among the fcc, states,and local government. a year later, the fcc implemented the statute by issuing detailed pricing rules and aprocess for certifying local regulation.on the basis of initial studies, the effects of this elaborate process appear to have been minimal. some priceswent up, others went down, but on average the changes were small. most local governments have decided not toattempt to become certified regulators, regarding the cost as not worth the candle. the main observable effect hasbeen a reshuffling of the channel numbers assigned to various programmers, a step necessary for most cablesystems to minimize the effect of the new rules on their total revenues from subscribers.at the heart of the new cable regulations was an important economic fact: cable television systems areenormously profitable, selling for several times their construction costs, because typically they have considerablemonopoly power. but the question posed by the history of the construction and implementation of the 1992 statuteis whether any cable regulatory system that is politically feasible and constitutionally valid can yield benefits thatexceed its costs. thus far, the preliminary results indicate that the answer is no, even though cable does enjoyrevenues that substantially exceed the economic costs of service.the problem with cable regulation is not the validity of the objective, but the thusfar unsolved problem ofimplementing a regulatory system that can make significant progress in achieving that objective. of course, thecable lesson does not translate directly to telecommunications. cable is a far less important industry thantelecommunications, at least for now. unlike telecommunications, cable is not an important factor determining theperformance of many other rapidly growing, hightechnology industries, and for consumers cable does not yetoffer the highly valued, almost indispensable services that are accessible only through the telephone. thus,introduction to part 2112the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the prospective benefits of telecommunications regulation are larger and would justify considerable inefficiency inan imperfect regulatory system.nevertheless, the cable debate makes clear the preference for competition rather than regulation that isexpressed by numerous observers of the communications industry. the experience with cable adds weight to theargument that easing the entry of direct broadcast satellites, of offair digital distribution systems, and even ofsecond cable companies or telephone companies into the cable business will do a better job than regulation inholding down cable prices and expanding service offerings to consumers. likewise, the cable experience raisesimportant questions about whether the promotion of competition, perhaps accompanied by some direct, targetedsubsidies for particular users, will do a better job than regulation of encouraging the development of theinformation superhighway of the 21st century.congress, the fcc, the justice department's antitrust division, and the courts have before them numerousproposals to restructure telecommunications regulation. the failed hollings bill combined with alternativeproposals from republican senate leader robert dole will continue to be live legislative issues in the next sessionof congress. two competing visions of the future are embodied in these legislative proposals. one (hollings)formalizes the importance of competition policy by placing a burden of proof on bell operating companies forhaving their lineofbusiness restrictions removed, reestablishes the prelouisiana preemption authority of thefcc, and legislates a broad universal service requirement that, among other things, requires alltelecommunications carriers to subsidize service to various educational and nonprofit institutions. the other(dole) imagines a smaller role for federal intervention, eliminating the lineofbusiness restrictions without furtherrequirements, and all but deregulating interstate service and interconnection among carriers.11 nevertheless, thesetwo bills share two important policies. first, both proposals would establish a tax on all telecommunicationsservices for the purpose of subsidizing local exchange service in smaller communities. second, both wouldeliminate restrictions against entry into local exchange service, including prohibitions against entry by cabletelevision and other utility companies. (in japan, electric utilities have been an important source of entry intofacilitiesbased telecommunications services.)meanwhile, significant restructuring proposals have been submitted to the antitrust division, the fcc, andthe d.c. district court that oversees the divestiture decree. these proposals involve the movement of localexchange carriers into long distance and manufacturing, and of longdistance carriers into local access.in the summer of 1994, the antitrust division allowed at&t back into the local access business by allowingthe merger of at&t and mccaw cellular, the nation's largest radio telephone company, after insisting thatmccaw provide equal access to all longdistance carriers and that at&t continue to supply cellular systemequipment to mccaw's competitors on a nondiscriminatory basis. later in the fall, implementing 1992 legislationthat will eventually allow a competitive radio telephone industry, the fcc auctioned new spectrum for radiotelephone services, which is expected to lead to the entry of several new access providers in all major metropolitanareas.facing some access competition already in the downtown areas of large cities, and much more potentialcompetition from radio telephony and, conceivably, cable television, some local exchange carriers have proposeddeals that would allow them to enter manufacturing and long distance, both of which would increase the chancethat they could be more effective competitors in markets for information services. the most imaginative of theseproposals comes from ameritech, the regional bell operating company in the great lakes region. ameritechproposes complete unbundling of the elements of local service and relaxing all regulatory barriers to the entry ofcompetitive access providers in return for eliminating its lineofbusiness restrictions. unbundling, accompaniedwith realistic, costbased prices, would enable competitors to enter the local access market by leasing and resellingelements of the ameritech network in combination with their ownintroduction to part 2113the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.facilities. for example, mci might lease copper wire connections between households and the local central office,but at that point branch the connections to its own local switch rather than use ameritech's switch, and mightprovide metropolitan interexchange service by building some of its own trunks between switches, but leasing sometrunk capacity from ameritech.all of these proposals share a new vision of local access: because of encouraging prospects for radiotelephony, independent local networks (most private, but a few public), cable television, other utility companies,and extension of the reach of longdistance carriers, local access ought not to be a protected monopoly, and maysome day be reasonably competitivešand, perhaps, even unregulated. disagreements arise about exactly wheneach type of company should be permitted into which markets and under what conditions, and about how todefine, and to pay for, universal service. but the present reality is that more than half of investments intelecommunications networks are now being made for local systems other than the traditional monopoly localexchange network, and the political system, at least at the federal level, has pretty much reached accord that thisdiversity should be facilitated rather than retarded.varying views on regulationthe papers that follow provide a range of views about these developments, the prospects for competition inall elements of the industry, and the ways that federal and state regulators are responding to them. robert crandallsummarizes the objectives and performance of telecommunications regulation. he points out that the objectives ofregulation are more complex than simply protecting consumers against monopoly, and in particular that theobjective of fairnessšall citizens should have access to approximately the same range of services at roughly thesame pricesšconflicts with giving service providers proper incentives for operating efficiently and adoptingwarranted new technologies. because of this conflict, regulation often is the primary barrier to competitive entry,made so because regulators fear that entry will upset the fairness of the system. crandall explains that this sacrificeof efficiency for fairness is becoming increasingly costly as telecommunications technology progresses, and headvocates regulatory reforms that minimize the scope of regulation and, where regulation is necessary because ofmarket power, that accord greater weight to economic efficiency.robert harris picks up crandall's themes about the growing importance of an efficient telecommunicationssystem and the desirability of less extensive regulation. according to harris, telecommunications must be seen aspart of an overall strategy for economic growth, much as railroads were a primary engine of economicdevelopment in the 19th century. the rationale for government intervention is gradually shifting from protectingconsumers against monopoly to assuring complete interconnection, including among competitive carriers. thelatter concern arises because the network is more valuable to each user as the number of accessible people andbusinesses increases. harris concludes with a survey of regulatory reform activities in several states that appear tobe placing a greater emphasis on efficiency, and in some cases to be proactively procompetitive.dale hatfield addresses the issue of competition between local telephone and cable television companies.because of fundamental structural differences in the nature of these two local networks, hatfield concludes thatneither is likely to become an important competitor to the other in the next few years. hatfield expresses concernthat the movement by bell operating companies into video services will be expensive and will be driven more bythe distorting effects of regulation than by any efficiency or procompetitive advantage flowing from such entry.nina cornell focuses on the precise nature of the bottleneck monopoly enjoyed by local access providers.cornell's main theme is that as long as local exchange carriers have control over termination, they will havemarket power over the entire network. and, according to cornell,introduction to part 2114the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.historical experience teaches that control over termination has inevitably led to actions to extend the monopoly toother elements of the industry. thus, for a procompetitive, freeentry regime to work, policy must succeed inmaking both originating and terminating access competitive. to do so will require unbundling of termination andefficient pricing of the unbundled elements. moreover, the pricing regime will require more than pricecapregulation, since price caps do not prevent, and sometimes reward, strategic pricing to harm competitors.thomas long expresses the common concerns of consumer advocates about the diversification of telephonecompanies and the adoption of efficient pricing systems for local access. the essence of long's concern is thatnetwork upgrades for the few or that may not be efficient for anyone will lead to higher prices for all consumers.reliance on access competition to prevent this outcome is, in long's view, unrealistic, and regulators seem proneto believing that there is more competition than in fact exists. long believes that allocating some of the fixed costsof the local network to services other than basic access is the best safeguard against consumers becominginvoluntary investors in hightechnology services that they do not want or need.bridger mitchell's paper clarifies the economics of local telephone networks, and in particular the concepts ofsubsidy that are relevant for policymakers. crosssubsidy occurs when, given current prices, other customers andthe network supplier would be better off if a service were abandoned. basically, this means that a service is notbeing subsidized if its price exceed the incremental cost of service. mitchell than examines the cost structure ofcalifornia local access companies to ascertain exactly who is and is not subsidized. mitchell's work indicates that: flatrate residential service is probably economically efficient (the gains from measured rates are morethan offset by the measuring and billing costs); because local access costs are driven primarily by the distance of customers to the local switch, statewide rate averaging subsidizes customers in sparsely populated areas and discourages the efficientadoption of radio telephony rather than wirelines as the means of providing access in rural areas; and the incremental cost of service is less than half of the average cost, indicating that in most areas wirelineaccess is a natural monopoly and that most residential subscribers are not being subsidized.eli noam provides a conceptual framework for understanding how regulatory issues evolve over the life of acommunications network. initially, because of economies of scale and the fact that each consumer values thenetwork more highly as it acquires more customers (the ''network externality"), the primary issue is promoting thegrowth of the system. this phenomenon applied to basic access for the early history of telephony, and appliestoday to new capabilities such as internet and, perhaps, digital transmission. once these scale and externalityfactors become less important, the primary policy issues shiftsšto promoting competition and mandatoryinterconnection where warranted, but to protecting "creamskimming" entry driven not by efficiency but by pricedistortions arising from the "fairness" objective. finally, in the late stage of a system, costs are rising and furtherexpansion of the system is not worthwhile, and policy focuses more on encouraging migration to another, usuallymore advanced system and making certain that those with investments in the old system do not succeed inartificially maintaining its dominance by erecting barriers to entryšincluding regulatory, legal, and politicalbarriers.collectively, the papers in this section reflect the dilemma of regulatory policy as technology and marketstructure rapidly evolve in the telecommunications industry. the core economic uncertainty is how important thenew technologies will be, whether that importance is limited to a minority of sophisticated customers or a largefraction of the businesses and residences in theintroduction to part 2115the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nation, and the extent of natural monopoly that will be present in each major component of the network during thenext decade or two as the use of these new technologies spreads. the political problem flowing from thiseconomic uncertainty is the relative importance of the two major duties of regulatory policy: protecting consumersagainst a ubiquitous, impregnable monopoly and assuring universal access to prosaic telephone service, orfacilitating the rapid adoption of advanced new technologies. for the most part, conflicts over the proper natureand scope of regulation, including whether extensive deregulation is in order, arise from continuing disagreementabout the technological and economic future. but in setting a future course, policymakers need to take intoaccount that a regulationintensive process tends to equalize prices and access across groups, but in the processtends to slow change, inhibit the entry of new firms with new ideas, and advantage status quo players.referencesbrock, gerald w. 1981. the telecommunications industry: the dynamics of market structure. harvard university press, cambridge, mass.capron, william. 1971. technological change in regulated industries. brookings institution, washington, d.c.cass, ronald a. 1989. "review, enforcement, and power under the communications act of 1934," a legislative history of thecommunications act of 1934, max d. paglin, ed. oxford university press, oxford.joskow, paul l., and nancy l. rose. 1989. "the effects of economic regulation," pp. 1449œ1506 in handbook of industrial organization,richard schmalensee and robert willig, eds. northholland, amsterdam.kanazawa, mark t., and roger g. noll. 1994. "the origins of state railroad regulation," pp. 13œ54 in the regulated economy, claudiagoldin and gary d. libecap, eds. university of chicago press, chicago, ill.noll, roger g. 1989. "economic perspectives on the politics of regulation," pp. 1253œ1287 in handbook of industrial organization, richardschmalensee and robert willig, eds. northholland, amsterdam.noll, roger g., and frances m. rosenbluth. 1995. "telecommunications policy: structure, process, outcomes," structure and policy injapan and the united states, peter cowhey and mathew d. mccubbins, eds. cambridge university press, new york, forthcoming.poole, keith t., and howard rosenthal. 1994. "congress and railroad regulation: 1874œ1887," pp. 81œ120 in the regulated economy, claudia goldin and gary d. libecap, eds. university of chicago press, chicago, ill.robinson, glen o. 1989. "the federal communications act: an essay on origins and regulatory purpose," a legislative history of the communications act of 1934, max d. paglin, ed. oxford university press, oxford.thierer, alan d. 1994. "senator dole's welcome proposal for telecommunication freedom," heritage foundation backgrounder, no. 233(august 24).notes1. for an excellent summary of the research literature on the effects of regulation on economic performance, see joskow and rose (1989).2. for a survey of the research that explores how politics and political institutions shape regulatory policy, see noll (1989).3. for more about the origins of railroad regulation, see kanazawa and noll (1994) and poole and rosenthal (1994).4. for a good history of the early telecommunications industry and its regulation, see brock (1981).introduction to part 2116the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5. for details about the close statutory relationship between the interstate commerce act and the communications act of 1934, see cass(1989) and robinson (1989).6. mci v. fcc, 561 f,2d 365 (d.c. circuit 1977) and 580 f.2d 590 (d.c. circuit 1978).7. the preliminary ruling by judge harold green rejecting summary judgment and indicating a likely victory for the government: u.s.v.at&t, 552 f. supp, 131 (district court for d.c. 1982); the final judgment divesting the company (entered as a modification of the settlementof the earlier case): u.s. v. western electric, 569 f. supp. 990 (district court for d.c. 1983).8. louisiana public service commission v. fcc, 476 us 355 (1986), held that the fcc could not assert jurisdiction over intrastate regulationsimply because the latter affected the fcc's interstate policies if it was technically possible to divide jurisdictional authority. this decisionexplicitly reversed the previous judicial interpretations of fcc authority, which held that the fcc could assert jurisdiction if a service was notwholly intrastate in character, as most clearly articulated in north carolina utility commission v. fcc. 537 f.2d 787 (4th circuit 1976). thereach and durability of the louisiana decision remain disputed and controversial, but the decision has certainly generated considerableinconsistency in the jurisdictional separations between state and federal authorities. for example, the fcc was allowed to assert jurisdictionover telephone instruments for the purpose of unbundling and deregulating them (see north carolina and computer and communicationsindustry association v. fcc, 693 f.2d 198 (d.c. circuit 1982)), but when it attempted to do the same thing for inside wire it was allowed torequire unbundling but not to require deregulation (naruc v. fcc. 880 f.2d 422 (d.c. circuit 1989)).9. for an excellent compendium of how regulation altered the rate and direction of technological progress in infrastructural industries duringthe 1950s and 1960s, see capron (1971).10. for more details about the comparison between japan and the united states, see noll and rosenbluth (1995).11. for a descriptively accurate if somewhat partisan analysis of the two basic approaches, see thierer (1994).introduction to part 2117the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government regulation and infrastructure developmentrobert w. crandallthe 1970s and 1980s provided students of regulation with a wealth of empirical evidence on the effects ofregulation and deregulation on prices, output, and service quality in many industries. this evidence has confirmedmuch of the prior research that concluded that regulation reduced economic welfare. indeed, winston's recentcomprehensive survey of the field suggests that, if anything, economists underestimated the benefits ofderegulation, in large part because they failed to predict the development of new services and technology afterderegulation (winston, 1993).it has been 34 years since the federal communications commission (fcc) began to liberalize thetelecommunications sector by allowing private microwave service; 24 years since the fcc allowed entry intoprivateline longdistance service; 19 years since mci entered switched longdistance service despite the fcc; and11 years since at&t agreed to a divestiture to settle a 1974 antitrust suit. communications technology hasimproved at an explosive rate over this period, and there appears to be no slowing of this progress on the horizon.despite all of these changes, telecommunications remains a highly regulated industryšregulation that is stilljustified by concerns over natural monopoly.if, as winston found, economists were unable to predict how the airlines would build their networks afterderegulation with a fleet of jets whose technology has changed very little since the 1978 deregulation, economistsshould certainly be wary of pretending to know how the nation's communications infrastructure will develop withor without the heavy hand of government regulation and/or subsidy. while some students of telecommunicationstechnologyšmany of whom are potentially heavy users of new network infrastructurešmay have strong viewsabout how they would like to see the nation's communications infrastructure develop, their vision may not beconsistent with the developments that maximize economic welfare.it is my view that regulation should not be seen as a form of government infrastructure planning, but rather as asource of restraint on actors who enjoy some modicum of market power that should decline as the potential formonopoly diminishes. in this paper i attempt to outline the major regulatory issues that have arisen intelecommunications as some regulators have moved to liberalize market entry while still maintaining control over avariety of rates and other operating parameters of incumbent carriers. in so doing i shall focus as much as possibleon the implications of these issues for infrastructure evolution. i start, however, with a brief digression on thedefinition of "infrastructure."government regulation and infrastructure development118the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what is infrastructure?to many participants in the debate over industrial policy, infrastructure is generally thought of as thosefacilities owned by government or by private, regulated utilities. by this definition, commoncarrier telephonesystems, commoncarrier energy distribution systems, sewers, water utilities, government buildings, and publicschools are infrastructure, but private computer networks, private schools, private roads, or shopping centers arenot.this distinction between public capital and private capital in unregulated firms may be useful for somepurposes, but it is surely misleading in telecommunications. billions of dollars have been invested in privatenetworks that are at least related to if not part of our communications infrastructure even though they are notgenerally available to other users. presumably, these facilities reflect the decisions by private concerns that totalreliance on commoncarrier facilities is not in their best interests. indeed, it may be that the role of commoncarriage is rather limited in an efficient, dynamic market with rapidly changing technology and equally rapidlychanging user requirements. it is even possible that the only communications infrastructure may eventually be aset of interfaces among myriad private networks.unfortunately, there may be no way for the student of telecommunications to determine which combinationsof private and commoncarriage network facilities reflect an optimal configuration. it is for this reason, amongothers, that public policy is moving toward more open access of unbundled commoncarrier facilities, allowing amyriad of possible combinations of commoncarrier and other facilities.in the discussion that follows, i assume that the goal of public policy should be to allow a multitude of actorsto invest in new technology and to develop the public/private network in a fashion consistent with their needs.this may result in a multitude of private networks that interconnect in some hierarchical fashion with or withoutthe assistance of large common carriers, or it could lead to a number of competing large networksšowned by,say, at&t, mci, tci, timewarner, hughes, and the regional bell operating companies.where is the natural monopoly?the stated objectives of most telecommunications regulation is the protection of the public from the evils ofmonopoly power that might be exerted by telephone common carriers through raising rates above incrementalcosts and/or denying their actual or potential rivals access to their bottleneck facilities. in fact, the objectives ofmost regulators are much broader than this. operating in a political arena, these regulators view regulation as anexercise in "fairness," protecting residences, small businesses, and rural americans from having to pay the full(longrun incremental) cost of basic telephone service.1 as a result, it is widely accepted that other services"subsidize" basic local service for these groups of ratepayers.some may and will debate this conventional wisdom about widespread crosssubsidization in telephoneregulation. however, one recent empirical study confirmed the existence of such crosssubsidies (palmer, 1992)using faulhaber's test for subsidization (faulhaber, 1975). many others have reached the same conclusion throughmore informal empirical tests (perl, 1985; crandall, 1991).even if crosssubsidies do not exist in the sense that rates do not lie outside the range between standalonecosts and incremental costs, it seems clear that state regulators in particular have historically been quite reluctant toallow prices to move toward ramsey (quasioptimal) levels (baumol and bradford, 1970). specifically, usageratesšparticularly for toll callsšhave been kept too high and access rates too low for most customers in responseto apparent political demands.government regulation and infrastructure development119the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ironically, it has always been thought that the most likely locus of natural monopoly in telecommunications isin providing access to dispersed small customers. but there cannot be any test of the existence of such power aslong as regulators deliberately keep the price of access artificially low to satisfy political objectives whilefrustrating entry into other markets from which the "subsidies" are paid.recent changes in technology have cast doubt on the notion that local access markets are natural monopolies.the development of new access technologies that employ the electromagnetic spectrum are threatening to provideubiquitous competition for the traditional wirebased systems. cellular competition is increasing as providers seekout new spectrum and employ new digital technology. personal communications networks are only in theirinfancy, but they too may add substantially to consumers' choices for gaining access to the network.on the other hand, fiber optics may have such largescale economies as to threaten to reestablish at&t'slong distance monopoly (huber et al., 1992).2 now that there are three national longdistance networks andnumerous other regional carriers, one might have expected interstate long distance services to be deregulated bythe fcc. but fear of at&t dominance and evidence that competition has not been responsible for lower rates(taylor and taylor, 1993) have made such deregulation difficult to complete. fortunately, even if minimumefficient scale in fiber optics transmission is very large, transmission costs may be such a small share of totallongdistance service costs that such economies alone could not reestablish at&t's monopoly.all of the current discussions about the locus of natural monopoly in telecommunications avoid a centralfact: the potential monopoly power that exists today is as much a reflection of regulatory barriers to entry as totechnology and market conditions. we simply do not know whether such power would persist in the absence ofregulation because we have no market experiment to instruct and guide us. moreover, given the incredible rate oftechnical change in this sector, we have no reason to believe that assertions based on today's array of telephonepoles, paired wires, cables, and switches are very informative. somehow, we need a market test of theeffectiveness of competition in this sector.the requisites of public policygiven the rate of progress and the large number of actual and potential players in this sector, it is my viewthat regulatory policy should now stress: removal of the worst of the remaining rate distortions for access and usage; elimination of entry barriers into local, interexchange, and "information" services markets; deregulation of all but the "core monopoly" services and substitution of price regulation for rateofreturnregulation for these services; and regulatory forbearance from any attempt to guide network design or investment decisions.removal of rate distortionsthere is no way that regulators can know the "true" costs of various telecommunications services given thepervasive joint and common costs in this sector and the rapid rate of technical change. allocations of historicalaccounting costs are quite simply arbitrary exercises. simulations of costs through forwardlooking engineeringmodels are equally subject to error and abuse by regulatory participants.nevertheless, it is fairly clear that toll usage rates are undoubtedly too high because regulated carrier accessrates are kept above longrun incremental costs. moreover, it is equallygovernment regulation and infrastructure development120the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clear that the incremental cost of a business loop is generally little different from the cost of a residential loop inthe same geographical area and that the cost of access increases with the distance from the switch. thus, areduction in business access rates, an increase in residential ratesšparticularly in smaller communitiesšand areduction in carrier access rates are generally required to move rates closer to incremental costs.as rates are moved toward incremental cost, competition in providing local access to smaller customers willincrease. at some point, cellular, personal communication networks (pcns), or other technologies might actuallybegin to make local access a contestable market. once this occurs, the degree of regulation of local exchangecarriers (lecs) can be reduced, and lecs can be freed to compete in vertically related markets.removal of entry barriersstate regulators have historically been reluctant to admit competitors into local markets for fear ofundermining the crosssubsidies they have crafted. not only will elimination of crosssubsidies increase theprobability of competition, but increasing competition will reduce the possibility for crosssubsidies.entry is taking place. state regulators are finding it increasingly difficult to prevent new fiber optics networksfrom developing in large cities, and they are largely powerless to stop the new entry that is occurring or is likely tooccur in radiobased services.3 cable companies are beginning to reconfigure their networks to compete in somefashion with the lecs. pcns will begin to appear in a few years.no one can foresee how the local access market will evolve. a few years ago it was widely believed thathighdefinition television would probably be an analog system. until just recently, there was considerable doubtthat telephone companies could deliver video services without extending fiber optics loops all the way to thesubscriber. given the rapid and unpredictable nature of technological change, regulators should allow relativelyfree entry and allow the market to determine the best arrangements for connecting residences and business tocommunications networks.of course, facilitating entry into access markets is not that simple. entry is more likely if the new entrants canconnect readily with incumbents, who, in turn, are obviously not eager to cooperate. regulation of the terms ofinterconnection is thus inevitable, but on what terms? this leads to all of the problems of open networkarchitecture, unbundling of basic service elements, collocation, and the provision of information on changes in thetechnical design of the core network. if regulators cannot know the incumbents' costs, how can they know thecosts of the basic elements? i offer no magic solution to these problems.deregulation of noncore servicesamong the most contentious issues in telecommunications policy is the development of safeguards toprevent a regulated carrier from crosssubsidizing competitive services from regulated monopoly profits. i do notintend to revisit the history of the fcc's approach to this problem in successive computer decisions, but theproblem is pervasive and is likely to get worse.as new technologies develop, the size of the monopoly "core" that requires regulation shrinks. competition inintralocal access and transport area (lata) toll, centraloffice services, or even local switching cannot be fullyeffective if the incumbent carrier is regulated and its rivals are not. yet once the incumbent is allowed to competefreely in some markets while being regulated in upstream services, complaints of crosssubsidy and denial ofcomparable interconnection willgovernment regulation and infrastructure development121the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.abound. the choice for regulators is either to require incumbents to shed services successively as they becomecompetitive or to deal with the potential problems by shifting to price caps and enforcing rules of comparableinterconnection. neither "safeguard" is perfect, but the choice should be viewed as just one difficult step along theroad to a competitive pluralistic network.the substitution of pricecap regulation for the current costbased approached favored by most stateregulators will not only reduce the incentives for crosssubsidization by the regulated carriers but also willeliminate a powerful disincentive for technical progress. costbased regulation stunts the carriers' incentives toseek costsaving or revenueenhancing technologies, particularly when such regulation is accompanied byunrealistically slow depreciation schedules. even though price caps are far from foolproof, any movement awayfrom costbased regulation should be eagerly supported by those who want to encourage major networkinvestments by regulated carriers.forbearance from mandating network technologyhistorically, regulators have assumed a planning role in an attempt to prevent regulated carriers from paddingthe rate base under rateofreturn regulation. investments are permitted if the new capital is "used and useful." insome instances, regulators have forced changes in technology to accommodate new services or new competitors,but they have generally stopped short of forcing regulated firms to push out the envelope of technology for fearthat such investment will expose ratepayers to too much risk.some industry observers and users of advanced services now want to use regulation as a prod to investment inan advanced national information infrastructure or "superhighway." regulated firms would be given assurances onrates for basic services in return for their commitment to build a highspeed switched network using fiber opticsall the way to the subscriber or to the "pedestal." the precise configuration of such a networkšwhether it employssynchronous or asynchronous technology, for instancešis subject to considerable debate and uncertainty. nor isit clear which services will be demanded by most subscribers or who will be allowed to provide them.given the speed of technological progress in this area, it is particularly dangerous to suggest that regulatedfirms, operating under a constitutional guarantee that they can recover their investment through subsequent rateincreases, should be instructed by regulators to invest billions of dollars in new technology that may either proveunwanted or be surpassed by other technologies. public utilities are not particularly good in making suchdecisions, as our recent sorry experience with nuclear power should confirm. two years after being liberated fromthe modified final judgment restrictions on information services, the bell operating companies have not been verysuccessful in developing and marketing new contentbased services.there is another important reason for not forcing (or subsidizing) investment by regulated carriers inadvanced networks. such a policy will only increase the pressure on regulators and legislators to limit competitionsince these massive new investments must be recovered through ratepayers or taxpayers. this will only increasethe argument for protecting cable television companies, newspapers, and other information providers from thepotential competition of regulated telephone companies. rather than expanding the domain of regulatedcompetition, we should be contracting it as rapidly as possible.given the bewildering array of technical possibilities for the "network of the future," it would be verydangerous for regulators (or legislators) to exclude competition from certain large players while mandating thattelephone companies invest in what is perceived to be today's best choice for the network of the future. at thisjuncture, it is widely believed that residential demand for video services will drive the network design. but no onecan be sure whether video on demandgovernment regulation and infrastructure development122the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(vod) will completely replace today's multichannel offerings or just how it will be delivered. will paired copperwires suffice for the last mile? will coaxial cable systems be the best local loop for vod? can the current coaxialsystems be modified to offer truly universal switched wideband services, or will such services be offered best bytelephone company asynchronous transfer mode (atm) networks? one shudders at the thought of state regulatorycommissions making these decisions.conclusionstudents of regulation have seen how it is the enemy of technical progress. regulatory accounting, entryprotection, and fears of crosssubsidies often prevent regulated firms and potential entrants from exploitingtechnological progress. the introduction of new freight cars, piggyback services, hubspoke airline networks,multichannel urban coaxial cable systems, paytelevision channels, and a myriad of telephone terminal equipmentwas delayed by regulators bent on protecting the public from the evils of monopoly restrictions of output. giventhe extraordinary current rate of technical progress in communications, they should be reluctant to limit the domainof current players or of potential entry. instead, regulators should look to open markets, constrict the core ofregulated monopoly, and increase the number of participants in the communications sector.of course, a reliance on competition to develop network infrastructure will not please those who think theyalready know what a modern telecommunications network should look like. i would prefer this risk to repeatingthe mistakes made earlier in this century by regulating airlines, trucking, broadcasting, cable television, andtelephony in the first place.referencesbaumol, william j., and david f. bradford. 1970. "optimal departures from marginal cost pricing," american economic review 60(3):265œ283.crandall, robert w. 1991. after the breakup: u.s. telecommunications in a more competitive era. brookings institution, washington, d.c.faulhaber, gerald r. 1975. "crosssubsidization: pricing in public enterprises," american economic review 65(5):966œ977.huber, peter w., michael k. kellogg, and john thorne. 1992. the geodesic network ii: 1993 report on competition in the telephoneindustry. geodesic company, washington, d.c.noll, roger g. 1989. "telecommunications regulation in the 1990s," new directions in telecommunications policy, paul r. newberg, ed.duke university press, durham, n.c.palmer, karen. 1992. "a test for cross subsidies in local telephone rates: do business customers subsidize residential customers?" the rand journal of economics (autumn):415œ431.perl, lewis. 1985. "social welfare and distributional consequences of costbased telephone pricing," paper presented at the annualtelecommunications policy conference, airlie, virginia.taylor, william e., and lester d. taylor. 1993. "postdivestiture longdistance competition in the united states," american economic review: papers and proceedings 83(2):185œ190.winston, clifford. 1993. "economic deregulation: days of reckoning for microeconomists," journal of economic literature 31(3):1263œ1289.government regulation and infrastructure development123the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. roger noll has called this approach to regulation "residual regulation." see noll (1989).2. huber asserts that competition is now more likely in local access/exchange services than in long distance.3. nextel is already operating as a third cellular service.government regulation and infrastructure development124the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructurerobert g. harrisintroductionhistorically, the term "infrastructure" has been applied to publicsector investments in highways, airways,schools, and libraries. because virtually all investment in the communications infrastructure was done by privatebusiness enterprises, there was a tendency to take it for granted. no longer. historically, the united states hasrelied on a dual system of regulation, federal and state, that strictly limited competition and provided for a nearlyguaranteed rate of return to private investors, to ensure the development of a ubiquitous public switched telephonenetwork with affordable rates. it has become evident that the traditional regulatory policies for achieving andsustaining universal service are no longer viable. because of dual jurisdiction, though, there has been a growinggap between procompetitive federal regulatory policies and those of many states, which are clinging to theregulatory regime of the past.in this paper i briefly review some of the changes that have been and will be occurring in telecommunicationstechnology, markets, and public policies. i explain the implications of these changes for the telecommunications/information infrastructure in the context of global competition and the strategic character of telecommunicationsand information services. i consider the implications of the changing character of telecommunicationsinfrastructure for public policy objectives, emphasizing the need for public policies that place greater emphasis ondynamics than statistics, on the grounds that innovation and productivity improvements will generate morebenefits than efforts to control prices or limit competition in hopes of maintaining historical crosssubsidies. i alsobriefly describe several recent state regulatory policy changes or pending initiatives that are consistent with thefollowing progressive policy objectives: reducing rate distortions in the pricing of telecommunications services;reducing entry barriers in local exchange services; deregulating competitive or discretionary telecommunicationsservices; and the adoption of price regulation, rather than rateofreturn regulation, of noncompetitivetelecommunications services.changes in the telecommunications industryin the past decade or so the united states and other highly developed economies have entered thepostindustrial era. in the industrial age the extraction of natural resources for energy and raw materials and themanufacturing of goods were the chief drivers of economic growth. while manufacturing continues to beimportant, employment in the service sector continues to grow, owing mainly to the tremendous advances incomputers and communications. in the past century, agricultural employment has declined from 45 percent to lessthan 5 percent and employment instate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure125the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manufacturing has returned to its 1890 level of 20 percent after peaking at 30 percent in 1960, while employmentin services has exploded from 30 percent to over 77 percent (and 75 percent of the gross national product). even inmanufacturing industries, knowledgebased service activities (e.g., information processing, communications,research and development) constitute 65 to 75 percent of manufacturing costs and even more of the "value added"in the manufacturing sector (quinn, 1992, pp. 3œ30).what railways, waterways, and highways were and are to the goods economy, telecommunications networksare to the service economy, since a very large share of value creation in the service sector involves the generation,manipulation, storage, retrieval, and other use of information. today, informationbased enhancements havebecome the main avenue to revitalize mature businesses and transform them into new ones. as chronicled bygeorge gilder in microcosm, the basis of this transformation is microelectronics technologies and their applicationto computers, communications, manufacturing equipment, consumer products such as autos and householdappliances, and virtually all service industries (gilder, 1989, pp. 317œ383).as davis and davidson (1991) have pointed out, "today, informationbased enhancements have become themain avenue to revitalize mature businesses and transform them into new ones. in every economy, the coretechnology becomes the basis for revitalization and growth. information technologies are the core for today'seconomy, and to survive all businesses must informationalize" (p. 17; emphasis in original).to understand the role of telecommunications in that transformation, one must consider three major types ofchange in telecommunicationsšnamely, changes in technology, markets, and public policies. in combination withthe relatively faster growth of service industries, these changes have heightened the importance oftelecommunications in economic development and, therefore, increased the value of developmentaltelecommunications policies (i.e., policies that promote, rather than inhibit, the development of a vitaltelecommunications sector).after several decades of steady, but incremental, technological innovation and adoption intelecommunications, there has been a virtual explosion of new technologies in the past decade. along withcomputers, telecommunications is on center stage of the microelectronics revolution: the application of transistors,semiconductors, integrated circuits and other microelectronics in telecommunications equipment has dramaticallyreduced equipment costs, improved the quality of service, and generated a host of new services and capabilities inthe public switched telephone network (pstn).through microelectronics the digitization of telephone switching has made possible many new services andreduced the costs of enhanced services. digitization and optical technology in interexchange transmission,interoffice trunking, and cable tv distribution systems have reduced the costs of those services and created entryopportunities for cable companies and alternate access providers such as metropolitan fiber systems. as federalpolicies and market competition have driven the prices of interexchange and data communications services towardcosts, technological change has induced substantial increases in demand, thereby inducing investments in capitalembodied technological innovation.at the same time, these developments have eroded the traditional natural monopoly character of the pstnand stimulated the rapid market penetration of private branch exchanges, private telecommunications networks,facilitiesbased carriers, and resellers. thus, local exchange carriers face competition from equipment suppliers(e.g., centrex services competing with pbx vendors); with their own customers, who increasingly turn to selfsupply of switching and network services; with competitive access providers for local exchange services; withestablished carriers like at&t, mci, and sprint for switched and dedicated services; and with private pay phonevendors for public phone services.1contemporaneous with these changes in the wireline telephone network, technological developments in radiocommunications (including microwave), satellite (including direct broadcaststate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure126the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite to customers' premises), terrestrial broadcast radio and television, and cellular telephony have dramaticallylowered the cost, improved the quality, and stimulated the proliferation of a wide range of wirelesscommunications services. not only has competition grown rapidly in each of these communications media, but asthe capacity and range of services available through each medium have increased, so too has the competitionamong communications media. so, for example, sideband fm and tv broadcasting are now used to distributefinancial market data and credit card verification information, in direct competition with the pstn.2there is every reason to believe that rapid technological change in both wireline and wirelesstelecommunications will continue, at accelerating rates, into the indefinite future. one major boost to innovation isthe growing quest for technological advantage by leading competitor nations to the united states. once theunrivaled leader in telecommunications equipment technology and system deployment, the united states facescompetition from equipment manufacturers from japan, germany, france, and the united kingdom, amongothers. companies from these countries have committed major resources to telecommunications research anddevelopment and have caught up with u.s. suppliers in some technologies and passed them in others.3 thisheightened international competition will almost certainly accelerate technological change, increasing the risk ofeconomic obsolescence in the pstn, but also expanding the potential benefits of investment in new technologies.dramatic changes are also occurring on both the supply side and the demand side of telecommunicationsmarkets. as little as ten years ago, local exchange carriers faced very limited competition for local networkaccess. today, traditional local telephone carriers face competition from a host of competitors and potentialcompetitors: competitive access providers, interexchange carriers, cellular carriers, cable tv carriers, and, soon,personal communications services providers. even small businesses and residential users have an increasing arrayof alternatives to pstn services. for example, one can now use, in certain localities, (1) fm sideband for deliveryof stocks and bonds price information to personal computers; (2) public tv sideband for delivery of credit cardvalidation information to retail pointofsale terminals; (3) a cable tv carrier for provision of local service bypass,local area networks, and metropolitan area networks; (4) cellular mobile as a substitute for coinoperated telephoneservice; and (5) a cdrom or magnetic disk database as a substitute for online access to information. moregenerally, there is growing competition between pstn service providers and equipment vendors, including"smartsets" (competing with "custom calling features"), auxiliary equipment such as answering machines(competing with voice mail), and personal computers.recent policy decisions by the federal communications commission (fcc) to further open up local accessto competition portend even more rapid change.4 the allocation of spectrum to facilitate the development ofpersonal communications networks is one of the last nails in the coffin of the local exchange monopoly. notsurprisingly, other telecommunications companies are rushing to exploit new technological and regulatoryopportunities in local exchange services. recent announcements of the formation of strategic alliances amonginterexchange carriers, cellular carriers, and cable television carriers, such as at&t's acquisition of a 33 percentinterest in mccaw cellular communications (karpinski, 1992a) and the time warnermci switched access trialin new york city (karpinski, 1992b), will accelerate the emergence of vigorous competition for local exchangeservices.the dramatic changes on the "supply side" of telecommunications markets have been matched by equallysignificant changes on the "demand" side. rapid growth in the use of computers, data, and transactions processingsystems (e.g., electronic funds transfers, credit card verification, automated teller machine networks, travelreservation services) has induced demand for data communications services, which is growing much faster thanvoice communications. with recent developments in computer graphics and image processing and storagesystems, it is becoming evident that data will be superseded in the near future by images as the fastestgrowingshare ofstate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure127the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications traffic (e.g., american express used to first keypunch data from credit card transactions, thenmove those data electronically from place to place; it now takes a "picture" of the credit receipt and moves theimage from place to place). these changes from voice to data and image communications explain the need for anduse of broadband transmission media.as the demand for sophisticated telecommunications applications has grown, large business users havedeveloped specialists in managing and purchasing telecommunications services. in just the past ten years, morethan half of the fortune 500 and thousands of medium and smaller enterprises have created a "chief informationofficer" position, to whom a range of computer, communications, and information experts and analysts report.with intimate knowledge of the technical and economic alternatives, these buyers continually seek out and exploitsmall differences in prices and have the capacity to assemble integrated systems from purchased "pieceparts."this means, in turn, that when regulated prices vary from market realities, buyers will turn to more economicalternatives.even among residential users, there are rapidly growing demands for advanced telecommunications andinformation services. with nearly 30 percent of the u.s. population engaged in work at home, and with more than35 million personal computers in american homes, it is simply no longer true that residential customers will besatisfied with "plain old telephone service."the divestiture of the bell operating companies by at&t and competition policy decisions by the fcc, incombination with the changes in telecommunications technology and market conditions, have facilitatedcompetition in customer premises equipment, interexchange services, and, most recently, local exchange services.the fcc has consistently pursued procompetitive policies for the past decade, often in opposition to states,sometimes requiring the use of preemption over state regulations (e.g., customer premise equipment, inside wiringdecisions). clearly, the general direction of federal policy is procompetitive (ntia, 1988).role of the telecommunications infrastructuresome states have begun to liberalize their telecommunications regulatory policies since divestiture inrecognition that traditional policies cannot cope with rapid changes in technology, competition, and marketconditions. states such as michigan, new jersey, and tennessee are explicitly using reformed telecommunicationspolicies to promote state economic development, improve public services, expand educational and social services,and create a better economic environment to attract businesses and skilled jobs. as more and more statesimplement progressive, procompetitive policies in telecommunications, the cost of not keeping pace with thesechanges, in terms of lost jobs and economic development to other states, will increase.these recent changes in state policies and perspectives reflect a growing awareness of the vital role oftelecommunications in economic development. there is, in fact, a deep intellectual tradition that viewstelecommunications and other infrastructure industries in this way. in his seminal work, the strategy of economicdevelopment, albert o. hirschman introduced the notion of backward and forward linkages from an infrastructuresector (e.g., energy, transportation, communications) to supplier and user industries (hirschman, 1958). hirschmanexplained why and how high investment in sectors with strong linkages will lead to more rapid economic growth.he coined the term "social overhead capital" to describe infrastructure industries that: provide services that are basic to a great variety of economic activities; exhibit a high degree of "publicness" (and are therefore usually provided by public agencies or privatefirms under public control); are immobile and therefore cannot be imported; have substantial "lumpiness" or technical indivisibilities; and have very high capital/output ratios, with large fixed investment required to achieve an economicallyviable level of output.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure128the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.given these characteristics, hirschman argued that investment in social overhead capital not only wasessential, but also required a national strategy for economic development. hirschman's ideas provide theintellectual underpinning of national and state investments in railroads, waterways, highways, airports and airtraffic control systems, hydroelectric projects, and public schools and universities.5 none of these investmentscould have been justified solely on the basis of a private costbenefit calculation. initially, both the interstatehighway system and the air transportation system were used by a relatively small share of the population, oftentraveling for business purposes. yet everyone contributed to the cost of the public investments through: preferential tax treatment (e.g., exemption from property taxes and taxfree financing of public debt); collection of excise taxes on gasoline used on city streets (the construction, maintenance, and operationof which are paid for by property taxes) to finance construction of intercity highways; and deliberate crosssubsidies (e.g., distribution of gasoline excise tax revenues from urban to rural areas).the justification for public expenditures on these infrastructure systems was based on the "positiveexternalities" and the economic development they generated. that is, beyond the benefits realized by direct users,these investments contributed substantially to economic growth and development in the local, regional, andnational economies. investment in infrastructure can be justified by the fact that what consumers have to spend ongoods and services depends on what they earn as workers. it is inconceivable that u.s. workers could haveexperienced the same growth rates in productivity, income, and standard of living in the postwar period withoutthese infrastructure investments. by the same token, the recent slowdown in productivity growth and falling realincomes reflect, in part, declining infrastructure investment relative to our competitor nations.although the telecommunications infrastructure has been mostly privately owned and operated,telecommunications policy in the united states was, for fifty years, based on the same basic principles as publicowned infrastructure. in lieu of public investment, the united states used industry regulation to reduce the risk of,and ensure reasonable returns on, telecommunications infrastructure investment in order to induce sufficientinvestment of private capital. the goal of universal service was based on a recognition of the positive externalitiesof additional customers on the network and the stimulus to economic development.even though we have achieved universal service, we should still remember the principle of economicdevelopment on which it was based. in fact, the principles of universal service, positive externalities, and socialoverhead capital are as applicable to the next generation of telecommunications services as they were to the last.much of the value of integrated digital services to any given user, for example, will depend on how many othershave access to and are interconnected with them. these externalities are especially powerful in complementaryindustries, such as information services. capabilities built into the public switched network could greatly facilitateaccess to, and thereby demand for, enhanced information services. this is especially true for smallbusiness andresidential users, who have neither the resources nor the expertise to design, build, and operate their own privatecommunications system, as do large corporate and governmental users.in addition to the positive externalities, infrastructure investment in telecommunications improves the qualityof services, increases the number of services, and reduces the costs of those services. thus, telecommunicationsinvestment generates substantial benefits to the users ofstate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure129the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telecommunications services. in the past decade or so, telecommunications services have literally revolutionizedmany industries; in virtually all industries and sectors, telecommunications services have generated or havedemonstrated the potential to generate major productivity gains. five recent studies of economic developmentsupport my conclusion that telecommunications services are playing an increasingly important role, especially inthe hightechnology, knowledgeintensive industries that generate skilled jobs and a high degree of learning on thejob.first, a study by the organization for economic cooperation and development (1988) found extraordinarilyrapid growth in the importance of telecommunications services to business users in all member nations, withcrucial effects on international competition in telecommunicationsintensive industries, especially financialservices (banking, insurance and securities, commodities, and foreign exchange trading), publishing andinformation services, wholesaling and retailing.second, in a study of the impact of information technologies on service industries (financial services, healthcare, insurance, and publishing), james brian quinn (1987) found: substantial forward linkage economies and externalities, including realization of economies of scale andeconomies of scope (the capacity to provide entirely new service products through the same servicenetwork); a substantial increase in "output complexity" (the quantity and quality of services available tocustomers); a blurring of industry boundaries through functional crosscompetition; and improved international competitiveness, through the locational decisions of manufacturers who use theseservices.one of the most valuable "downstream" benefits of telecommunications services that quinn found is theincreased geographic extensiveness of user industries. in urban areas this extension improves accessibility andenhances competition among providers of goods and services (e.g., automated teller machines competing withbranch banks; telemarketers competing with local retailers). in rural areas the geographic extension of servicesthrough telecommunications often means a substantial improvement in the quality and variety of services availableto rural consumers and businesses, or even the difference between having affordable access to a service or not(e.g., remote health care services).in a recent extension of his work, quinn found that telecommunications can make significant contributions toincreased productivity and improved competitiveness in manufacturing as well. in intelligent enterprise, quinn(1992) explores the revolutionary changes in organizational and industry structure that are being driven by theapplication of knowledge and information, noting that:[d]iscussions concerning america's manufacturing competitiveness have consistently overlooked an area thatoffers major productivity leveraging possibilities: the manufacturingservices interface. on the one hand, servicecompanies have become some of the most important customers, suppliers, and coalition partners for manymanufacturing concerns. u.s. service enterprises are both near at hand and are among the world's most efficientperformersšsurpassing the services productivity of virtually all other advanced industrial economies, especiallyjapan. major opportunities exist for manufacturers to exploit u.s. service companies as major customers, as leadcompanies or codevelopers for new products, as potential suppliers, as valueadding advisers or marketintermediaries, and as sources of valuable information and distribution clout in their markets. (p. 208)in order to realize this potential, quinn urges increased investment in communications infrastructures andregulations that are "goaloriented rather than meansspecifying" (quinn, 1992,state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure130the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pp. 432œ433). by "goaloriented," quinn means regulations that use incentives to stimulate desired performance,rather than attempting to mandate the means of achieving such performance through "commandcontrol"regulations.third, in a study commissioned by the state of new york, coopers and lybrand found that purchases oftelecommunications services by businesses in the united states were growing at the rate of 11.8 percent per year,compared with gross national product growth rates averaging 2.5 percent (coopers and lybrand, 1987).employment is growing fastest in "telecomintensive" industries. even though the real prices oftelecommunications services have been declining, purchases of telecommunications services are a growing shareof business costs. consequently, business users are more price sensitive and mobile, so the local cost and qualityof telecommunications services play an increasingly important role in business location decisions.telecommunications can also geographically extend the workplace; by so doing, telecommuting can enhance thequality of workers' and families' lives, bring economic opportunities to rural areas, and aid in reducing congestionand air pollution in urban areas.fourth, in a study commissioned by the new jersey board of public utilities, deloitte and touche (1991)found that: "as new jersey continues to move toward an information servicesbased economy, today's localexchange carrier network will increasingly constrain users' (especially residential and small businessusers) ability to fully participate in the information age"; "a significant opportunity exists to advance the public agenda for excellence in education throughimprovements to the telecommunications infrastructure"; "strong motivation, especially in the improved quality of care and cost reduction, exists for increasing theuse of telecommunications and information technologies in the health care industry in new jersey"; and "public policies that encourage deployment of an advanced telecommunications infrastructure areessential for new jersey to achieve the level of employment and job creation expected in the state." (p.i3)fifth, on the basis of an extensive survey and focus group interviews of small businesses, the illinois taskforce on advanced telecommunications and networking (1992) concluded that: "all enterprises are becoming more information intensive and – [the] illinois communications andcomputing infrastructure will define state economic development capabilities in the future"; and "a robust telecommunications infrastructure is vital to meet the requirements of education and training,libraries, health services, safety, and other social components which collectively create the quality oflife." (p. 9)each of these studies has confirmed that the direct user benefits, positive externalities, and economicdevelopment benefits of telecommunications are, if anything, growing over time. for an increasing number ofindustries, access to advanced telecommunications services will be essential to competitive advantage, possiblyeven competitive survival, in global markets. until recently, though, little or no thought was given to theimplications of u.s. telecommunications policy for international competition, perhaps because the united stateswas a hegemonic economic power in the world. that extremely parochial view of the world is increasingly out oftouch with currentstate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure131the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.economic and technological reality, especially considering what has happened and is happening elsewhere.in an increasing number of countries, national policies are premised on the idea that telecommunications is astrategic industry, with economic characteristics that require or deserve special consideration in assessing policyalternatives. while the term "strategic industry" is often used indiscriminately (i.e., meaning that an industry isimportant), there is a rapidly growing literature analyzing the economic conditions and characteristics of anindustry that make it strategic. although that literature is concerned primarily with international trade theory andpolicy, and hence addresses "tradable goods," much of the developing theory applies to nontradable goods as welland is therefore relevant to telecommunications services (see, e.g., krugman, 1987; porter, 1990).implications for regulatory policy objectivesthe central message of these international developments is that state and federal telecommunications policiesmust, in order for the united states to be internationally competitive in the information age, explicitlyacknowledge and incorporate the broader economic developmental benefits of telecommunications services. theunited states can no longer regulate telecommunications as if it were a purely domestic industry, when othernations have chosen telecommunications as a leading instrument of national economic development andcompetitive advantage.although the telephone regulatory process has become quite adversarial in recent years, historically there was avery strong social and political consensus regarding the goals and objectives of telephone regulation. moreover,there was a consensus among policymakers that rateofreturn regulation was the best means of achieving thosegoals. as the economy becomes increasingly dependent on telecommunications services, though, the consensusover both ends and means has been breaking down, as those involved in the policy process attempt to cope withthe revolutionary changes that have occurred, and will continue to occur, in telecommunications.changes in telecommunications technology and markets have two crucial implications for public policy.first, the goals and objectives, the ends, of regulatory policy should reflect the growing importance oftelecommunications to the economic welfare of households, businesses, and public agencies. this requires thatpolicymakers give added weight to economic development effects in considering policy alternatives. second, indeveloping and implementing a regulatory framework, the means to achieve those policy objectives, policymakersshould take full account of the dynamics of change in telecommunications, on both the supply and the demandsides. policies that worked well in the past, in a markedly different industry environment, will not work well in thecurrent and future environments of telecommunications.traditional regulatory policy objectives in telecommunicationsthe era of stable rateofreturn regulatory policy in the telephone industry spans the period from the 1920sthrough the early 1970s. the dual system of federal and state regulation was reasonably successful, in large partbecause there was a strong consensus on policy objectives, which included the following: the primary objective of telephone regulation was, historically, the achievement of universal service, thatis, promoting the development of a ubiquitous, affordable telephone network, with prices that account forneed (social equity) as well as ability to pay (market). this goal was typically reflected in telephone ratedesigns that priced some services, such as toll, business services, and custom calling features, above costin order to keep the price of basic residential service at affordable levels. the subsidy to residential usersgenerally included a preferential price for access and local usage (in many states, flatrate local calling).the universal service objective was also the justification for geographic price averaging, by whichcustomers in rural areas paid the same rates for service as customers in urban areas, even though the costof both local and toll service was significantly higher in rural areas.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure132the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. a second important objective of regulatory policy has been maintaining a consistently high level ofservice quality, including timely installation of new service; very low "call blocking" rates; very littledowntime in the network or subscriber lines; and the ability of the public switched network to withstandor quickly recover from natural disasters and other crises. in unregulated industries, market forcesgenerate a wide range of prices and product qualities. in regulated industries, such as electricity andtelephone, the systems were engineered to very high standards, whether or not the revenues from anygiven class of customers cover the cost of the services they use. an often implicit, but nonetheless important, third policy objective has been rate stability, that is,minimizing changes in rates for a class of services or a class of customers. in the rate design process,substantial weight has been given to the existing rates in order to protect customers from "rate shock" dueto sudden, unforeseeable price changes. providing investors with a fair rate of return has been a fourth traditional policy objective of telephoneregulation. fair rate of return encompasses two purposes: (1) giving investors fair compensation for therisk and time value of capital and thereby (2) stimulating private investment in "social overhead capital,"the telephone infrastructure. these twin purposes have been served by limiting competition to reduceeconomic risk (by granting exclusive franchises) and by reducing financial risk through a steady,predictable rate of return on investment.progressive regulatory policy objectiveseven accepting that universal service and other social equity goals must continue to be taken into account, theobjectives of telecommunications policy should be changed in recognition that economic efficiency, infrastructureinvestment, and modernization and technological innovations in telecommunications are increasingly important tothe productivity of private enterprises, notforprofits, and public agencies and, therefore, to the competitivenessof the state economy. to take account of the economic development and productivityenhancing potential oftelecommunications, public policy should explicitly incorporate, and give greater weight to, the followingobjectives: one only need consider the magnitude of the u.s. trade deficit and federal and state fiscal deficits tounderstand why efficiency should be given more weight in public policy decisions. because the unitedstates is no longer a hegemonic economic power in the world, and because national productivity gainshave not kept pace with leading competitor nations, the country can no longer afford the "luxury" ofpublic policies that fail to promote economic efficiency objectives. either policymakers elevate efficiencygoals to get better use of and more from the nation's economic resources or they will have to do withfewer resources to meet economic and social objectives. that means (1) either allowing market forces toset prices or, if regulated, allowing prices to reflect market factors to achieve allocative efficiency; (2)using incentives to promote technical efficiency by telecommunications companies and their employees;and (3) reducing unnecessary regulations to achieve administrative efficiencies in the administrativeprocess.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure133the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. in a predominantly market economy, public policies should attempt to be responsive to market conditionsin the industry being regulated and in related industries. prices, as signals of cost and value, play acritical role in market exchange; therefore, regulators should allow prices to be set by market forceswhenever possible or, alternatively, emulate market prices when they do set prices (or pricing bands orrules). similarly, regulators should, to the maximum extent possible, allow markets to determine whatvariety of products and services will be offered. market pressures have increased the rewards of goodpublic policies (i.e., those that stimulate investment, increase usage, and promote economic developmentin the states). market pressures have also increased the costs of policies that are not consistent withmarket conditions (e.g., uneconomic bypass, selfsupply, relocation of facilities). technological innovation is a third critical policy objective for promoting economic development. byfacilitating innovation and the adoption of better technologies, policymakers can ensure that users willobtain the benefits of innovation, especially lower costs through productivity gains. regulators can alsopromote innovation by enabling the rapid introduction of new services to meet customer needs and byallowing greater pricing flexibility for discretionary services. historically, u.s. policies toward public infrastructure industries have incorporated, if only implicitly,economic development goals. accordingly, the united states has been an international leader in publicinfrastructure investments, which have played a significant role in the nation's economic growth andglobal leadership over the past several decades. unfortunately, public recognition of similar economicbenefits from private infrastructure investment has lagged. only recently, as other nations have turnedtheir attention to telecommunications services as a means of promoting economic growth, as aninstrument of national economic strategy, have u.s. policymakers begun to take sufficient notice of thepositive externalities and other public benefits of telecommunications. elevating the importance ofinfrastructure investment among policy criteria can potentially improve the performance oftelecommunications industries and the nation's economy. one of the most important steps toward efficiency objectives has been taken by allowing, evenencouraging, competition in telecommunications services and equipment. strictly speaking, competitionis not a policy objective but a means of achieving other objectives. still, because there is such a strongconsensus in the united states that competition is desirable, policymakers have often elevatedcompetition to a goal of regulation. competition is especially effective in promoting efficiency, sincemarket competition drives prices toward costs and causes suppliers to minimize costs. ultimately,competition can supplant or even eliminate the need for regulation, although in the meantime quasi orpartial competition may well make the task of regulators more difficult.balancing competing objectivesgood public policy decisions require making tradeoffs among competing objectives. there will be timeswhen some policy objectives conflict with others; good policy recognizes and balances among multiple policyobjectives. policymakers should not assume these tradeoffs are inevitable instate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure134the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.all cases, however. the art designing outstanding policies involves finding ways to reduce the tradeoff, to getmore equity and more efficiency. properly designed and implemented, policies can reduce tradeoffs amongcompeting objectives; the resulting improvements in performance can generate increased efficiency and also pay aconsumer "dividend."implications for state regulatory policiesuntil the 1980s there were few significant differences in state regulatory policies toward common carriertelephone companies. in the past decade, though, the states have taken very different paths in their respectiveresponses to the at&t divestiture, changes in federal regulatory policies, and a growing recognition of theimportance of telecommunications to economic development. from a national policy perspective, this variationamong the states is useful in generating experience with alternative regulatory policiesša classic case of"laboratory experiments among the states." it is my position, though, that there are many cases in which statepolicies are inhibiting the growth and development of the telecommunications infrastructure. states should beencouraged, if not required, to adopt policies that meet certain minimum requirements. in this section i discussfour types of regulatory reforms that some states have adopted or are in the process of adopting.reducing rate distortions: california's implementation rate designin phase 3 of its new regulatory framework, the california public utility commission (puc) has expressedits intent to open its local access and transport areas (latas) to competition, with 10xxx dialing, for local,extended area service, zone usage measurement, toll, and 0+ calls. the decision, now pending, would raise theprice of flatrate residential service from $8.35 to $13.00 per month, while maintaining a 50 percent discount forlifeline customers. it would substantially reduce the toll rates of pacific bell, the major local exchange carrier inthe state: in the 17 to 20mile band, from 22© to 9.75©/minute and in the 51 to 70mile band, from 37© to13©/minute. it would also simplify and expand the applicability of usage discounts, making it easier for customersto choose a rate plan that would minimize the prices they pay for toll services.through this decision, the california puc is finally accepting competition as an essential element of thestate's telecommunications policy. by removing a large share of rate distortionsšthat is, prices that are eithersignificantly above or below economic costsšthe reformed policy will increase efficiency, promote economicentry by competitors, and encourage the adoption of information technologies that are complementary tocommunications usage. still, the puc proposal leaves substantially unresolved the following problems:continuation of flat rate pricing (i.e., free local calling for residential subscribers) distorts choices between wirelineand wireless technologies. although reduced in magnitude, continuing residential rate subsidies distort thecustomer's choice between analog and digital service (i.e., the price differential between subsidized analog serviceand unsubsidized integrated services digital network (isdn) service biases customers from adopting the advancedservice). the plan maintains price averaging, which distorts the economics of rural service and deters the entry oflowercost competitors and the development of lowercost technologies.so, while the california plan represents a significant step in the right direction, it came only after years ofhighly contentious proceedings and has still not yet been officially adopted. moreover, given the rate at whichtechnologies are changing and market competition is emerging, it is apparent that regulators, even if heading in theright direction, have difficulty keeping up with, much less getting ahead, of industry development.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure135the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.removing entry barriers to local exchange competitionameritech has filed a joint state and federal regional plan that offers a quid pro quo: ameritech wouldunbundle its local network and open the local exchange market to greater competition, in return for being allowedinto the interexchange market. the plan would require physical interconnection and collocation of competitors intoameritech's central offices with reciprocal traffic arrangements. it would also unbundle all critical networkelements: local loop, switching, transport, ss7 call setup, and numbering. it would offer customers a choice ofcarriers, with usage presubscription, and, as soon as technology allows, 1+ dialing for all toll calls. the plan alsowould shift the universal service burden to all competitors through a "bulk billing" arrangement.to be implemented, the ameritech plan requires the approval of the fcc, the u.s. department of justice, andthe district court, as well as the regulatory commissions of the five states in which ameritech operates as a localexchange carrier. the proposal illustrates the high degree of interdependence between federal and state regulatorypolicies and between antitrust and regulatory policies. it also demonstrates that timing in regulatory reform is oftencritical: ameritech seeks "simultaneous" implementation of opening local markets and allowing it into interlataservices, while competitors take the position that ameritech should unbundle and open the local exchange marketfirst, and then, after a sufficiently large loss of market share, ameritech could be allowed in interexchangeservices.regardless of whether the ameritech plan is approved as proposed, it is evident that variations in statepolicies toward competition are growing. it raises the question of whether the united states can continue totolerate such large differences in policies that are so fundamentally important to the national interest intelecommunications infrastructure. pending legislation in congress could preempt states whose policies prohibitcompetition in local exchange services. given the number of states that continue to oppose competition, it maywell be in the national interest to adopt such preemptive policy.deregulating noncore services and regulating the price of core services: price cap planssix states have adopted price caps or rate freezes with no earnings sharing as part of their incentive regulationplans. all of these plans have several key elements in common: they deregulate of detariff services that arecompetitive or discretionary; they remove limits on the rate of return earned by the local exchange carrier; andthey institute price freezes or price indexing for core or essential services. summaries of each of these plansfollow.kansasthe main features of telekansas, southwestern bell's incentive regulation plan, are as follows:6 the plan froze basic local residential and business rates for the period 1990 to 1995. local rates could increase for some customers due to the elimination of some party lines and exchangereclassifications. bell's longdistance rates were permanently reduced by $17.1 million. access charges for longdistance calls were cut by $2 million. bell customers will save about $21.3 million in each of the first two years of the plan and $22.8 million inthe remaining three years, for a total of $110 million.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure136the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. bell committed to an investment of $160 million over the next five years to modernize telephonefacilities, upgrade all customers to oneparty service, and eliminate all 911 basic service charges. the plan changed the way bell is regulated (it removed the regulatory cap on bell's earnings). pricing flexibility on certain discretionary products was allowed by shortening the approval process to 20days from 30 days.since its adoption, telekansas has resulted in increased infrastructure investment, more new services tojustify financially those investments, and rate stability to local service customers. the telephone company hadimpressive firstyear revenue increases while maintaining rate stability and increasing infrastructure investment.michiganmichigan's telecommunications act of 1991 essentially replaced rateofreturn regulation with servicebyservice regulation. the main features of the plan are the following: monthly service rates were frozen for all but the smallest local exchange carriers for two years. residential rates were flat rated up to 400 calls. basic local exchange rates may not crosssubsidize other services. access rates continue to be regulated and are capped at interstate rates unless approved by the fcc orupon agreement of the parties.the deregulation law was passed too recently to draw many conclusions, but no basic service rate increaseshave occurred since the plan was adopted. there have been some longdistance rate increases.nebraskalb 835 deregulated all telecommunications company rates with one exception: basic local exchange service.tariffs introducing new services or altering rates for existing services can be implemented 10 days after they arefiled at the fcc. basic local exchange service rates are not subject to traditional rateofreturn regulation. basiclocal exchange rates are covered under various provisions of the law: (1) the telephone companies must give theircustomers 120 days' notice and hold a public informational meeting in each commission district before they canchange their rates; (2) consumers can authorize the public service commission (psc) to review a rate increase ifenough of the subscribers affected by a rate increase sign a petition; (3) the psc can review basic local exchangeservice on its own motion if rates go up by more than 10 percent in a year.7contrary to claims that telephone rates would double in five years, us west's basic service rates did notincrease between 1987 and 1991. opponents of lb 835 have tried to point out that the constant rates are excessiveand have somehow missed a downward trend in national average basic local service rates. comparison ofnebraska's business and residential rates with those of its neighbors, however, suggests that its rates are notdiscernibly higher or lower and that they have not missed any ''downward trend." in service innovation, lb 835gave nebraska an advantage overstate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure137the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other states in that it allowed carriers to introduce new services virtually at will. this made it easy for telephonecarriers to introduce and test new services (mueller, 1993, p. 119), which has had a small but measurable effect oninvestment (p. 138). deregulation and increased investment are gradually having an impact on nebraska'stechnological lead over neighboring states (mueller, 1993, p. 147).vermontthe vermont public service board approved the vermont telecommunications agreement (vta) ondecember 30, 1988. originally, it was to run for three years but was extended for another two. after a secondagreement was withdrawn in 1992, the 1987 social contract was extended through 1997. the main provisions ofthe vta were as follows: it eliminated rateofreturn regulation for new england telephone (net). it provided net with substantial freedom to offer "new services" under rates, terms, and conditions of itsown choosing. it stabilized local service rates for three years (extended since then). it committed over $280 million for network modernization (completed by the end of 1992). it maintained quality of service in accordance with specific criteria.the agreement appears to have had generally positive results: local telephone rates in net's territory have been stable since 1985. ninetyfive percent of allvermonters have phones, the fourthhighest rate in the country. net invested $280 million in five years to upgrade its system. the money would have been spenteventually even without the agreement, but more slowly. the new equipment means developmentofficials can assure potential corporate newcomers that they will not be isolated in vermont. more new services have been introduced than in any other state serviced by netš19 new services. the state has spent less time and money regulating net. regulatory rules have not changed during the agreement, allowing net, its customers, and itscompetitors to plan with more certainty. less regulation means net and its competitors can focus moreon their businesses and customers and less on regulators (andrews, 1991). infrastructure modernization through the vta was significant (edelstein, 1991).in summary, the vta did not allow net to earn excessive profits. on the contrary, the expense ofmodernization and launching new products resulted in lower than expected earnings for net. basic local rateshave not increased throughout the life of the agreement, and the telephone network has been modernizedsignificantly.north dakotasome key features of sb23208 and sb24409 governing incentive regulation were as follows: sb2320 classified services as essential or nonessential.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure138the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. rates for essential services were set by the psc's price factor formula (basically a form of price caps). rates for nonessential services are not regulated. sb2440 increased the number of nonessential services and reduced the number of essential services; italso set the price cap in the law. essential service rates have had limited increases allowed through the price cap: the price cap for uswest was increased by 1.665 percent in 1992 and by 0.488 percent for 1993; for 1994 the increase will be0.6 percent.sb2440 was introduced to clarify and set into the law the list of essential services to be governed by the pricecap and to set the price cap and its productivity adjustment. however, rate increases for essential services appear tohave been limited. furthermore, there seems to be broad public support for continuing and expanding the price capplan, as evidenced by the broad margin of passage of sb2440.west virginiasome key features of the state's incentive regulation plan include the following: effective january 1, 1992, an incentive regulation plan was approved until the end of 1994. the plan retained the previous plan's service classification (competitive or discretionary, noncompetitive,and intrastate access services) of an earlier incentive regulation plan and added one more category:services subject to "workable competition." basic service rates were frozen during the plan (a feature of the earlier incentive regulation plan as well). under the incentive plan, c&p agreed to accelerate infrastructure investments toward becoming 100percent digital by the end of the plan (it was on target to achieve this goal one year earlier, by the end of1993).the incentive regulation plan appears to have had a significant impact on the financial health of the telephonecompany while maintaining rate stability for basic local services. west virginia's improved telecommunicationsinfrastructure has also attracted telecommunicationsintensive firms (peters, 1991). in summary, its incentiveregulation plan appears to have effectively maintained local service rate stability while at the same time providingincentives for c&p west virginia to rapidly upgrade its network capabilities. through its office for the futureprogram, the state, in partnership with the local telephone company, seems to be successfully marketing thoseadvanced capabilities for outside investors to relocate to the state.conclusiongiven the rate of change and the magnitude of changes that lie ahead, public policies must place greateremphasis on the dynamics of the industry, whereas regulation has a natural tendency to deal with statics, such ascontrolling prices and restricting competition. state regulatory policies have an enormous impact on localexchange carriers and the telecommunications/information infrastructure. in too many instances, state regulationhas become a major obstacle to competition, deployment of new technologies, and development of new services.the best route to the informationstate regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure139the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure of the future is not through more regulation but through different and less regulation. where statesare moving in the right direction, they should be encouraged and rewarded. where they are not, the united stateshas a strong national interest in limiting the regulatory prerogatives of the states, to ensure regulatory policies that,if not identical, are compatible with national policy goals and objectives.referencesandrews, richard. 1991. "telecommunications agreement scrutinized," vermont business magazine, march 1.barr, francois, and michael borrus. 1987. from public access to private connections: network policy and national advantage. berkeleyroundtable on the international economy, working paper no. 28, university of california, berkeley.coopers and lybrand. 1987. state policy & telecommunications economy in new york: final report. new york state office of economicdevelopment, albany, new york.davis, stan, and bill davidson, 1991. 2020 vision. simon & schuster, new york.deloitte and touche. 1991. new jersey telecommunications infrastructure study: report to new jersey board of public utilities. deloitte andtouche, trenton, new jersey.edelstein, art. 1991. "changes due on telecommunications pact," vermont business magazine, october 1, p. 27.gilder, george. 1989. microcosm: the quantum revolution in economics and technology. touchstone/simon & schuster, new york.harris, robert g. 1991. "telecommunications services as a strategic industry: implications for united states policy," competition and theregulation of utilities, michael a. crew, ed. kluwer academic publishers, boston.harris, robert g. 1993. "r&d expenditures by the bell operating companies: a comparative assessment," pp. 245œ266 in regulatoryresponses to continuously changing industry structures, msu public utility papers, institute of public utilities, east lansing,mich.hirschman, albert o. 1958. the strategy of economic development. yale university press, new haven, conn.huber, peter w., michael k. kellogg, and john thorne. 1992. the geodesic network ii: 1993 report on competition in the telephoneindustry. geodesic company, washington, d.c.illinois task force on advanced telecommunications and networking. 1992. report of the illinois task force on advancedtelecommunications and networking. report to jim edgar, governor of illinois, springfield, iii., april.karpinski, richard. 1992a. "at&t strides into local loop with possible mccaw deal," telephony, november 9, pp. 8œ9.karpinski, richard. 1992b. "time warner, mci test catv bypass," telephony , december 7, p. 6.krugman, paul. 1987. "strategic sectors and international competition," in u.s. trade policies in a changing world economy, robert m.stern, ed. mit press, cambridge, mass.mueller, milton l. 1993. telephone companies in paradise: a case study in telecommunications regulation. transaction publishers, newbrunswick, n.j.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1988. ntia telecom 2000. u.s. department of commerce,washington, d.c.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure140the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.noam, eli m. 1992. "private networks and public objectives," aspen quarterly (winter):106œ136.organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd). 1988. the telecommunications industry: the challenges of structuralchange. oecd series in information, computer and communications policy (no. 14), oecd, paris.peters, eric. 1991. "telemarketer opens bureau in wheeling," the state journal, december 1.porter, michael. 1990. the competitive advantage of nations. basic books, new york.quinn, james brian. 1987. "the impacts of technology in the services sector," in technology and global industry: companies and nations inthe world economy, bruce r. guile and harvey brooks, eds.national academy press, washington, d.c.quinn, james brian. 1992. intelligent enterprise: a knowledge and service based paradigm for industry. the free press, new york.telco competition report. 1992. "fcc's expanded interconnection decision seen as 'historic' step toward opening local exchangemonopoly to competition," october 15, pp. 1œ8, brp publications, washington, d.c.notes1. for a thorough presentation and analysis of competition in telecommunications, see huber et al. (1992). for additional evidence on thispoint, see barr and borrus (1987). see also noam (1992).2. see huber et al. (1992), especially chapters 2 and 4.3. for a comparison of r&d expenditures by u.s., european, and japanese telecommunications equipment manufacturers and publictelephone operators, see harris (1993). in a paper presented to the telecommunications policy research conference in 1989, "research anddevelopment in telecommunicationsšan international comparison," thomas schnoring showed that by 1986, japanese telecommunicationsfirms had already achieved a higher "technological potential" than u.s. firms overall and had significant leads in optical fiber, imagecommunication, and general picture transmission (figure 4/1 and 4/2 at pp. 1718). "strategic uses of regulation: the case of lineofbusiness restrictions in the u.s. communications industry," by robert t. blau and robert g. harris, found that among 13 leading globalsuppliers of telecommunications equipment, the number of electrical patents awarded annually to european and japanese firms had grownmuch faster from 1984 through 1989 than those of u.s. firms (figure 3, p. 183). that study further shows that among the same 13 companiesthe "relative technological strength" of the u.s. companies remained about the same from 1984 to 1989, while that of the european andjapanese suppliers grew markedly (figure 4, p. 184). finally, the study shows that the global market share of the u.s. companies fell by abouthalf from 1984 through 1989, while the shares of european and japanese firms grew substantially (figure 5, p. 184).4. in reference to the fcc's september 17, 1992, order in docket 91141.5. for an elaboration of this discussion, see harris (1991).6. summarized from "state modifies bell plan to save customers $110 million," united press international, february 2, 1990.7. for more detail on the legislation, see mueller (1993), from which this description was drawn.8. 1989 north dakota session laws, chapter 566.9. 1993 north dakota session laws, chapter 469.state regulatory policies and the telecommunications/information infrastructure141the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the prospects for meaningful competition in localtelecommunicationsdale n. hatfieldintroductionthe purpose of this paper is to explore the prospects for meaningful competition in the provision of localtelecommunications services. this topic is important (1) because of its relationship to the line of businessrestrictions that were placed upon the bell operating companies (bocs) as a result of the modified finaljudgment that produced the breakup of at&t and (2) because of the efforts of local exchange carriers moregenerally to be deregulated in the provision of exchange and exchange access services and to expand intoinformation services and other adjacent competitive markets.prospects for competitioncable company competition with telephone companiesit is useful to look at the public switched telecommunications network (pstn) as being composed of fiveparts: (1) the terminal equipment and inside wiring portion on the subscriber's premises; (2) the subscriber accessor local loop portion of the network between the subscriber's premises and the local switch or central office; (3)the local switching portion; (4) the metropolitanarea portion of the network interconnecting those central officesand the "points of presence" or switching systems of the longdistance carriers; and (5) the interexchange or longhaul portion of the network. to these five partsšcustomer premises equipment, local loops, local switching,metropolitanarea/interoffice transport, and the interchange networkšit is also useful to add a sixth by dividingthe local exchange switching systems into two parts: (1) basic call processing, that is, the lowerlevel functionsassociated with making connections between and among subscriber lines and interoffice trunks, and (2) thehigherlevel, softwarebased service logic functions and their associated data bases. of course, it is this separationof basic call processing from the service logic and associated data bases that is leading to the creation of the"intelligent network" and the offering of services like personal number calling.note: the views and opinions set forth in this paper are those of the author. they do not necessarily reflect the views of theannenberg washington program in communications policy studies of northwestern university.the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications142the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at one timešnot really so long agošall of these segments of the network were regarded as being part of onelarge natural monopoly. the notion that the entire networkšall six partsšexhibited natural monopolycharacteristics was challenged by (1) rapid technological changes (such as the development of microwave radio)and (2) a lot of rethinking on the part of policy analysts and regulators. there is no need to repeat the regulatoryhistory here, but, briefly stated, the customer premises equipment and longhaul portions of the network were"unbundled" from the four portions of the local exchange networkšsubscriber access, local switching (2 parts),and local transport. competition was then allowed in these unbundled portions, and that competition is now wellestablished in both areas. it is probably fair to say that many policy analysts, initially at least, believed that thelocal exchange networkšcomposed of the four remaining partsšstill constituted a natural monopoly.viewed in a historical context like this, it is not really too surprising that the natural monopoly status of thelocal exchange network is now being challenged by (1) continuing rapid technological changes and (2) furtherrethinking about the scope of the monopoly on the part of policy analysts and regulators. consequently, as a resultof actions at the federal level (in terms of interstate services) and by selected public utility commissions at the statelevel (in terms of intrastate services), competition is emerging in the transport portion of the local exchangenetwork and, to a very limited extent, in local switching. furthermore, from a technological perspective at least,there are even some prospects for intermodal competition (e.g., from wireless technologies alone or from acombination of cable television and wireless technologies) for the local loop itself.the cable television industry is now deploying fiber in the distribution portions of its networks and otherwisestudying and beginning experiments with the next generation of cable technology. those developments andexperiments, which include "fiber to the neighborhood," conversion from analog to digital transmission, digitalcompression, and advanced forms of packet switching, are aimed at providing dramatic increases in capacity (e.g.,to 500 television channels or beyond) and increased reliability while serving as a future platform for theintroduction of twoway, multimedia services (such as interactive games and distance learning) and, potentially,traditional voice and data services as well.however, there are numerous technical uncertainties and other constraints associated with the provision of thelatter types of services. for example, there are the noise ingress problems associated with the use of the "tree andbranch" cable architecture for the upstream transmission of such signals, the limitations associated withinexpensive cabling and other devices (e.g., splitters) used by many consumers within their homes, the addedcomplexities in terms of the radio frequency modem needed on the customer premises to allow twowaycommunications and in interfacing existing analog telephone equipment to that modem.other major constraints are that cable companies lack (1) the necessary switching systems to route ordinarytelephone calls among subscribers or between subscribers and longdistance networks; (2) the sophisticated andvery specialized network management (operational support systems) for the provisioning, administration,maintenance, traffic management, service evaluation, and planning and engineering associated with switchedservices; (3) specialized billing systems capable of handling the full range of local exchange telephone servicesand the associated large volume of individual calls or transactions; and (4) the technical arrangements for routingtraffic between and among individual local cable television systems and between such systems and the incumbentlocal exchange telephone carrier.1in addition to the above limitations, the following points must also be considered when consideringcompetition by the cable industry: the industry is by no means unanimously in favor of pursuing even specialized aspects of thetelecommunications business, let alone ordinary local exchange and exchange access services. in otherwords, some cable firms may be very slow to offer (if ever) anything except entertainment video andclosely related services.the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications143the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. because cable television franchises are typically awarded on a communitybycommunity basis, theindustry is badly fragmented on a geographical basis. in a typical metropolitan area (let alone over anentire local access and transport area served by a bell operating company), it is not unusual to findliterally scores of individually franchised systems owned by a relatively large number of different cablemultiple system owners. those firms that are exploring the telecommunications business (especially switched services) have notreached any final agreement on the technical details of the architecture that they will employ. because ofthe differences in approaches in this early stage of development and the diversity of cable systemownership in a particular region, the initial services offered are apt to be highly fragmented and thereforeof limited utility. while the economics for upgrading cable networks to expand entertainment services are well established,there is still considerable uncertainty about the economics of providing ordinary switched telephoneservices. building on the previous four points, the wellpublicized trials that the cable companies are currentlycarrying out are more in the nature of experiments as they relate to the provision of ordinary telephone(i.e., nonentertainment) services.2 to the best of my knowledge, there are no cable television companiesin the united states that are offering regular "dialtone" services on a tariffed basis at this time [fall1993].3in addition to the above, and beyond any direct de jure barriers to entry, there are host of other de factoconstraints to cable companies and other potential competitors entering the local exchange telephone business.these restrictions include, inter alia, the following: lack of agreements and standards for the efficient and economical interconnection of competitors withthe incumbents' local exchange networks for the exchange of local traffic; difficulties associated with accessing pole lines, ducts, rightsofway, radio sites, and buildings necessaryto construct competing facilities; absence of nondiscriminatory access to unbundled information (e.g., data bases) and services in theincumbent carrier's network necessary for the transmission and routing of telecommunications services; absence of the ability to resell the incumbent's telecommunications services and network functions andskewed pricing structures that preclude entry into some segments of the local exchange market; and incumbent's control of numbering plans and lack of local number portability.4because of these restrictions and the simple size of the task required to duplicate the existing local exchangenetwork, the cable companies are not in a position to offer significant competition to incumbent local exchangetelephone companies in the short to medium term, even if such competition were authorized by regulatoryauthorities.the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications144the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telephone company competition with cable companiesin the past, local telephone companies or local exchange carriers (lecs) have been limited technologically intheir ability to provide cable television services by the inherent bandwidth limitations of the twistedpair coppercable deployed in the local loop portion of their networks. the lecs are exploring two different approaches toovercoming these limitations.one approach is known as asymmetrical digital subscriber line (adsl) and is based on the use ofsophisticated digital signal processing techniques for oneway transmission of broadband digital signals plusordinary twoway voice conversations over a single pair of wires (i.e., the local loop). the adsl technology,which would retain the classic star topology of the existing network, coupled with advances in digital signalcompression, would, potentially, allow simultaneous transmission of several video signals to the home.basically, the adsl technology involves trying to squeeze the last increment of capacity out of a networkthat was optimized for narrowband voice transmission. however, there are significant technological and economicrisks associated with further development and deployment of this technology. these risks are as fundamental aswhether the quality of the signal will be sufficient to meet customer needs, whether a sufficient number of videosignals can be delivered simultaneously, whether the performance will be adequate on the copper pairs installedmany years ago, and, since there are distance limitations associated with the technology, how customers beyond acertain distance from the central office will be served. these risks are apparently so great that some telephonecompanies in the united states appear to have rejected the adsl approach, and only one company seems to bestrongly pursuing the technology in field trials.the other approach being explored by the lecs to overcome the inherent limitations of their existing networkinvolves replacement of the twistedpair copper cable with fiber optic cable and its associated electronics. thetelephone companies' highly publicized original vision called for running fiber optic cable all the way to homes,the socalled fibertothehome (ftth) architecture. however, as noted in a recent article in a telephone industrytrade publication (wilson, 1993), "the local exchange carrier community's oncegrand plans for running fiberoptic cable into every american home came to a screeching halt in 1989, colliding hard with the wall of highcosts" (p. 9).the industry retreated from the ftth vision to a configuration that involved proposing to run fiber close to agroup of customers so that the cost of the necessary electronics could be shared among a number of households.this configuration, which is now being tested, is referred to as fiber to the curb (fttc). however, there are stillsignificant unresolved technical issues relating to this more modest vision of the telephone companies. theseinclude such fundamental questions as whether the network (1) should be active or passive or some hybrid of thetwo, (2) should utilize analog or digital transmission or some hybrid of the two, (3) should be configured with astar or treeandbranch topology or a logical hybrid of the two, and, (4) for the star topology, whether it should be asingle or double star.this uncertainty is further illustrated by recent indications that some lecs may retreat even further andadopt a "fibertotheneighborhood" architecture that in many ways is similar to the hybrid approach beingdeployed by the cable industry. given the technical uncertainties associated with fttc, it is not surprising thatthere are considerable economic uncertainties associated with the fttc approach, to say nothing of ftth.not only are there still significant uncertainties associated with the technology and costs associated withpotential telephone entry into the provision of broadband services, there are also significant uncertainties aboutwhether the added revenues generated by the provision of entertainment video services would be sufficient tocover the added costs. for example, one of the most publicized telephone company experiments with twowaycable (gte's experiment in cerritos, california) was recently characterized as a "flop" (lippman, 1993).the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications145the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moreover, in competing for the delivery of entertainment video programming, the telephone companies facecable companies that have already constructed broadband coaxial cable networks that are now available to roughly96 percent of the television households in the united states. furthermore, as suggested above, cable companiescan greatly expand their available capacity and achieve significant onetime efficiency gains by introducing fiberin the trunk and distribution portions of their networks, while retaining use of the existing broadband coaxial cableconnections to individual residences. finally, the cable television revenues themselves are at risk because of theincreased competition from terrestrialbased multichannel multipoint distribution systems or "wireless cable"systems, the imminent launch of a highpower, highcapacity direct broadcast satellite system, and the "cellularlike" wireless systems operating in the upper regions of the microwave spectrum near 28 ghz. these competitivethreats are enhanced by the availability of the same digital compression techniques that will enable the significantexpansion of cable television system capacity as explained above.the issue of lec investment in broadband facilities is complicated by the interaction of the incentivescreated by the mature state of the market for ordinary local exchange services, continuing rapid technologicalchanges, and the nature of traditional economic regulation. regarding market maturity, one of the mostfundamental factors facing the lecs is that "universal service" has largely been accomplished and their basicbusiness, as measured in terms of the number of access lines, is growing at the slow rate of only a few percent peryear. thus, there is very little opportunity for substantial growth in their basic business.moreover, their basic local exchange telephone business is, by and large, still under traditional rateofreturnregulation. with traditional rateofreturn regulation, expenses are essentially passed through to ratepayers, andannual profits are determined by the product of the allowed annual percentage rateofreturn and the netinvestment (i.e., original investment less accumulated depreciation) that has been made to provide the regulatedservices. however, the falling costs of switching and of interoffice transmission, and the introduction of pairgainsystems in the loop, combined with more rapid depreciation, have created a situation wherein the net investment(i.e., the "rate base") is trending downward. in a nonregulated industry, this would be welcome news becauseincreased capital productivity would allow increased profits and/or decreased prices. but with traditional rateofreturn regulation, increased capital productivity reduces the absolute level of profits. this decrease in the absolutelevel of profits due to falling net investment has been exacerbated by the falling cost of capital (and hence theallowed rate of return) over the last few years.5 in short, without some fundamental change in strategy orregulation, the lecs/bocs face the prospect of "disinvestment" and decreasing total profits in their basicbusiness.thus, as long as the established lecs are rateofreturn regulatedšor even if a strong component of rateofreturn regulation remains under alternative forms of regulation as is typically the casešthere is a strong reason forthem to invest in fiber irrespective of demand. indeed, the potential drop in the absolute level of profits without theimmense investment associated with fiberintheloop may largely explain the massive public relations, litigation,and lobbying efforts that they have unleashed to convince policymakers, regulators, and the general public that theinvestment is not only prudent but absolutely required to assure the competitiveness of u.s. firms in worldmarkets.there are other advantages to the bocs of deploying fiber, especially in downtown metropolitan areas wherethey are beginning to face competition from competitive access providers such as teleport and metropolitan fibersystems. by investing in fiber in these downtown areas, they not only respond to the nascent competition but, byoverinvesting, can also discourage additional entry. despite these other advantages, the need to boost investmentis clearly a major motivation for the lecs' desire for fiberšespecially in the residential and smallbusinessmarkets.another problem with lec investment in fiber is that, as long as they have monopoly power in the provisionof local exchange services, they have the incentive to load the bulk of thosethe prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications146the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.investment costs on ordinary ratepayers in order to subsidize the provision of new broadband services. in addition,as a practical matter, it is almost totally beyond comprehension that regulators would allow a local telephonecompany to fail if there were not alternative providers of service available. thus if uneconomic investments bylecs are made in broadband facilities in the subscriber access portion of the network, the inevitable result will bethat ordinary ratepayersšnot the stockholders of the local exchange companyšwill be stuck with the bill. this isespecially true if such investments are made at the behest of the regulators themselves.because of all of the foregoing and the simple size of rebuilding the existing local exchange network, thetelephone companies are not particularly well situated to compete with the cable companies for provision ofbroadband entertainment services unless potentially uneconomic investment is artificially stimulated by policy andregulatory actions (or inaction).summary and conclusionsdespite the current hype that surrounds the issue, there are significant uncertainties about whether headtohead competition will actually develop between telephone companies and cable companies in the provision oflocal services. even if the existing legal barriers to entry are eliminated, there remain significant technological,economic, and marketplace uncertainties concerning the development of such competition. if competition doesdevelop between the two industries, it will be slow in coming, and it may well be limited to the provision ofcertain specialized services or network components, rather than for the basic services that lie at the heart of eachindustry's current business. furthermore, if, over time, these barriers and uncertainties are overcome, the resultingindustry structure may consist of little more than an oligopoly with only two major players.in either casešwith limited competition in adjacent sectors of the market or a twoplayer oligopolyštheresulting rivalry would hardly meet the test for robust competition that would justify full deregulation of thelecs. thus, policymakers and regulators would be well advised to exhibit a healthy amount of skepticismregarding the lifting of existing line of business restrictions and deregulating lecs without adequate safeguards.referenceslippman, john. 1993. '''tv of tomorrow' is a flop today," washington post, september 1, p. f1.wilson, carol (ed., telefocus column). 1993. "bellcore revisits the residential broadband cost question," telephony, july 26.notes1. affadavit of richard r. green in the united states district court for the eastern district of virginia, the chesapeake and potomactelephone company et al. v. united states of america et al., may 20, 1993.2. affadavit of richard r. green, may 20, 1993.3. in the united kingdom, cable companies are beginning to provide ordinary local telephone service in competition with britishtelecommunications.4. these barriers were identified and discussed at the eighth annual aspen institute conference on telecommunications regulation.5. the potential decrease in profits also explains, to a substantial degree, the lecs/bocs interest in "price cap" or "incentive" regulation,which essentially decouples prices from costs.the prospects for meaningful competition in local telecommunications147the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.regulation and optimal technological change: not whether,but hownina w. cornellthe topic of this panel is how regulation has impeded the timely introduction of costeffective newtechnologies and even encouraged adoption of new technologies that, although new, are not the most costeffective. i have been asked to address this question from the vantage point of an interexchange carrier. however, ibelieve that the vantage point is the same as that of any entrant that wants to provide services but is not theprovider that supplies the network with which end users initially connect. the problem i have with the formulationof the panel's topic is that it implies that if regulation somehow went away, a more efficient futurešwith speedierand better technological changešwould await us. i do not believe that.the technological change that an industry or sector experiences is in part a function of its market structureand the presence or absence of barriers to entry. in telecommunications the choice for market structure is either tohave a monopoly or to use regulation to keep the door open to the possibility for multiplefirm supply. which ofthese two choices we select and, if we select the second, how we implement it will have profound effects on thefuture pace and direction of technological changes.i believe the history of telecommunications from its beginnings to the end of the monopoly era shows that amonopoly market structure does not maximize the likelihood of promoting the most costeffective technology atthe most efficient pace. as the telecommunications system was opened up to entry in different places, starting inthe 1970s particularly, the pace of deployment of new technologies and functionalities also accelerated.1 only ifwe maintain and even expand the opportunities for multiplefirm supply and new entry will the goal of promotingthe most efficient pace and direction of technological change be met. to maintain or expand the opportunities formultiplefirm supply, however, requires regulation in its broadest sense. this is because telecommunications is atwoway network system.in all twoway network systems, government has had to play a bigger or smaller role in order to ensureinterconnection between the parts of the system. this is because twoway networks must have some kinds ofnodes where the different parts of the network pass traffic in both directions between the parts. if any one playercompletely controls the nodes, that player also controls the entire system. any wouldbe entrant would have tobuild a complete duplicating network and induce all customers to switch, as otherwise the new network would notserve the twoway function that is required.in order to have the possibility for multiplefirm supply when the sector involves a twoway network need,government must either own the nodes, as it does with airports; own the approaches to nodes, as it does withroads; or regulate the terms and conditions of interconnection, as it does with railroads and telecommunications. ifgovernment does not continue to regulate the terms andregulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but how148the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conditions of interconnection in telecommunications, the history of this sector of the economy shows that thoseterms and conditions will be used to remonopolize most or all of the sector.technically, this outcome is possible because of the way the twoway distribution of traffic occurs. eachenduser connection to the network (or to a network of networks) must have a unique address number, whetherthat number is the one originally dialed (as with current ordinary local and toll calls) or is the number to which adialed number is translated for routing (as occurs today with 800 calls). this unique address number is what thenetworks themselves use to route calls. when a call is placed by a calling party, that unique address number is setto be the termination point. most customers, particularly residential and smallbusiness customers, will have onlyone or a very small number of such terminating addresses and are likely to want them all supplied by a singlecompany, even should local exchange competition be a reality. i base this conclusion on the way the toll markethas worked: almost all interexchange companies use the billing services of the local exchange companies forresidential customers, at least in part because of those customers' preference for a "single bill." moreover, at leastfor a while, even where a customer uses more than one local exchange supplier, the telephone number actuallydialed by the calling party will determine which of those lines is the destination point.the company that controls that termination point has dominance over the pricing of terminating at thataddress within a very broad range of possible prices. for most kinds of what we today call plain old telephoneservice callsšlocal and toll callsšthe company that receives the origination of the call will have no choice but topay what the company that controls the terminating address charges for the termination. this is because the choiceof which company will control the terminating address is not made by the company of the customer originating thecall but by the enduser customer on the basis of the cost he or she has to pay, which is only for outgoing calls.the cost to the originating company of trying to convince the terminating customer to change that choice is notlikely to be low enough that the originating company could afford to try to induce the terminating customer tochange his or her provider of that connection to the network. thus, the company that controls the terminatingaddress will continue to have a bottleneck monopoly over all calls sent to that address, even if not over allcustomers in a geographic region.regulation of the terms and conditions of interconnection will have to take into account a number of ways thecompany that controls the terminating address might use (abuse) that control, absent regulation, to remonopolizethe market, if multiplefirm supply is to be able to bring new technologies to market tests. the first way thecompany might try to regain a monopoly is to refuse outright to interconnect at all. this is also the easiest abuse toprevent. as important for future possible technologies, however, is the potential refusal of the terminatingcompany to interconnect except at a few select locations in its network. this selectivity can be used to retain amonopoly over a larger amount of the actual transmission or to insist that additional functions will only besupplied by the terminating company, not the originating company. a refusal to interconnect at a particular pointin the network can prevent certain technologies from being introduced at all or from being introduced in as timelyor as extensive a manner as would have occurred if interconnection had been allowed where the supplier of thattechnology had wanted.refusals to interconnect are not the only way power over the nodes can be exercised to influence marketstructure and, with it, technological outcomes. the same results can be achieved by allowing interconnection butthen setting prices that in fact deter or prevent the ability to use the interconnections successfully. in this regard itis not just the setting of too high a price, per se, but also the relationship of the price for interconnection to otherprices that can have pervasive effects on the future pace and direction of technological change. the adverse effectof crosssubsidization on future technological change has been touched on by robert crandall (in this volume).crosssubsidies by an incumbent firm with control over the nodes can be used to impede or block entry by otherfirms into the provision of one or more services. this in turn prevents those other firms from bringing newtechnologies and new functions to the market.regulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but how149the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.much less often addressed, but a much more common danger, is the likelihood of establishing price squeezesthat achieve the same goals but without having to price any services to end users below cost. the formerlymonopoly local exchange providers have succeeded in several cases in establishing price squeezes and getting tocontinue them, reducing or eliminating the ability of other firms from effectively challenging the former monopolyprovider's dominance over the supply of those services. price squeezes by local exchange carriers have beendemonstrated in the case of pay phones in a number of state regulatory proceedings.2 the battle that continues torage over whether local exchange carriers will be required to impute charges for bottleneck monopoly functionsinto their enduser rates also demonstrates the existence of price squeezes today.3local exchange carriersšfor example, gte in oregon and pacific bell in californiašcontinue to argue thatthey should not be required to impute the charges at all.4 moreover, they argue that if they must impute at all itshould be done over such a broad aggregation of services as to allow some of the most competitive services toescape the requirement. this argument appears, for example, as a claim that any imputation requirement shouldnot apply on a servicebyservice basis within intralocal access and transport area (lata) toll, but only to theentire category of toll services collectively. because of the continued denial of equal access for intralata toll,the most competitive portion of this market is the segment that interexchange carriers mostly supply usingspecialaccess facilities. an imputation requirement applied only to all toll services collectively imposes noeffective constraint on how the local exchange carrier prices the services that compete with the interexchangecarriers' special accessbased services. when imputation is not required, the result is that the local exchangecarrier can price the service at a level no other carrier can match because of the price that the other carriers mustpay for access.this is the same technique that will most likely be used to remonopolize if proper regulation overinterconnection prices is not maintained even in a world of multiple suppliers. this is particularly importantbecause multiple suppliers are not likely to be able to enter with services offered to all customers in a broadgeographic region. the incumbent supplier of network connectionsšthe local loopšis likely to try to imposeinterconnection rates on competing providers that are higher than what it recovers in its own charges for theservice for which termination is sought, as bell atlantic tried to do in maryland, for example, for local exchangeterminations to metropolitan fiber systems.5 if permitted to price this way, the current providers of local loopfacilities could underprice all other providers in all markets in which they are allowed to operate.thus, the choice facing the government in telecommunications is not whether to regulate but where toregulate, and how, if it wants to promote the ability of the market to test and adopt most readily new costeffectivetechnologies. whatever answer government chooses will have a significant influence on the future pace anddirection of technological change, because it will determine into which parts of the whole telecommunicationssystem new ideas, technologies, and services can most easily be subjected to a market test. in other words,regulation cannot be neutral in its impact on the future pace and direction of technological change.regulation will have to determine the nature and extent of physical unbundling that will be required of thosefirms that supply the first connections to end users. how unbundled those networks are forced to bešwhichmeans at what points other firms can interconnectšwill determine how much other firms can contest in themarket such functions as the amount and direction of the intelligence in the network, the functions that can beadded to basic call processing, and the like.6 other firms can only contest the choices made for these elements ifthey can interconnect at locations that enable them to offer substitutes for the choices made by the initial carrier.regulation will also have to determine the prices paid for various forms of interconnection. in this regard,regulation will have to determine three aspects of the price. the first is the overall level of each price. the secondis the price for one form of interconnection relative to other forms of interconnection. the third is the price foreach form of interconnection relative to prices set by the owner of the nodes for services provided directly to endusers. each of these aspects of theregulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but how150the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.price for interconnection can have a direct impact on the future pace and direction of technological change.if interconnection prices are set very high, demand for the services that must interconnect is suppressed, withthe result that less attention may be paid to those services by those investigating new technologies and functions.very high interconnection prices could also push some users to turn to less efficient technologies that can servetheir needs but that avoid the need to pay the high interconnection prices. because such options are only availableto some telecommunications users, the result is a loss in efficiency over time.if the price for one form of interconnection is high relative to another, firms using new technologies will tendto try to adapt those technologies to be able to use the less costly (to them) form of interconnection. this also willhave direct impacts on which technologies get adopted and how efficiently they are used. if the relative prices fordifferent forms of interconnection vary based on factors other than the underlying cost differences, these variationsin how future technologies develop will not be as efficient as they would have been in the absence ofinterconnection price differences not based on cost differences.if the price for interconnection is set such that any firm using interconnections faces a price squeeze relativeto the price charged for relevant enduser services by the firm controlling the nodes, the firm using theinterconnections will have less chance to prove in the market the possible superiority of its technology orfunctions. once again, the result will be less efficient than would have been the case in the absence of a pricesqueeze and will have a deleterious effect on the pace and direction of future technological change.the challenge, thus, is to accept that some regulation is necessary and to design it to allow the greatestopportunity for new ideas to have a chance to prove themselves in the market. the necessary regulations involveboth the technical aspects of interconnection and the prices to be paid for various forms of interconnection. thefirst of these two needs means that regulation must address the multitude of issues involved in what has come to becalled open network architecture, but it must be done with a greater recognition that appears at present of a needto push the former monopoly firms that provide the first connections to the system for end users to unbundlebeyond where their own incentives would lead them to go. the necessary regulation of interconnection prices,however, will not occur until there is recognition that the necessary controls over interconnection prices are notaddressed by debating the merits of price caps over rateofreturn regulation.the problems of rateofreturn regulation are by now widely known. price cap regulation is offered as asolution that eliminates incentives to avoid new technology or be inefficient in operation. price caps are alsoadvocated because they may reduce or eliminate incentives to engage in crosssubsidization. this latter claimdepends in good measure on the ability to prevent the firm from turning back to rateofreturn regulation if thingsdo not go well for it under price caps, a topic most suitable for debate among lawyers. price caps, however, do noteliminate the incentive to create a price squeeze and may even facilitate implementing one. thus, price caps,however beneficial as a means of limiting possible monopoly abuses of end users' prices, do not begin to addressthe issues involved with pricing interconnections. moreover, the regulatory requirements necessary to try tocontrol or prevent price squeezes reduce some of the regulatory savings that have been touted as a benefit by thosewho promote price caps.the controls necessary to try to curb or prevent price squeezes involve looking in fairly detailed ways at costsversus prices for each service offering, particularly the offerings to end users. the reason is that, to prevent pricesqueezes, enduser prices must include the same charge for use of the nodes as is charged to those who mustinterconnect. without such a nondiscrimination requirement, price squeezes are inevitable. the necessary data fromwhich this part of the necessary regulatory controls must be developed, however, is either the same as, or similarto, the data that have to be collected for rateofreturn regulation. ending the collection and reporting of these dataregulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but how151the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is one of the "efficiencies" often cited as a benefit of price cap regulation. it is, however, at best only a shortrunefficiency if it means that the regulations necessary to promote the widest testing of new ideas and functionscannot be imposed.notes1. see, for example, report by the federal of communications commission on domestic telecommunications policies, submitted to thesubcommittee on communications, committee on interstate and foreign commerce, u.s. house of representatives, september 27, 1976; andtelecommunications in transition: the status of competition in the telecommunications industry, a report by the majority staff of thesubcommittee on telecommunications, consumer protection, and finance, u.s. congress, house, committee on energy and commerce, 97thcongress, 1st session, november 3, 1981, for two reports of these effects compiled at the time the system was being opened up to entry.2. see, for example, before the commonwealth of massachusetts, department of public utilities, petition for an advisory ruling as to thecompetitive nature of public pay telephone service, d.p.u. 8845, 19881989; before the public service commission, state of florida, inre: petition for review of rates and charges paid by pats providers to lecs, docket no. 860723tp, 1990: before the state of illinoiscommerce commission, in the matter of independent coin payphone association and total communication services, inc. complaint toreclassify illinois bell telephone company pay telephone service as a competitive service in illinois market service area 1 (msa 1),docket no. 880412. 19911992; before the washington utilities and transportation commission, northwest payphone association et al. v.us west communications, inc., docket ut920178, 1993.3. see, for example, before the state of illinois, illinois commerce commission, in the matter of illinois bell telephone company petition toregulate rates and charges of noncompetitive services under an alternative form of regulation, docket no. 920448, 1993. this is onlyon of many cases where a price squeeze has been shown to exist for some toll services.4. see the filings of gte in before the public utility commission of oregon, in the matter of the investigation into the cost of providingtelecommunications services, phase ii: unbundling and pricing issues, docket um 351, ongoing, and the testimony and briefs of pacific bellin before the public utilities commission of california, in the matter of alternative regulatory frameworks for local exchange carriers andrelated matters, 1.8711033, 19911992.5. see the direct testimony of alfred e. kahn and william e. taylor on behalf of bell atlanticmaryland in case no. 8584, before the publicservice commission of maryland, in the matter of the application of mfs intelenet of maryland, 1994.6. for a vivid example of the difference in the level of unbundling sought by entrants and the level local exchange carriers are willing toprovide, see the filings of the various parties in before the public utility commission of oregon, in the matter of the investigation into thecost of providing telecommunications services, phase ii: unbundling and pricing issues, docket um 351, ongoing. this is not the onlyexample of such a discrepancy, however.regulation and optimal technological change: not whether, but how152the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hardwork is just beginningthomas j. longintroductionthis is a time of dramatic change in the telecommunications industry. traditional monopoly markets aredisappearing. competition in the local loop is coming. computer and telecommunications technologies areconverging. the cable industry is becoming a major force in telecommunications. each day our newspapers heraldanother important change.as we make the transition to a new telecommunications marketplace, particularly as we anticipate enhancedcompetition, there may be a tendency to assume that it is time for regulators to pack their bags and go on anextended, or even permanent, vacation. my message is that regulators should put the vacation brochures back intheir drawers and hunker down for at least 5 to 10 years of more hard work. and, despite all of the changes, mostof the hard work will serve the same primary purpose that regulation has always servedšprotecting consumersand competitors from monopoly power.a number of trends are now converging to create a serious threat for residential and smallbusinessconsumers. the threat is of saddling these consumers with unjustifiably high rates for basic service in a time ofdramatically declining costs. monopoly local exchange carriers (lecs) can use these inflated basic service rates tocrosssubsidize their expansion into the video and information services markets. lecs will be able to use therevenue from these excessive rates to gain an advantage over their current and future competitors. consumers willsuffer, not just because they will be paying excessive rates but also because the development of competition willbe slowed or even stymied.at least five trends are contributing to this threat. first, skittish lecs worried about competition are lookingto collect as much money as possible from captive customers for as long as possible. second, regulators may beaiming their sights too far down the competitive road and failing to see the considerable monopoly power thatlecs still wield. third, in a time of tremendous upheaval in the telecommunications marketplace, the lecs andother telecommunications giants can take advantage of their massive resources to argue for a regulatory "paradigmshift" that furthers their interests at the expense of small customers. fourth, telecommunications giants have showntheir adeptness at parlaying regional and national concerns about economic weakness and global competitivenessinto much friendlier regulation. fifth, in the absence of any new tax revenue, monopoly telephone rates are seen asthe next best thing to taxes. unlike tax money, which is used for a public purpose, revenue from higher rates isviewed by the monopoly telephone companies as their money to use as they see fit.these trends mean that regulators will have to be more vigilant than ever in the coming years to protectconsumers from unjust and unreasonable rates. in this paper i highlight two issuesthe future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning153the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that i believe will be particularly important to small consumers. but first, since i have argued that the mainpurposes of regulation will not change much in the coming years, i want to share my view of those main purposes.purposes of regulationi see three traditional purposes of telecommunications regulation. the first, and core, purpose is to protectconsumers and competitors against the undesirable consequences of market power. with market power comes theability to engage in price gouging of customers, to crosssubsidize competitive services through supracompetitiverates for monopoly services, and to engage in other unfair conduct designed to thwart competitors. regulation isneeded to curb such exercises of market power.the second purpose is to protect consumers and competitors against fraud (and other abuses of customers),unfair competition, and other undesirable behavior that even telecommunications firms without market powermight exhibit. market power can facilitate some of this untoward behavior, but competitive firms can commitfraud and conspire to defeat competitors too. (monopolies don't have a monopoly on bad behavior.)the third purpose is to promote universal service. this is a goal of regulation, not primarily to satisfy acollective charitable impulse toward less advantaged segments of society, but rather to reap the enhanced benefitsof a telecommunications network to which all are connected. i define universal service as universal access to thelevel of telecommunications service that is essential for effective participation in society.1as competition increases, these will still be the main purposes of regulation, at least for the foreseeablefuture. as for the first purpose, the lecs will continue to have market power in many of their market segments forseveral years, especially for the services used primarily by residential and small business customers.2 with respectto the second purpose, the challenge of protecting consumers against fraud and other abuses will only increase asthe number of competitors and customer confusion multiply. as for the universal service objective, even in a fullycompetitive marketplace, everyone will be better off if we ensure that essential telephone service is affordable toall groups in society. that will mean continuing to have the general body of customers pay into lifelinetypefunds to support subsidized service for customers needing assistance.i would like to focus on two issues that are now and will continue to be particularly important to consumers,and therefore should be important to regulators, in the coming years. the first is protecting consumers frombecoming the guarantors of the lecs' success in competition. the second is ensuring that consumers don't becomeinvoluntary and uncompensated investors in the lecs.inflated monopoly rates as a cushion against competitionas traditional monopoly sectors shrink, the incentives for lecs to flex their monopoly muscle with theirlocal service customers will be greater than ever. the lecs are facing the scary prospectšwell known to firms inthe competitive sector of the economyšthat their financial success may not be guaranteed. captive local servicecustomers are their only remaining hope of retaining the financial security to which they have becomeaccustomed.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning154the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the linchpin of the lecs' efforts to shelter themselves from competition is the following familiar assertion:basic exchange service is priced way below cost and subsidized by the services that are now being opened tocompetition. those subsidies may have served valuable purposes in the past, the argument goes, but they cannotbe sustained if the lecs are to have a fair opportunity to compete in the sectors thrown open to competition.the beauty of this argument from the lecs' perspective is that it completely exonerates them from anyresponsibility (such as the possibility of inflated costs) for rates that are not competitive. and it enables the lecsto argue that rate reductions for the newly competitive services should be offset by rate increases to the supposedlybelowcost basic exchange services.this argument that basic services are receiving a large subsidy is being used to justify billions of dollars ofmonopoly rate increases, a large portion of which have already occurred. since such large sums of money are atstake, it is more vital than ever that regulators closely examine the validity of the subsidy claim.some may be surprised at my suggestion that there is a dispute about whether basic exchange service isreceiving a subsidy. i chalk that up to the telephone companies' masterful domination of the public discourse,certainly not to any factual demonstration that basic service is being subsidized. solely through decades ofconstant, unflagging repetition in every forum and at every opportunity, the telephone companies have managed totransform an unproven assertion into an unassailable fact.turn had the opportunity to examine this "fact" in california's intralocal access and transport areacompetition and "rate rebalancing" case involving our two largest lecs, pacific bell (pacbell) and gte ofcalifornia (gtec).3 the only way pacbell and gtec could support their claim that basic residential service wassubsidized was by allocating all of the fixed costs of the local exchange network to basic service. of the totalreported costs of basic service of about $25 per month, those fixed costs made up about 80 percent.the problem with allocating all of these costs to local service is that the local exchange network is designedfor and used by all telephone servicesšincluding toll and enhanced servicesšnot just local service. the fixednetwork costs are joint and common costs incurred to provide a variety of services. assigning all of those costs tobasic service is about as fair and economically efficient as assigning all of the companies' executive salaries solelyto basic service.what we discovered in our recent case was that pacbell's $8.35 rate for basic service more than covers thedirectly assignable costs of basic service. the difficult question for regulators is how to allocate the huge pot ofjoint and common costs that are not clearly attributable to just one service. there is no obvious right way to do it.here is a simple example. suppose that the cost study for a standalone toll network (i.e., a network thatincluded all the elements necessary for toll calling and only toll calling, such as the local loop and switchingfacilities as they would be designed solely to provide toll service) showed that the local loop portion of such anetwork would cost an lec 150 units. suppose that the local loop in a standalone local exchange network wouldcost 100 units. this would mean that the toll network causes 50 percent more of the local loop costs than localexchange service. in this case the allocation of the joint and common local loop costs should ensure that tollservice is assigned 50 percent more of those costs than basic exchange service.4 but when phone companies reportas fact that basic residential service costs $25 a month (a figure that includes all the fixed network costs), they areat best being misleading. in reality, their cost numbers rely on a lot of highly controversial assumptions,arguments, and economic theories.5regulators have to grapple with this issue if they want to protect monopoly customers from becoming theguarantors of the lecs' success in competition. they need to be skeptical. many california regulators did not evenknow there was any controversy about the cost of basic service; they had been so thoroughly indoctrinated by thephone companies' party line. regulators need to get their hands dirty by requiring and critically examining studiesof the cost of major services and then deciding the fair amount of costs to recover from basic exchange servicesand how much of the fixed network costs should be allocated to other services.once the fair amount of costs to recover from basic service is determined, rates should be set to recover thosecosts, no more, no less. once it is clear that basic service is no longer receiving a subsidy, the lecs will not beable to argue for increased basic rates every time a former monopoly service is opened to competition. the idea isto build a wall around basic exchange service rates and make it clear that those rates are not available to fundcompetition.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning155the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ratepayers as involuntary investorsthe second major challenge for regulators i want to discuss is that of resisting the pressure from lecs tomake ratepayers involuntary investors in the advanced telecommunications networks that the lecs are nowbuilding. in california we are hearing a steady refrain from the lecs that they need rate relief to accelerate thedevelopment of the telecommunications infrastructure.raising rates (or, just as bad, not decreasing rates as much as would otherwise be justified) to pay forinfrastructure is doubly unfair to ratepayers. first, it makes ratepayers fund and bear the risks of investmentwithout offering any prospect of a return on the investment. in a competitive market, firms do not have the luxuryof simply raising their prices to fund investment. they have two choices: use internal capital or raise new capital inthe debt and equity markets. in either case, investors will demand and be entitled to a return on the investment.allowing lecs to collect inflated rates from ratepayers to fund infrastructure investment is like giving themfree money. they will use that free money to build advanced broadband networks, which they will claim they, notthe deeppocket ratepayers, own. by virtue of their "ownership" of this new network plant, the lecs will arguethat ratepayers are not entitled to any of the returns on the investment. if this argument succeeds, the lecs willhave shifted all of the risk of the investment to ratepayers while denying them the return that investors in ourmarket economy are entitled to. ratepayers will put up some or all of the capital for the broadband networks andthen be required to pay the lecs for the privilege of using those networks.6compounding that unfairness is the second problem: if rate increases to fund investment are allowed, thecustomers who will pay the excessive rates are for the most part not the customers who will be using andbenefiting from the infrastructure they will pay for. the purpose of the new broadband investment is not toenhance basic voice service but to allow sophisticated new video and highspeed data services to come to market.(one obvious purpose is to make competitive forays into the cable television market.) using inflated rates forbasic voicegrade service to pay for advanced video and data transmission services is a classic and indefensiblecrosssubsidy.the enhanced competition that has been a central goal of telecommunications policy for the last decade couldbe a casualty of such de facto ratepayer funding of broadband networks. telecommunications firms that areoperating in competitive markets do not have the luxury of charging inflated rates for monopoly service to financetheir new investment. lacking the unfair advantages of the lecs, they may be hamstrung in their efforts to mount asignificant competitive threat.if funding of infrastructure investment is left to the market, will that mean that certain groups of people orcertain geographic pockets will not be served by new investment? the argument is made that, for these leftoutsectors, ratepayer funding will be necessary to provide the advanced infrastructure.regulators need to examine these claims closely and skeptically. with free money available, the lecs have astrong incentive to claim that infrastructure investment is uneconomic in a given sector and will not happenwithout ratepayer funding. before monopoly rates are used to fund any investment, the lecs should be required toprove that there is no possibility of using private capital for the investment. if the lec can make this showing andthe regulators authorize inflated rates to pay for the investment, then ratepayers should be treated the same as anyother investors and receive their fair share of the returns.7 i suspect that if regulators made it clear that ratepayerswould be entitled to returns on investments they are required to fund, many supposedly uneconomic investmentswould suddenly become economic.before raising rates to foster accelerated investment, regulators should do everything possible to prevent basicmonopoly services from crosssubsidizing advanced competitive services. the fairest way for the lecs to recovertheir costs of providing advanced service is through the rates they charge for those advanced services.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning156the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there may come a time when a service we now consider an advanced information age service becomesnecessary for effective participation in society.8 when that happens, under my definition, that service would beconsidered part of universal service. groups that could not afford the full cost of the service would be entitled todiscounts to make it affordable. the discounts should be broadly funded by a surcharge on all telecommunicationsservices.however, regulators should be skeptical of claims that we need a dramatic redefinition of universal servicenow to include emerging broadband services. the lecs and many manufacturers have a strong financial interestin a world of universal broadband, even if most of the population does not need it. proclaiming access tosophisticated broadbandtype services to be part of universal service ahead of any demonstrated strong need ordemand would enhance revenues for many manufacturers and for telecommunications carriers, which wouldbenefit from major new markets.lofty claims are being made that broadband services will revolutionize education, health care, and citizens'ability to participate in government. there are powerful interests that have a strong financial incentive to makethese claims. decades ago we were also told that television would be a powerful educational force and a vehiclefor the expression of a broad diversity of ideas and voices. television has turned out to be overwhelmingly anentertainment medium that offers precious little opportunity for underrepresented segments of society to get theirvoices heard. it is possible that, like television, broadband technologies will prove to be mostly a means forenhancing entertainment opportunities.a more prudent approach to expanding universal service would be to wait to see which new services becomeessential and use lifelinetype discounts as needed to make those services affordable for those who need financialassistance.conclusionsome of the hard work that lies ahead for regulators could be obviated if lecs adopted a different approach.the hard work i have identified falls mainly into the category of protecting consumers against monopoly pricing.many lecs claim to welcome fair and open competition. unfortunately, in the regulatory trenches, they aredemanding terms for the onset of competition that use their remaining monopoly customers as a crutch and thathamstring their competitors. i challenge the lecs to live up to their rhetoric and to resist the urge to continue torely on ratepayers as a deep pocket funding source for their private investments.when it comes to infrastructure development, consumers would be best served by regulation that promotesdiverse choices of telecommunications companies and services. managing infrastructure improvements should notbe the endeavor that keeps regulators busy in the next decade.acknowledgmenti am indebted to turn's telecommunications analyst, regina costa, for many of the ideas in this paper. ofcourse, i am responsible for any deficiencies in the analysis.referencemelody, william h. 1983. ''diversification, deregulation, and increased uncertainty in the public utility industries," proceedings of the institute of public utilities, thirteenth annual conference, msu public utilities papers. institute of public utilities, east lansing,mich.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning157the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. my wording of the universal service objective reflects my views about how the "service" part of universal service should be defined. it isnot enough just to promote access to a dialtone service. today, the level of service that is essential to effective participation in society wouldinclude affordable calling (to businesses, schools, health care providers, etc.) within one's community of interest. the definition of universalservice is fluid. it should evolve as our requirements of and expectations from telecommunications service change. tuchtone service is a goodexample. a few years ago touchtone service was convenient but not necessary. now many businesses, government offices, and health careproviders require touchtone to be able to take full advantage of their services. as a result, touchtone should now be considered part of theservice that should be universal.2. the large portion of residential customers who use telecommunications services sparingly will not be an attractive target for competition forcompetition for many years to come, if ever.3. california public utilities commission investigation (1.) 8711033, phase iii, the implementation rate design (ird) phase. as of may1994, the california commission had not issued its final decision in this proceedings.4. the method i have seen that would best replicate cost causation would make use of standalone cost studies of the various services that usethe local loop. the joint and common costs of the local loop would be allocated among these services based on the extent to which each servicecauses local loop costs to be incurred, as shown by the standalone cost studies.here is a simple example. suppose that the cost study for a standalone toll network (i.e., a network that included all the elements necessaryfor toll calling and only toll calling, such as the local loop and switching facilities as they would be designed solely to provide toll service)showed that the local loop portion of such a network would cost an lec 150 units. suppose that the local loop in a standalone local exchangenetwork would cost 100 units. this would mean that the toll network causes 50 percent more of the local loop costs than local exchangeservice. in this case the allocation of the joint and common local loop costs should ensure that toll service is assigned 50 percent more of thosecosts than basic exchange service.5. one of these theories is that nontrafficsensitive costs (such as the costs of the local loop) should not be recovered through usagebasedrates. this theory is based on a narrow view of economic efficiency. it ignores the ineffeciencies and inequities that result when services arenot priced to recover the costs they cause. to use an example of current import, assume that a lec builds a new broadband network that isneeded only to carry video services but that incidentally can be used to provide basic voice telephone service. the abovedescribed theorywould hold that, if the video services are only priced on a usage basis, the nontrafficsensitive costs of the broadband network should all beassigned to basic exchange service and recovered in the monthly service fee. the result would be that basic exchange voice telephone rateswould would be used to recover broadband network costs that voice telephone service did not cause. the prices for voice and video serviceswould be distorted, and many basic voice telephone cutomers would unfairly be forced to pay the costs of services they do not want. for anexcellent discussion of the many issues surrounding allocation of joint and common costs, see melody (1983).6. under this scenario, ratepayers would be equivalent to taxpayers being taxed to build the broadband networks that will be part of the"information superhighway"." the u.s. interstate highway system was built with taxpayer money, but at least those highways are publiclyowned and taxpayers do not have to pay private owners for using what they have paid for.7. this would be accomplished by determining the amount of the total new investment that is funded by ratepayers through rates that arehigher than they otherwise would be. based on a required annual accounting of the achieved percentage returns on the new investment,ratepayers would be entitled to that same percentage return on their investment. the ratepayers' returns would be flowed back to them in theform of reduced rates, targeting as nearly as possible the services whose rates had initially been inflated to finance the investment.8. determining when a service has become essential for effective participation will not be easy or free of controversy. this will a sociologicaljudgment, not a judgment that will require the specialized technical expertize that regulatory commissions are supposed to have. accordingly,decisions about expanding the definition of universal service (which will lead to higher surchargesši.e., taxes) should certainly involve thelegislative process.the many important issues surrounding the potential expansion of the concept of universal service could certainly be the subject of a separatepaper.the future of telecommunications regulation: the hard work is just beginning158the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.costs and crosssubsidies in telecommunicationsbridger m. mitchellone of the fundamental issues in telecommunications regulation is how to devise a method for sharingcommon costs. some of the costs of the telecommunications system, including the entire range of servicesprovided over the backbone network, are common to many users and services. the debate about how best toallocate the burden of paying these costs in ubiquitous in telecommunications regulationšand is frequently veryconfused, especially when the issue is whether a particular service or group of customers is being subsidized byother services and/or users.as an economic matter, crosssubsidy among users and services is a welldefined concept. a group ofcustomers is being subsidized if their price is so low that the service supplier and its other customers would bebetter off if the service were discontinued. this circumstance occurs only when the increase in revenues to thetelephone company from offering the service is less than the increased costs of providing it.several years ago the california public utilities commission collaborated with pacific bell, generaltelephone of california, and the rand corporation to investigate the costs of providing local telephone serviceusing current technologies. the objective was to construct a "building block" model of local telephone service,using data from california, that would estimate the bestpractice costs of a local service system, using currenttechnology, for communities of various sizes and other characteristics. in areas where no service was provided,such as a new housing development or industrial park, the model would estimate the total cost of a new localnetwork. in areas in which a backbone network was already in place, the model could be used to estimate the costof adding more subscribers or more usage by existing subscribers.several important findings emerged from this study (mitchell, 1990), all of which are important in the debateabout pricing policy and subsidization within the telecommunications system.the first important finding was that almost all of the additional costs arising from either more subscribers oradditional usage are fixed on a persubscriber basis. increases in variable costs arise only from additional usagethat occurs at peak periods, which in turn gives rise to a need to increase busyhour capacity in order to retainservice quality. the importance of this finding is that usagebased pricingšsuch as a charge for each call or eachminute of usešwould not contribute much to the efficiency of the usage of the telephone system. indeed, takinginto account the additional costs of measuring usage and billing for it, the u.s. system of flatrate monthly chargesfor residential local telephone service, including both access and calling, is probably not inefficient.the second important finding of the california study is that by far the most important factor in causingvariation across localities in the cost of service is the distance of the subscriber from the local switching center or,to put it another way, the length of the copper wire connecting the customer to the local switch. the distance ofthis connection is determined primarily by populationcosts and crosssubsidies in telecommunications159the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.density, with customers in small towns and rural areas having, on average, much longer connection distances thancustomers in large cities.this finding, too, has considerable policy significance. local telephone prices are typically based on theaverage cost of service for all customers within a state or served by a single company with a broad heterogeneousservice territory. the practice of rate averaging is extremely important because it discourages entry by local accessproviders that would deploy less expensive technologies for providing service with a long connection distances.for example, recent advances in radio telephone systems, such as the transmission systems used by cellulartelephone companies, can provide highquality local access in many lowdensity communities at significantlylower costs than the traditional wirebased telephone system.the third major finding of the california study is that the incremental cost of service is much lower than theaverage cost of service. that is, adding more subscribers and more usage to an existing system is much lessexpensive, per additional subscriber, than the average cost per subscriber of constructing a completely newsystem. thus, on a statewide basis, the average cost of service in california is about $25, whereas the incrementalcost of service in most areas is less than half that amount.an important implication of this finding is that in most areas local residential service, using present telephonetechnology, is a natural monopoly. of course, this conclusion needs to be strongly qualified: it does not apply tocentral business districts of large cities with numerous businesses that are intensive users of services, to customergroups that seek technical capabilities going substantially beyond the features of the existing network, or to groupsthat are most efficiently served by radio telephone services, which do not exhibit extensive scale economies.nevertheless, most residential subscribers do not fall into any of these categories.all of these findings also shed light on the crosssubsidy issue. they suggest that more intensive users arenot being significantly subsidized by less intensive users since nearly all costs are independent of usage. thesefindings also suggest that most residential customers are not being subsidized, in part because most residentialcustomers do not live in areas with long wire connections to the local switch and in part because the incrementalcost of serving one more residential customer in a local area is much lower than the average cost of service. forthe most part, subsidies of local service go to residents of highcost communities with low population densities:rural areas, small towns, and suburban communities with singleunit dwellings on very large lots. and, because insome cases these communities could be served at lower cost by other technologies, even here some of the subsidyis unnecessary.a common argument for preservation of the existing structure of the telecommunications industry and systemof regulation is that it is necessary to preserve universal service because it provides a means for crosssubsidizingusers who would otherwise be unable to afford service. the california study casts considerable doubt on thisargument. most users are not crosssubsidized, which means that telephone companies would be worse off if theydecided not to serve most customers at current prices. many customers who are subsidizedšnotably, farmers,owners of rural second homes, and residents of lowdensity suburbscould easily afford unsubsidized service.referencemitchell, bridger m. 1990. incremental costs of telephone access and local use, r3909ictf. rand corporation, santa monica, calif.costs and crosssubsidies in telecommunications160the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.economic ramifications of the need for universaltelecommunications serviceeli noamamong u.s. states, new york has been a leader in promoting competition among firms providing localtelephone service. but liberalization does not mean instant deregulation. there is still a messy transition phase togo through, especially on the details of interconnection. the question is, does liberalization of telecommunicationsmean libertarianism, with no governmental regulatory role? and beyond, if there is free entry into all sectors oftelecommunications, what will happen?it is useful to conceptualize telecommunications networks as shown in figure 4a. network size is presentedon the horizontal axis. the vertical axis indicates the cost of services provided and their utility to the consumer interms of dollars. two curves are shown. one is the average cost curve, and one is the benefit, or utility, curve. theaverage cost curve implies that a network is, in effect, a costsharing arrangement, with the burden of costcollectively assumed by users. networks have a fairly significant fixed cost. as more users join the network thefixed cost is spread evenly over the various users, and the average cost decreases. but, as the network expands,highermarginalcost users join the network and the average cost starts to increase. the result is a ushaped curvefor most costfunctions. the curve for participating in the network increases with the number of people on thenetwork. this is due to the positive externalities of network usage. these externalities tend to flatten out as thenetwork reaches a certain size.there are a number of distinct regions on figure 4a. prior to the point where the two curves intersect, cost ishigher that utility. therefore, somebodyšeither government or private investors expecting a future returnšwillhave to subsidize the network. beyond the intersection point, there is a region of selfsustaining growth. beyondthe point where the distance between the two curves is at a maximum, there is a range in which the network, left tothe decision process of the users, would not grow, because costs are going up faster than utility and thus the netbenefits decrease. eventually, net benefits become negative when the curves again intersect.this suggests that there are three areas where there will be problems (figure 4b). we start with the firstregion on the left, where there is a critical mass problem. in the early stages of a network arrangement, funds forinvestment must be garnered because the cost of the system is higher than the benefits returned. in the traditionalregime, this investment was done by the network monopolist itself. france telecom, for example, put ample sumsof money into minitel, even giving away the terminals to its customers. why? because eventually the combinedcritical mass of users would be sufficient for everybody to benefit from the network, including its owner, francetelecom.but, if that is a reasonable approach for a monopoly, it often will not work in a competitive environmentbecause of the possibility of interconnection. a rival company can interconnect with a company's network andbenefit from its rival's accumulated critical mass of customers without having made the upfront investmentsitself.economic ramifications of the need for universal telecommunications service161the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 4a cost and benefits in relation to increasing availability of telecommunications services. p=ac, price =average cost; u(n), utility as a function of the number of users.figure 4b three issues basic to provision of telecommunications services.thus, the economic incentives can be in favor of being the second, not the first, entrant. there will be lessearly investment, and some of the funds necessary to create a critical mass of users might have to come fromoutside. in washington and elsewhere, this is an approach technologists are advocating. many would like to see aninjection of government money to deal with the critical mass problem.but subsidies are not the only alternative. there are essentially three ways to deal with the critical massproblem. one approach for the government is to do nothing and let markets function independently. the secondapproach is to deal with the cost curve by reducing the initial cost of supplying the service. a final strategyinvolves demandside policy, which implies increasing the utility curve by enhancing the value of the fixedservices.economic ramifications of the need for universal telecommunications service162the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national science foundation, by supporting the "industrial policy" approach in the internet, has bothincreased demand and reduced cost. typically, in the united states and elsewhere, the approach has been toconcentrate on developing the supply side of the graph (figure 4a)šfor example, by aiding the carriers thatwould do the upgrading. the alternative, supporting users at the demand side and thus reaching a critical mass, canbe done by partly supporting leadingedge, technologydriven uses and also communitybased applications. this iswhere the libraries and schools come in; they do not use leadingedgetechnology, supplyside applications butrather demandside, lowsophistication applications.the second problem is indicated on the far right of figure 4a,b, and it concerns universal service. here theproblem is that, because of competition, the network cannot maintain an internal subsidization scheme as in thepast with some users subsidizing other users. when entry is free, the new competitors first target the userspresenting the largest potential profits, and eventually the support system vanishes. to prevent such a collapse, avery elaborate system of access charges has been established. it is a system that is so opaque that hardly anyonecan understand its workings. but in a democratic society there should be accountability, with an understandingabout who is paying whom and how much.there is a relationship between the critical mass and universal service problems. we will never get to thelatter without having solved the former. however, it will be harder and will take longer for critical mass to becreated unless there is also a willingness to deal with the universal service issue. consider the burnsdolegorebill of a few years ago. in essence it said that in order for the government to aid (i.e., to support) by regulation theupgrade of the telecommunications network from copperwire to fiber (the creation of a critical mass issue), itwould also have to ensure that the rural united states would not be left behind (the universal service problem). inother words, it is not realistic to assume that congress will pour money into the first problem without having someassurances that the universal service side of the network will also be taken care of.the universal service issue is not going to go away. some are convinced that competition will take care ofany problems that arise. however, they are confused about the difference between allocation distribution andproduction efficiencies. competition will increase production efficiencies. it will not, however, resolve issues ofdistribution. the fact that food growing and processing are competitive and efficient does not respond to thequestion of how to feed the poor. even though it is possible to reduce marginal cost and the absolute number ofpeople not served by market forces acting alone, the universal service issue is not fully addressed that way. thereare positive externalities to adding to the network, as depicted by the upwardsloping curve in figure 4a.one alternative funding mechanism for universal service is a system that charges all carriers in proportion totheir net transmission revenues and credits them for already existing contributions to universal service. the moneywould go to categories of customers designated by the political system. they would get vouchers for theirsubsidies and be able to select their own carrier. competition for such customers would force the carriers to beefficient. carriers serving lowdensity areas could also be benefited, although not on an exclusive basis.a further problem is represented by the middle range of figure 4a,b. a competitive environment fortelecommunications involves a complex arrangement of carriers providing services for different segments of themarket: local, mobile, long distance, and international, in addition to vendors of hardware and software. in such acomplex carrier system, specialized "systems integrators" will invariably emerge to put together packages ofservices. this is already happening today for large customers, and will most likely be available to smallercustomers in the future. a restructuring plan by the rochester telephone company is going in this direction byseparating the service function from the network carrier function.economic ramifications of the need for universal telecommunications service163the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these systems integrators will effectively undercut the underlying carriers. the basic economic reason is thatin a competitive market, the integrators get the services and can resell them at marginal cost, while the carrier hasto bear the full cost per unit, including an allocation of fixed costs. since in network industries with largeeconomies of scale the marginal cost will be below the average cost, the integrator will economically outperformthe carrier providing the underlying service. several things will therefore happen.one is that the whole notion of common carriage, which is based on similar conditions of service for similarlysituated customers, will break down because the common carrier cannot compete against a systems integrator orcontract carrier that can pricedifferentiate and select customers. secondly, to the extent that the common carriercannot recover its full cost, there will be underinvestment in the network infrastructure itself. in the future,policymakers will have to deal with the question of how the network system can maintain its financing in asituation like this.in a competitive environment of carriers, systems integrators make unnecessary many of today's regulatoryinterventions. for example, price regulation becomes largely irrelevant because systems integrators will shop forthe best deal for their customers and will compete among themselves for those customers. but what is not going togo away under competition is the universal service issue, and the common carrier (open access) issues.interconnection problems are also likely to remain in this environment.the final question is how to reform the existing regulatory system to deal with future issues. although manypeople believe that state regulators are part of the problem, it is important to recognize that the decentralized reformprocess has worked reasonably well in the united states. the japanese, french, and germans, all of whom have acentralized decisionmaking process, have taken decades to reach what a decentralized system has accomplishedmuch faster. regulatory reform in the united states might not be a logical progression based on a nationalblueprint, but in most other places these blueprints have taken long to draft and are invariably timid. the unitedstates, using a decentralized mechanism, has been able to reform its telecommunications system quite well. thosewho believe that a decentralized adam smithtype mechanism is working well in decision making in the sphere ofeconomics should not reject out of hand the same mechanism for decentralized decision making in the politicalsphere.in conclusion, liberalization of telecommunications does not mean libertarianism. many regulatory issueswill go away, but others will persist in new forms and new ones will emerge, as discussed. for better or worse,government will not vanish from this sector; the challenge is to orient it toward an open future.economic ramifications of the need for universal telecommunications service164the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussionbrian kahin: i want to pick up on nina cornell's concerns about interconnection and the issue of thegovernment's role. it is worth bringing up because it is very often overlooked. it is not even mentioned in theadministration's information infrastructure document. the nsf [national science foundation] is involved in theprogram to restructure the nsfnet, which is in effect unbundling the nsfnet as it exists today so that nsf isno longer providing a single package in its main contract but has broken out the different roles of routing arbiter, avery high speed backbone that will be very restricted in use, and the newly conceptualized nap [network accesspoint].in principle the nap is an exchange or switch where anybody can interconnect, and it is a way to get onto thevery high speed backbone if you have the right to do that. it is not clear how many naps there are going to be.nsf is going to fund them, and so we have the government funding something that is not subject to an acceptableuse policy but that is generalpurpose infrastructure investment.to what extent will this architecture catalyze the larger infrastructure? how will the commercial internetcrystallize around this concept? i wonder if we are seeing an inversion of the paradigm from the network as acarrier to the switch as a carrier and what that means for understanding the costprice differential, because it seemsto me it is a lot easier to get at that when the carrier is as simple as a switch. that is not going to solve the "lastmile" problem, but it might be progress.robert crandall: i still have some difficulty with imagining what the network or networks of thefuture are going to look like. i do not see any reason why there is one network, given what we know about what ishappening to transmission switching costs. i can imagine lots of different networks into which i could connectwith a piece of terminal equipment that has a set of switches that can connect me to lots of different networks andlots of different nodes.one of the problems of this discussion is that it is based on what we know is the current network, the currentpublic switched network developed under regulation. one of the things we know about other industries is that oncewe deregulate, the technology changes and market organizations change in ways we could not possibly predict. infact, it may be that regulation is condemning us to one particular model that is incredibly inefficient.kahin: also, the network that we have been focused on is a homogeneous network, whereas now, especiallyin the internet, we are entering an environment of heterogeneous networks, where the networks all differ incapability and functionality and speed.crandall: that is right, but there could be a bunch of different backbones, too, not only a bunch ofdifferent lans [local area networks].alfred aho: this panel spoke of some of the experiences learned from regulation in japan. in the unitedkingdom, there is ongoing competition between the telephone companies anddiscussion165the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the cable companies. are there any lessons that we can learn from regulation in the united kingdom?crandall: i do not know much about what has happened with cable versus telco competition, but theyhave admitted that going from one carrier to two carriersšbut making sure there was not a third, fourth, fifth, orsixth carrieršwas a mistake, that a duopoly was not much better than a monopoly if it was protected by regulatorsfrom entry.roger noll: in the united kingdom the regulatory system itself has not led to competition of the formthat we think of in most of the u.s. system. it has led to a somewhat better but nonetheless regulated systemwhose prices are somewhat better than they were but are not as low as ours. bob, do you want to talk about that?robert harris: yes, just very briefly. the joint offering of telephony and cable entertainment services inthe united kingdom is very different because they basically did not have a cable system. the cable system beingdeployed was originally designed and engineered to provide both telephony and video and hence does not have alot of the problems that dale hatfield talked about that the u.s. cable system has. it does suggest, however, that aswe modernize cable plants in the united states, they can perhaps be reengineered if enough cable operators get theidea that there may be a market for telephonictype services. but in comparing a de novo situation in britain to anexisting cable plant in the united states, i think you had better be very careful about any kind of lessons you drawfrom one to the other.noll: i think the main lesson americans have tried to draw from the united kingdom concerns how theyregulate prices, and there are two lessons to draw on. the first is that they have price regulation; that is to say, allprices taken together, indexed, are capped by the rate of inflation minus 3 percent. it turns out that that system hasdemonstrated two important principles. the first is that the rate of technological change and advances inproductivity inside british telecom substantially exceeded historical experience, and the second is that the politicsof the system requires that they change the rule to make prices fall even faster. that is to say, the second importantlesson is that the notion that you can have price regulation that leads to better price performance but enormousprofits of the regulated utility is obviously incorrect on the basis of the experience in britain.colin crook: one interesting early indication in the united kingdom in the cable area is that when thecable companies had basic telephony on the cable system, the turnover on the cable side went down to essentiallyzero. people will not disconnect their telephones like they will disconnect their cable systems, so some veryinteresting business is going to be lining up when we start to merge these areas together, i would forecast.george gilder: two questions. first, it seems to me that digital wireless technology is going to destroythat differential between the cost of rural and urban service almost entirely, and i wonder what dale hatfield, forexample, thinks about that prospect and what its effect will be.second, it seems to me that the price of nodes drops about 50 percent every 18 months and that they justmultiply increasingly and that nodes are no longer a bottleneck. nodes are dropping radically in price and movingrapidly to the fringes of all the networks, so the nodes are really in the command of all the users rather than in thecommand of the transport people, and i wonder how this process is going to affect the vision of the node as abottleneck that allows monopoly power to be exercised.dale hatfield: let me comment first on wireless. i think that there are some very attractive possibilitieswith wireless, so i think you are absolutely on the right track. however, you are still faced with most of thoseother issues i talked about, the terms and conditions of interconnection with the existing carrier and so forth. also,there are probably some bandwidth issues, perhaps obviously less in rural areas, but to the extent that we aregetting more bandwidthintensive applications, even fairly generous spectrum allocations tend to look not quite sogenerous, and then i would also say it is not clear to me how all this will sort out.discussion166the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at one time, i looked on cellular as perhaps having some prospects, but it ended up being in relativelyconcentrated hands. with the spectrum that the [federal communications] commission has now set aside forpcss [personal communication systems], it is not clear to me who is going to end up winning that spectrum, and itis not clear to me that we will even then have a fully competitive marketplace. generally the conclusions that i hadbefore, which i could summarize by saying i am uncertain, still hold: i am still uncertain, even with the prospectsof wireless, for those reasons.nina cornell: i think there is one thing that is not well recognized. radio may help with the ruralurbandistinction, assuming you solve the bandwidth problems and the concentration problems. but to serve a locationlike the one where i live, you are talking about having to put in a number of radio transmitters to serve essentially10 households, and so you are still going to have a very high cost per household because there is very little sharingof a particular set of technology. so you are still going to have that same phenomenon of, if you pardon theexpression, "diseconomies of scale" for rural, because even though there are a few lovely places, probably in southdakota and nebraska, where they can go long hops and not meet mountains and convoluted terrain, a lot of themost sparsely populated areas happen to be in the mountains.the second thing about nodes is that it is not that the price or cost of nodes is so high; it is literally that theyarešdespite price, despite costša bottleneck because you have to get from the node to the end user. it is thatlink, if you will, and its connection at the node, that has been used so successfullyšand continues to be able to beused so successfullyšto control the system if there is not some regulatory control in the broad sense over how it isused and what the prices are. even if i had continued to live in downtown washington, i would not have the abilityto call up and say, "please connect my local loop to somebody else's node tomorrow. i have changed my mind."vinton cerf: there are a number of reasons for regulating. the obvious one that comes up is abuse ofmonopoly power, but let me ask you, nina, whether you sense other reasons for regulating, especially in this newinformation infrastructure environment, other than to avoid abuse of monopoly. is there a public interest, a publicgood that needs to be protected, which is not necessarily subject to abuse by monopoly power?cornell: that is a tough one. i sit wrestling in a very personal way with the whole issue of ruraltelecommunications. those of you who know me know that i live 20 miles outside of a town that has 362 peopleand the nearest city of any size is at least a threehour drive away. i happen to believe it would be a very bad ideato see rural america disconnected from the network, and i am concerned about that. at the same time i can tellyou that having looked up close and personally at the "subsidy" mechanisms, and having discovered that theirpresent value is about to be handed to us west as a gift as they walk away, i am not very convinced that we aredoing a very good job of it. maybe it would be better if entry were permitted.i would love it if somebody wanted to do a voucher system so that it is not capitalized and given away, but ido not know the real answers to that. i am concerned about eli noam's third bubble, the universal service one[figure 4a,b], because i am concerned about disconnectingšnot me but everybody in the community around mešfrom the entire national network, which is, in fact, a real threat at the moment.george turin: i need some help here. let me start with a disclaimer. i am not now, nor have i ever been,an economist, so i really need some help. everything i have heard from this panel, even from those who defendsome aspect of regulation, seems to be in the direction that regulation will stop entities from doing things that theymight do if the free market had total play, and those things that they might do might be bad, so regulation hassome role. that seems a very reactive statement about regulation.on the other hand, we heard in the first session this morning from several user communities, three out of fourof which are going to need some real help. now, here is where i need some help myself. tomorrow's sessionconcerns government investment. is positive government investmentdiscussion167the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the only way that those user communities are going to get help? is there no way that regulation per se can act as aproactive force to help user communities that may be disenfranchised in some wayšsuch as the library,education, and health care communities?noll: who would like to speak for using regulation to help health care?cornell: some of the kinds of concerns raised this morning were flatout government: government paysfor education, textbooks, and school buildings, and if pipes to the internet are important, government should payfor that. but in the drive to price everything in telecommunications usagesensitively versus flat rate is an issuethat has some major implications, i think, for education, health care, and libraries. in that regard, there are someinterests and some questions, and i do not think these are issues of subsidies. i was encouraged when bridgermitchell said he was not certain that flatrate pricing was inefficient, because like one of the blind people trying toidentify an elephant from a particular peculiar piece, i see measured usage often being used as a way to try to curbentry and to create barriers to use rather than being really efficient. i think there are some issues regarding flatrateversus usagesensitive pricing, particularly at the local level. it is a peculiar situation, particularly in the case ofeducation and public libraries. we do view those as things we fund publicly, and so the issue is not really subsidy.the issue is funding, but i think, as i said, there is a different issue in regulation there.crandall: i do not know anything about libraries, but if you think about public education and the healthcare sector, you think of two institutions in our society that are starved for funds. i think what is wrong there is theincentive systemsšthere is no incentive to be efficient or to adapt to the right technology. i do not see any reasonwhy government subsidies for infrastructure would improve their performance in any way.noll: i agree, but in a certain sense the issue still is the reason that the educational system or the librarysystem would choose to allocate as it has all of its previous budget increases. recently there have been vastreductions in budgets for libraries, but the elementary and secondary education system budget has been growing inreal terms for most of the postwar period but has by choice not been invested in telecommunications.now, the explanation for that could be, as eli noam put it, a critical mass problem. but it is hard to imagine astate the size of california or new york having a critical mass problem. in california, the state educational budgetis determined by the state legislature. the funding is all centralized, and the state could in fact take 3 or 4 percentof the educational budget and invest it in telecommunications for educational systems, but it has chosen not to.i think that before you get to george turin's issue, you have to identify exactly why telecommunicationshasn't been invested in for education and what the problem is for which we are trying to find a solution. inprinciple that is an enormous publicsector activity that does not choose to buy textbooks, let alone to invest intelecommunications. it chooses to do other things, and if the world is such that the politics of education selectsagainst the delivery of information to students in favor of something else, it is exactly the same politics that willdrive a regulatory institution. they are not separate. they are run by the same state legislature and governor. sowhat is it that regulation can solve that the statecentered budgeting of education cannot solve?turin: so in short form, the answer is no.noll: yes.laura breeden: i am the executive director of farnet, which is an association of internet serviceproviders. i am neither an economist nor a political scientist, but i did have to do this for a long time using somegovernment money and some money that we got from clients, so i have a certain practical feel for these issues. ido not know what the right answer is in terms of regulation, but i can tell you that when you sit down to do yourbusiness plan or your budget for the year, what you are looking at is a huge expenditure on lines.the cost of those lines for the longhaul sections has gone down and down. in fact, it does not much matterwhether you are calling from boston to syracuse or boston to san francisco; it isdiscussion168the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.still 22, 23, 24 cents a minute. the real cost is in the local loop facilities, which have not been deregulated. sowhen i hear someone ask if regulation is going to make a difference, i look at long distance and say, ''hasregulation made a difference in the price of service?" i am one of the systems integrators. the world that i comefrom is the world of the systems integrator, where you buy the raw material, in this case the transport, from thephone company or from the bypass vendor and then you add value, the routers and internet service, and so forth.so can regulation help? deregulation can help. deregulation might bring the cost of the local loop down so thatyou are not looking at $37,000 for an internet connection, $20,000 of which is in the local loop, which is anartificially high cost. maybe deregulation is a form of regulation. maybe that is the answer.noll: i am going to add one more item to the program and then we will go to discussion from the floor.notice it was mentioned by both tom long and eli noam in their discussions that an important element ofpolicymaking is to figure out what the costs are, not only of the existing system but also of alternatives. to myknowledge by far the most comprehensive and best study of the costs of the telecommunications system under thecurrent technology was performed by a group at the rand corporation led by bridger mitchell, so i have askedbridger to tell us briefly the basic story of that study.bridger mitchell: i think tom long really raised one of the key questions by saying one of thefundamental issues is how to share a common cost, a cost that the telecommunications must incur in order toprovide a whole range of services. much of the debate in the regulatory commissions and the policy communityhas been confused; it has been about allocating that common cost among one or the other or several services. butthe correct question in terms of a pure crosssubsidy is whether the prices are so low that the firm and theremainder of its customers would be better off by not supplying a particular group or a particular service. if thefirm's actual net costs would go down or its net profit would go up by getting rid of the service, getting rid of theset of consumers, then that would be a crosssubsidy.several years ago, the california public utilities commission joined forces with pacific bell and gte incalifornia and rand to actually look at the technologies for delivering currentgeneration access and localexchange service. they put together a building block model, as it were, of the technology that is in use there andpretty much throughout the country and using data from california. now, what came out of this? we were lookingat the cost of adding subscribers to the existing network where the telephone system was already operating oradding additional usage by subscribers who were already on the network. and the basic findings that i wouldsummarize here are that most of the costs of additional use or additional subscribers are fixed on a persubscriberbasis when one is looking at access to the network and use in the immediate local environment.the variable costs that come out are primarily driven by the need to have additional capacity for peak orbusyhour utilization in order to provide and maintain quality of service. so one consequence of that is that flatrate service for local calling, immediate local areas, does not look terribly inefficient when most of the costs ofadditional usage are primarily driven by peakhour capacity. another basic finding in that study is that thevariation in costs across the state are driven primarily by the distance of the subscriber from the local switchingcenter or the local wire center, and so rate averaging is discouraging entry in the highcost, predominantly rural orsuburban communities.finally, incremental cost, which is really the numbers we were looking at, is substantially below the averagecost of the total plant if you were to build the local exchange from the ground up. that would suggest that on astatewide average, incremental costs are considerably below the $25persubscriberpermonth number that wasbeing used in these filings.noll: just to put an important point on it, if you ask what is really subsidized, the bottomline answer is,telephone services in small communities and rural areas, from the point of view of what the economist defines as asubsidy (which is actually paying less than the incremental cost of the service provided). so the really importantpoint here regarding the debate about pricingdiscussion169the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and cost allocation is that there is a hunk of costs arising from the sort of economies of scale in the localtelecommunications system and there is a fixed cost, so that the regulatory process becomes the mechanismwhereby people fight out that battle in a legalistic and political sense about who is going to bear what cost. theoutcome is that it is not the case that large numbers of people end up with subsidies.it is the case that rural areas and small towns end up with subsidies, but everybody else is basically payingmore than their incremental cost. there are economics we could then bring to bear concerning how you divide upthat fixed cost most efficiently, but the problem is not really lots and lots of people getting subsidies. the problemis the fundamental conflict that was represented in the session between the technical and economic features of theindustry to begin with and the political determination of how the cost of the system will be borne.charles jackson: mr. long, you stated, if i recall correctly, that the cost of the local loop should not beallocated just to basic service, and we have heard people talk about unbundling. several questions here were aboutunbundling.i live in maryland. in maryland a company called mfsi has applied to offer competitive local exchangeservice, at least in maryland, to business and government. i will quote from one of their filings: "mfsi proposesthat c&p [the local exchange carrier] be required to allocate the costs of providing dialtone lines between twofundamental functions, links and ports, and to tariff separate unbundled rate elements for links and ports."my first question, as a consumer advocate, is whether maryland should approve or deny mfsi's request forsuch unbundling, and if they do unbundle, with or without your approval, whether all the cost of loops should beallocated to links and whether c&p should be allowed to geographically deaverage link costs or should berequired to maintain some sort of statewide average pricing of these things facing business or competitors?thomas long: you will have to excuse me. i am not quite sure what mfsi meant.noll: the idea being that somebody could get into the business of taking the c&p copperwire loops butthen connecting them to their own switch instead of the c&p switch. or the alternative option.long: i am afraid you have stumped me for now. i want to think about it.hatfield: i would just add an anecdote. if you go back in the course of early history that we talked about,you find there were far more lines in the united states. one of the reasons we had rapid rollout of telephoneservice is in part because farmers constructed their own lines and connected them to an existing switch in town. inthis discussion, we have done a 360. we are back to the idea that maybe farmers should be able to construct theirown lines and connect to an existing switch.noll: i think the question about deaveraging is really crucial, because it not only is the loops versus portsstory, it is that within the same town, some people are going to be 100 yards from their first switch and some aregoing to be 5 miles. concerning bob's point about the network architecture being not necessarily the mostefficient, the only way to find out if the current arrangement is the most efficient is to have a relatively smallnumber of very large switches in cities with lots of people connected a long way away from them, and then tocharge the people who are 5 miles away ten times as much for telephone service as the people who are 100 yardsaway.harris: but by that, you do not necessarily mean they pay that out of their own pocketšhave them face theprice and decide?noll: that is precisely the point. the reason it is a test is because the people who live 5 miles away andwho face $100 a month for a telephone bill, right now in the current environment would have a very, very strongincentive to go for a cellular telephone instead because it would be cheaper.walter baer: bob harris spoke eloquently about the need for some federal preemption of stateregulation. i would be interested in how the other panelists would comment on that,discussion170the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.particularly regarding competitive entry. also for eli noam's scheme: eli, can that be implemented on a statebystate basis, or does that require federal rules in implementation?eli noam: it would require federal principles and state implementation, which i think is basically the wayfederalism in the united states should function in the future or to some extent functions today. if you haveredistributive systems or support systems on a statebystate basis, presumably you would have some kind of aracetothebottom competition among jurisdictions and all kinds of manipulations by carriers to shift costs andrevenues. at the same time, if you had it totally centralized, you would have early implementation problems or youwould not let new york or wyoming go their different ways. so i think within the principles of federally setprinciples, you can permit local variations.noll: eli, address the following problem. i think this is the thrust of walter baer's question. suppose thefcc takes the position that for state regulators that adopt the following state regulatory rules we will allowreintegration of the bell operating companies. how would that work out exactly? would you imagine that all 51jurisdictions would adopt basically the same regulatory system for the local loop?noam: i do not think they would. it is not clear to me whether they should. take local competition. i thinksome of the states, new york and illinois, for example, have been at the forefront of it and in a way have providedsome of the models that have been implemented on the federal level either by the fcc or by a federal jurisdictionright now. that is, in a way, the way the system should work. you have a kind of basis for experimentation in thestates, and if i were to fault the states it would actually be for not being innovative enough, for not using more ofthe competitive ability to be flexible and to have variations but rather congregating around generic kinds ofresolutions to lowestcommondenominator policies. that is really the problem, not state experimentation.now, after a certain period for states to experiment, you can imagine a system in which the fcc or someother federal body will make this nationwide as long as you do not cut off the flexibility. i think it would be a realmistake.cerf: it seems to me that one of the things that gets in the way of effective competition is lack of continuouscompetition. there are a lot of examples where you do not get this opportunityšin the cable companies, forexample, since it is a franchise arrangement. if there is any competition at all, it is at the beginning of the franchiseand then there is some period of time before which there might be any other competition. some of the governmenttelecommunication system services are like that. fts2000 is an example of an intermittent competition, it seemsto me. (if i get this all wrong, the economists will fix me up, i am sure.)but is there any way for us to assure that, as we enter into this new information infrastructure age, we are ableto inject an opportunity for continuous competition so that consumers can change their minds and move from onesupplier to another regularly? the first question is, is that any good, is that useful, is that a helpful mechanism?and the second is, is there anything getting in the way of doing that?noam: it is a big question, but i would say the one way to deal with this is to make possible competitiveentry that is less than end to end, for example, so that would mean a certain amount of unbundling of services forthe telephone industry. in the context of the cable industry, it would mean the unbundling of the settopconverterboxtype technology from the network provision and a whole range of intermediate access issues so thatentry can be partial rather than full. that is only a partial answer to your question.charles oliver: eli noam made the assertion that telecommunications is not price elastic and thereforeit was okay to impose subsidy burdens on it. does anyone else agree with that as a global assertion? certainly wehave seen the demand for access to interstate longdistance service more than double since the subscriber linecharge was phased down. the implication is thatdiscussion171the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic local service is what should be bearing the subsidy burden and it should be crosssubsidizing longdistanceservice.noll: well, to defend eli, he was not attempting to defend any particular crosssubsidization. what he wassaying is that if a "philosophy king" who also happened to be an economist descended upon the earth and decidedhe wanted to raise x dollars in tax revenue, what would he tax? the answer is he would tax only the most inelasticdemanded things, and basic access to the telephone network is about as inelastic a demand item as there is. that isall he meant.oliver: so by that logic, if you could, you would tax oxygen and food?noll: no. it was discovered at the time of the doomsday book that the right way to tax people isproportional to the heads they have.discussion172the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part 3public investment in telecommunications infrastructurediscussion173the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussion174the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction to part 3david g. messerschmittthis session of the workshop discussed different mechanisms for increasing investment in infrastructurethrough direct or indirect public investment. areas for investment or subsidy that were specifically consideredwere basic research, development, service and information providers, and end users.a recent report from the clinton administration, national information infrastructure: agenda for action(iitf, 1993), laid the groundwork by suggesting some areas for direct investment or subsidy. it proposed the basicthesis that carefully crafted government action can complement and enhance the efforts of the private sector, andassure the growth of an information infrastructure available to all americans at reasonable cost. this thesisaddresses two phases of evolution of a network infrastructure where free market mechanisms are inadequate, asidentified by eli noam during panel 2's discussion: the lack of critical mass early in its evolution (when themarginal utility to users does not justify the cost) and the desire for universal service in the mature phase (whenthe network is widely but not universally available, disadvantaging a subset of the population). public investmentor its close cousin user subsidy may be needed in the early phases to "jump start" the infrastructure, and crosssubsidy or user subsidy may be required later to extend the infrastructure to all users, particularly disadvantagedpeople or those in rural areas.four specific actions related to public investment or action to encourage the national informationinfrastructure (nii) are identified in the clinton administration report:1. help the private sector develop and demonstrate technologies and applications. this most likely takesthe form of government support of research or may take other forms such as tax credits or subsidy ofprivate research.2. adjust federal procurement policies to provide incentives for the private sector to contribute to niidevelopment. the question here is whether the government is in a position to choose the winningtechnologies.3. make the vast reservoir of government information available via the nii. since the government at alllevels has traditionally provided library service, to what extent should this extend to becoming an niiinformation provider?4. extend the universal service concept of the telephone network to the nii. since the nii is likely still inthe "critical mass" phase, it may be premature to consider this issue. nevertheless, there aresignificant issues inherent in introducing the new nii into the existing telecommunicationsenvironment, with its existing crosssubsidy structure and regulatory disincentives to the introductionof new technology.introduction to part 3175the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.walter baer gives an enlightening perspective on past government investments in telecommunications,beginning with the construction of the first telegraph system. starting with the formation of western union andlater the bell system, most telecommunications infrastructure was constructed with private funds under thewatchful eye of state and federal regulators. however, the government did support research and development ofmay telecommunications technologies for defense needs, and many of these later became important commercialsuccesses, for example, microwave radio, computing, digital signal processing, satellites, and computernetworking. now whether the government should continue to support technological development, and, if so, howit can best shift from a defense to a commercialbased investment. baer describes some ways that government iscurrently investing in telecommunications and other technologies: research and development tax credits. a shortcoming of the current approach is that software tax creditsare more difficult to obtain and yet are the lifeblood of the telecommunications industry; direct investment in research and development, much of it subsumed under the high performancecomputing and communications initiative; networks and systems. this includes a direct investment in networking infrastructure in the nationalresearch and education network program. it also includes military systems such as the arpanet andthe global positioning system that are now making a transition to important commercial uses. it alsoincludes investment in infrastructure for internal government use, such as fts2000, that has asubstantial impact on commercial technologies because of the size of the procurements; subsidizing of user networking, which is relatively infrequent but includes support for rural telephonenetworks through the rural electrification administration telephone loan program; support of applications, such as telemedicine, which is spread through a number of government agenciesand is relatively small in the aggregate; subsidizing of users, which is also rare but includes support for school and college connection tonetworks and support of public television stations; direct funding of agencies that regulate or set standards, such as the federal communicationscommission, the national telecommunications and information administration, and the nationalinstitute of standards and technology. these programs have tremendous leverage over privateinvestments in telecommunications, especially in comparison to the size of government expenditures; and support for information and databases. the government is the largest creator, collector, user, anddisseminator of information.baer makes the important point that all federal investments in telecommunications infrastructure amount tobetween $0.5 billion and $2 billion per year (depending on how broadly you defineintroduction to part 3176the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure), which is tiny in comparison to the roughly $50 billion per year spent in the private sector. since thegovernment is not in a position to greatly increase these investments, direct government investment will remaintiny in comparison to private investment. thus, the government will make the greatest impact if it focuses itsinvestments in areas that will maximally leverage private investment. there are three important rationales forgovernment investment where market mechanisms fail: redressing underinvestment in research and development,achieving critical mass in new technologies, and achieving equity in access. given budgetary limitations,government can have a much greater impact through policies, standards, and regulations than it can through directinvestments. the exception is research and experimentation, where government expenditures are a significantfactor and are justified by shortcomings in market mechanisms.baer finishes by asserting that given these factors and the shift of government attention from military toeconomic and social purposes, the government should shift from the supply to the demand side, focusing moreheavily on enduser applications and enduser support, rather than on networking infrastructure. it should alsofocus more on the diffusion, as opposed to just the development, of new applications. this may include somedirect support of enduser groups, such as a voucher system. baer also urges skepticism in accepting argumentsthat investment in telecommunications infrastructure will yield compensatory savings in administrative or othercosts.bridger mitchell discusses direct government construction of network facilities and subsidies to end users. hereiterates the issues relating to the critical mass problem in the early stages of a new network technology and thedissemination or universal service problem that arises as the network grows and matures. most rationales forgovernment subsidies of networks and users redress one or the other of these problems.charles jackson considers government investment from the perspective of telecommunications carriers. hepoints out that the capital flows and usage charges are huge in relation to any credible government expenditures,and thus the government is unlikely to make any significant difference by direct investment in facilities orsubsidies to users. rather, the government should concentrate on the tremendous leverage it has in regulatorypolicy, for example, bringing the depreciation time of assets into line with the increasingly rapid obsolescence ofthe equipment.william gillis speaks from the perspective of an information supplier. he argues strongly for allowingmarketplace mechanisms full rein, and against making prior assumptions about the information marketplace basedon historical conceptions of the technology. government should invest in the timely creation of standards fornetwork interoperability and the establishment of testbed facilities but not the direct creation of services, wherethere is adequate privatesector activity. an exception is the creation of applications within the scope ofgovernment activities such as education. gillis reiterates that applications never move from zero to a mass marketquickly and that discussions of universal service in information services are therefore grossly premature. in thearea of information services, he urges the government to make its vast databases available electronically but in theprocess to also reorganize the data and invest in the development of a uniform nomenclature to make it moreaccessible. the goal should not be simply to unleash runaway data, but rather to turn the data into easily accessibleand useful information.robert kahn addresses government investment in research and development. he begins by describing aconceptual framework of a generic network core, a demandspecific layer, and applications built on top of that(similar to the computer central processing unit, operating system, and applications). he emphasizes thatapplications are what matter to the end user but that the government has a critical role in coordinating andstandardizing the core and demandspecific layers. it is extremely important that the core be designed in an "opensystem" fashion so that market mechanisms can freely define and deploy the applications without interfering withone another. the government should also ensure that there is a level playing field for all commercial participants.kahn describes in some detail the conception and development of standards for the internet as a premier exampleof how relatively small government investments in research and experimentalintroduction to part 3177the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.testbeds can have a tremendously leveraged impact on the technology, economy, and society. he also gives anumber of examples of companies (such as sun microsystems and silicon graphics) that have been the result ofsupport by the advanced research projects agency to universities and another (cray computer) that was stronglyinfluenced by government procurement and applications. his basic point is that government investment in basicresearch and precompetitive technology development can pay great dividends for the economy.laura breeden, then of the federation of american research networks (farnet), speaks from theperspective of a systems integrator who repackages network services for nonprofit organizations. she emphasizes,as did earlier speakers, that the success or failure of the nii will be founded on the applications and the userfriendliness and cost of the access devices, not the transport of the network. also needed is a more activeassessment program for determining the value of government investments and helping to guide futureinvestments, rather than simply following the "religion" that the nii will be built and the benefits will be there.finally, she appeals for greater scrutiny in the areas of massive federal investment, such as the defense andintelligence communities, as opposed to the relatively small scale of investments in research and educationalnetworking. can those investments be targeted for a greater commercial payoff?the discussion following the panelists' presentation brings out a number of interesting issues: questioners reiterate the importance of the applications and their value and friendliness to the end user,rather than the networking technology itself. the distinction between private and public investment in the telecommunications infrastructure is perhapsnot as great as one might think, since virtually all taxpayers are also regulated ratepayers. mistakeninvestments are subsidized by either the taxpayer or the ratepayer, which are one and the same. the nii will be used for accessing information services perhaps as much as for peopletopeoplecommunication. the question arises as to what universal service means in that context. what good doesit do to get poor people or rural residents connected to the infrastructure if they cannot afford to accessthe information sources? in addition, an increasing portion of the cost is in access devices (e.g.,computers) rather than in network access, and again this is an important obstacle to universal service. government should consider and assess not only the economic aspects of the nii but also the impact onsociety. in the past, major new telecommunications infrastructures such as those for the telephone andtelevision have had profound impacts, both positive and negative.referenceinformation infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993 national information infrastructure: an agenda for action. information infrastructure taskforce, washington, d.c., september 15.introduction to part 3178the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government investment in telecommunications infrastructurewalter s. baerintroductionu.s. government investment in telecommunications infrastructure dates back at least to 1843, when congressappropriated $30,000 to support construction of samuel morse's american telegraph system between baltimoreand washington, d.c. (thompson, 1947, pp. 16œ19). in the 150 years since then, the federal government hassupported many other advances in telephony, terrestrial broadcasting, satellite communications, and datanetworking. but unlike investments in highways, mass transit, water supply and treatment, and related categoriesof physical infrastructure, telecommunications investments have been made largely by privatesector firms underregulations set by federal, state, and local authorities. consequently, direct government investment in the u.s.telecommunications infrastructure has remained quite small compared to investments by telecommunicationscommon carriers and other private firms.in the past, federal investments in telecommunications have been driven principally by national securityconsiderations and other direct government missions. defense spending during world war ii and throughout thecold war period spurred the development of microwave and satellite transmission systems, computers forswitching and network control, and new network concepts such as packet switching. today, however, publicconcerns are shifting from military security toward u.s. economic competitiveness and societal needs in suchareas as health care, education, and the delivery of public services.the growing interest in telecommunications and information infrastructure reflects these economic and socialpolicy concerns. like other infrastructure elements, telecommunications and information networks directly andpervasively support both public and privatesector activities. their expanded use is generally believed to increaseproductivity and output, spur innovation, and lead to significant changes in organizational structure.1 and they arechanging rapidly.the policy importance of technological advances in telecommunications and information is twofold. not onlydo these advances promise even greater benefits to individuals and organizations who use them, they also breakdown the regulatory fences that governments have erected to keep industries separate. technology is rapidlyblurring the boundaries between the telephone, cable, broadcasting, and computer industries; between pointtopoint communication and mass communication; and between communications and information services. thesechanges raise anew questions of how public and privatesector responsibilities for infrastructure investmentshould be divided.this paper discusses the issues surrounding publicsector investment in telecommunications infrastructure. itbasically addresses the following questions: in what ways and for what reasons does the government investdirectly in telecommunications infrastructure? should these investments change in light of the rapidly advancingtechnology and increasing importance of telecommunicationsgovernment investment in telecommunications infrastructure179the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and information? the paper primarily focuses on federal investments in telecommunications infrastructure,recognizing that state and local governments play important roles as well (mechling, 1993). examples includestate government investments in telephone and data networks, state university investments in local area networks,and local government investments in police, fire, and other communications networks and facilities.this discussion of direct public investment complements the prior workshop session on how governmentinfluences private infrastructure investment through legislation, regulation, spectrum allocation and assignment,standards setting, and other ''indirect" means. it should be emphasized that these indirect government activitieshave considerably more effect on total investment in telecommunications infrastructure than do direct governmentinvestments or subsidies.a note on definitionsdefining the telecommunications infrastructure is tricky, particularly if the intent is to differentiate the"telecommunications infrastructure" from the "communications infrastructure" or the "information infrastructure."the 1991 infrastructure report from the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia)distinguishes between the "communications infrastructure which, broadly speaking, encompasses all of thefacilities and instrumentalities engaged in delivering and disseminating information throughout the nation" and themore narrowly defined "telecommunications facilities, by which we mean facilities that permit pointtopoint,twoway transmission of information of the user's choosing" (ntia, 1991, pp. 13œ14). the broader ntiadefinition seems akin to the current "national information infrastructure" that includes pointtopointcommunications, mass media, the u.s. postal service and express delivery services, publishers and printers, andthe motion picture and video industries.this paper defines telecommunications infrastructure as encompassing all electronic communications, butnot print. unlike the ntia definition, it includes both pointtopoint and mass media such as cable television,since their technologies are swiftly converging and both can be used for the transmission of video, voice, and dataservices. the definition of infrastructure here also comprises four principal components: (1) the physicalinfrastructure, including both network and user facilities and their operating software; (2) applications software;(3) research and development on physical infrastructure and software; and (4) human capital investments relatingto these other elements. this again is broader than the ntia definition that includes only the physicalinfrastructure.federal investment in telecommunications infrastructurethe federal government subsidizes or directly invests in telecommunications infrastructure in a variety ofways, ranging from funding research and development (r&d), to building prototypes and operating systems, tosupporting users who purchase telecommunications equipment and services in commercial markets. the principalcategories of direct government support and subsidy are listed in box 3 and described below.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure180the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3 categories of federal investment in telecommunicationsinfrastructuretax incentivesdirect support of research, development, and demonstrations internet other components of the high performance computing and communications initiative defense research, development, testing, and evaluation demonstration and prototype systemssupport of telecommunications networks and systems defense and space systems fts2000 and other government systems national communications system capital and operating subsidiesdevelopment and support of applicationssupport of users hardware and software purchases operating subsidies trainingother types of federal support support of regulation (e.g., federal communications commission) support of policymaking (e.g., national telecommunications and information administration) support of standards (e.g., national institute of standards and technology) databases and informationtax incentivessince 1981, the federal government has subsidized technology investments in general through research andexperimentation (r&e) tax credits, available to firms whose expenditures on laboratory or experimental r&d areabove a base level.2 most communications equipment manufacturing firms and carriers benefit from r&e taxcredits.one controversial issue since these tax credits were first introduced is the extent to which softwaredevelopment qualifies as eligible r&e. software is an increasingly important part of the telecommunicationsinfrastructure, so that extending the range of software eligible for r&e tax credits would be a stimulus toinfrastructure investments.investment tax credits were eliminated in the 1986 tax reform act. legislation to reenact them has[previously] been proposed to stimulate overall u.s. investment, but it seems unlikely to pass in the currentcongress.direct support of research, development, and demonstrationsthe administration budget for fiscal year 1994 (fy 94) included $72 billion for research and development, ofwhich $30 billion (42 percent) was for nondefense purposes. most of thegovernment investment in telecommunications infrastructure181the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nondefense r&d support for telecommunications, as well as $343 million from the advanced research projectsagency (arpa) of the u.s. department of defense, is now subsumed under the $1.1 billion multiagency highperformance computing and communications initiative (hpcci). the hpcci includes five principalcomponents:31. highperformance computing systems research for future generations of computing systems system design tools advanced prototype systems evaluation of early systems2. advanced software technology and algorithms software support for "grand challenges" software components and tools computational techniques highperformance computing research centers3. national research and education network (nren) internet gigabit research and development4. basic research and human resources basic research research participation and training infrastructure education, training, and curriculum5. information infrastructure technology and applications (iita) information infrastructure services systems development and support environment intelligent interfaces "national challenges"the nren and the new iita program are the two components most clearly directed toward advancing thenation's telecommunications infrastructure. however, the entire hpcci can well be considered to be a federalinvestment in telecommunications and information infrastructure.beyond its contributions to the hpcci, the department of defense invests heavily in advancedcommunications research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e). the fy 94 lineitem budget for defenserdt&e for "intelligence and communications" totaled more than $5 billion. although it is difficult to estimatehow much of this directly related to the national telecommunications infrastructure, defense requirements have inthe past often led to technology developments with commercial applications. examples of such national securityprograms include much of the early work on digital signal processing, r&d on the arpanet, and research bythe national security agency on encryption in commercial telecommunications networks.the federal government has occasionally supported prototypes and demonstrations of telecommunicationssystems intended for widespread commercial use, of which the morse telegraph system is the earliest example. inthe 1970s, the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) sponsored the ats6 satellite programthat successfully demonstrated direct broadcasting of television and other communications services from space.the ats6 demonstration convinced agovernment investment in telecommunications infrastructure182the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.number of developing countries to invest in communications satellite systems, thus benefiting u.s. suppliers ofsatellites and ground stations (cohen and noll, 1991). it did not, however, directly influence the pace ofinvestment in satellites for the u.s. telecommunications infrastructure.in september 1993 nasa launched the advanced communications technology satellite (acts), which is adirect descendent of the earlier ats program. as its name implies, acts is intended to demonstrate advancedtechnologiesšprincipally highdatarate switching and processing onboard the satellite. nasa project managerssay that acts has directly influenced commercial infrastructure investments such as motorola's iridium system,which will provide satellite links to wireless communications users (nasa, 1993, pp. 1œ2). critics claim,however, that commercial technology had bypassed the $600 million acts program well before its launch(broad, 1993).support of telecommunications networks and systemsthe department of defense and other national security agencies have traditionally built and operated theirown telecommunications networks, ranging from secure military communications links to the arpanet, whichbegan as a lowcost computertocomputer network, to the global positioning system (gps), which sends satellitesignals that give accurate location information worldwide. some defense networks such as the arpanet and thegps have evolved to become part of the telecommunications infrastructure, but most remain separate systemsdedicated solely to defense missions.a few civilian agencies such as nasa build and operate extensive telecommunications networks of theirown, but most other federal agency communications are coordinated by the general services administration(gsa). since 1987, gsa has maintained an information technology fund to procure telecommunicationsfacilities and services for federal agencies. its largest contract is known as fts2000, providing intercity voice,data, and video services. managed by at&t and sprint, fts2000 is a softwarecontrolled "virtual network"whose traffic is physically commingled with nonfederal communications. whether or not the primarily leasedservices under fts2000 constitute federal "investment" in a technical sense, they certainly support investment inthe telecommunications infrastructure by private carriers. through the information technology fund, gsa alsoprocures local telecommunication services and supports information security and emergency managementprograms. in addition, the federal government maintains a national communications system office responsiblefor providing critical communications needs during emergencies (ncso, 1993).the history of the internet illustrates how federal support of telecommunications networks can change as thesystems evolve (hart et al., 1992). the original concept of distributed computer/communication links was basedon research in the early 1960s supported by the u.s. air force (baran, 1964).4 in 1969 arpa built thearpanet, the first computertocomputer network based on this "packetswitching" concept. the arpanetwas a fully governmentfunded network linking the department of defense and its contractors. by the early 1980sthe arpanet's success led to proposals to develop similar networks for nondefense uses. the national sciencefoundation thus funded its own nsfnet to link its supercomputer sites and other major u.s. centers ofcomputing research. other regional and local networks quickly developed, linked by the nsfnet and other"backbone" networks and connected to many sites and networks around the world. today, the internet comprisestens of thousands of interconnected, interoperable computer networks. federal direct support represents onlyabout 10 percent of total internet costs in the united states (hart et al., 1992, p. 686).5 as of july 1993, more thanhalf of the 46,782 registered networks connected to the internet were commercial.6whether federal agencies should continue to provide network subsidies as the internet becomes part of thenational telecommunications infrastructure has emerged as a key policy issue.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure183the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the federal government generally does not provide capital or operating subsidies for telecommunications,except for special congressionally mandated purposes. since 1949, the rural electrification administration (rea)has offered lowinterest loans and other subsidies to support the expansion of telecommunications to rural areas.and the national telecommunications and information administration has awarded planning and constructiongrants, primarily for public broadcasting and educational television, through its public telecommunicationsfacilities program.ntia is now expanding its grants program to include networking pilot projects, sometimes described asnetwork "on ramps." these grants provide matching funds to schools, libraries, state and local governments, andother nonprofit organizations to purchase the equipment needed to connect to computer networks such as theinternet.development and support of applicationsthe federal government has often funded innovative telecommunications applications for defense, education,health care, criminal justice, agricultural extension, and other areas of federal agency concern.7 while pastapplications have successfully used existing voice, video, and lowspeed data facilities, the emerging highspeeddata networks may make many new applications possible.8to promote such applications, the administration requested $96 million in fy 1994 for the new informationinfrastructure technology and applications component of the hpcci; $156 million was eventually allocated,covering a larger number of agencies than the request.9 this effort "will develop and apply highperformancecomputing and highspeed networking technologies for use in the fields of health care, education, libraries,manufacturing, and provision of government services" (iitf, 1993, p. 9).even more difficult than developing new applications, however, is helping users adopt them and adapt themto their own circumstances. the innovation literature is replete with examples of how private firms and publicsector agencies often lag in utilizing new technologies or applications that have been demonstrated elsewhere. as aconsequence, some government programs aim to speed adoption and diffusion through technology transfer orextension services. intensive use of telecommunications and information networks is of growing importance forsuch diffusionoriented programs.support of usersproponents of an expanded nren propose increased government support to help bring schools, libraries, andother new users onto the network. the administration's program to expand the ntia networking grants is a clearstep in this direction. legislation proposed in 1993 would have established within the national science foundation(nsf) a "connections program" to "(1) foster the creation of local networks in communities which will connectinstitutions of higher education, elementary and secondary schools, libraries, and state and local governments toeach other; and (2) provide for connection of such local networks to the internet."10 the bill also would haveauthorized federal funds for training new users, which is no less important than purchasing the hardware andsoftware necessary to connect them.up to now there have been no categorical federal programs to support telecommunications users. recipientsof federal research grants and contracts may cover some equipment, service, and training costs under their awards;and their institutions receive indirect costs that they can use to pay for telecommunications equipment andservices. federal laws may require telecommunications equipment suppliers and carriers to provide specificfeatures or services, such as closedcaptiongovernment investment in telecommunications infrastructure184the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.decoders in television receivers11 or "telecommunications relay services" that let hearingimpaired individualscommunicate over the telephone network.12 the fcc also offers matching funds to states that adopt "lifeline" orother assistance programs to lowincome telephone subscribers. but the specifics of user subsidies are generallyleft to state public utility commissions and state and local government welfare programs.13other types of federal supportthe federal government supports the telecommunications infrastructure in a variety of other ways as well.most directly, federal support of policymaking, regulation, spectrum allocation, and assignment by the fcc andntia sets the ground rules that govern privatesector investments in the telecommunications infrastructure. theseagencies as well as nist support standardssetting activities in telecommunications. and government agenciesthrough their own r&d and procurement sometimes set de facto standards, such as the tcp/ip protocolsdeveloped by arpa and now used by the internet.as "the world's largest creator, collector, user and disseminator of information" (omb, 1992, p. iii5) thefederal government provides information and database that flow over the telecommunications infrastructure.recent revisions of the government's information management policies encourage electronic dissemination(omb, 1993), and the national technical information service, the u.s. government printing office, and thelibrary of congress, among other agencies, are developing ways to make more of their information accessible inelectronic form. although not direct investments in the telecommunications infrastructure itself, these effortssupport the infrastructure and make it more valuable to other users.scale of federal investment in infrastructurefederal investments in telecommunications infrastructure are not as well documented as are investments inother physical infrastructure categories. table 1 presents 1994 federal budget requests totaling $49 billion forinfrastructure investments in highways, rail and mass transit, aviation, water transportation, and water supply andtreatment. data published by the congressionaltable 1 federal investment in nontelecommunications infrastructurebudget authority ($m)category1993 estimate1994 budgethighways21,43921,321rail and mass transit5,8025,738aviation10,46610,863water transportation8,6398,724water supply and wastewater treatment4,4082,338total50,75448,984source: congressional budget office (1993), table 4, pp. 16œ17.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure185the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.budget office show that state and local governments invested more than twice as much in infrastructure as did thefederal government during the 1980s.14data available in 1993 on federal investments in telecommunications infrastructure are shown in table 2. asnoted above, the largest direct investments have been for r&d through the hpcci. the budget for defenserdt&e for intelligence and communications is five times greater than the hpcci budget, but most of this cannotbe linked directly to the national telecommunications infrastructure. however, the new technology reinvestmentprogram (trp) of the department of defense to develop dualuse technologies [could have made] somecontributions to infrastructure. the trp identified information infrastructure, including network architecture,wireless communications, software development, and heterogeneous databases, as the first of eleven key dualusetechnologies for funding (arpa, 1993, p. a1). trp received $472 million in fiscal year 1993, with $600 millionrequested for 1994. [fy 1995 appropriations were recised.]under networks and facilities, gsa's information technology fund had a proposed fy 94 budget of $1.3billion, of which $834 million was for lease or purchase of interexchange and local telecommunications servicesand equipment. the direct subsidy component of the rea telephone loan program varies from year to year but isless than 15 percent of the total loan portfolio.federal budget requests for telecommunications applications and user support totaled about $230 million.these include programs in ntia, rea, the department of education, and the department of health and humanservices, as well as the two initiatives for information infrastructure applications and networking pilot projects.direct federal spending on telecommunications regulation, policymaking, and standards through the fcc, ntia,and nist amounted to about $160 million.a narrow definition of direct federal investment in telecommunications infrastructurešincluding only thenren, acts, the national communications system, the rea telephone loan subsidies, the ntia publictelecommunication facilities program and networking grants, the iita program, and other federal agencytelecommunications applications programsšgives a 1994 total of about $530 million in proposed budgetauthority. broadening the definition to include the entire hpcci, the investment portion of the gsa informationtechnology fund, the small fraction of the trp and defense rdt&e (outside the hpcci) that contributes to thecivilian telecommunications infrastructure, and federal funding for telecommunications regulation, policymaking,and standards setting increases the total to perhaps $1.8 billion to $2 billion. this figure is still small compared tothe $49 billion the federal government budgeted in 1994 for other physical infrastructure and to the $50 billionestimate for annual private investment in u.s. telecommunications infrastructure,15 but it represented a significantincrease over federal investment in prior years and signified the importance the clinton administration has placedon advancing the telecommunications infrastructure.rationales for direct federal supportgiven the large and growing private investments in u.s. telecommunications infrastructure, why should thefederal government directly fund or subsidize additional investment? can we not rely on the private sector to makebetter investment decisions than the government? the basic response is that in some cases the net benefits tosociety from infrastructure investment will exceed the benefits that individuals and firms can appropriate tothemselves. this is the classic public goods argument for government support of highways, airports, and water andsewer systems. some telecommunications investments may share these public goods characteristics.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure186the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2 federal investment in telecommunications infrastructurebudget authority ($m)category1992 actual1993 estimate1994 budgetresearch and developmentnational research and education network92114171other high performance computing and communications initiativecomponents (except applications)563681829national aeronautics and space administration acts program11129defense research, development, training and educationšintelligenceand communications4,5844,9105,168defense technology reinvestment program472600networks and facilitiesgeneral services administration information technology fund intercity services554589508 local telecommunications261324326 information security and emergency management343536national communication system526773rural electrification administration (rea) telephone loan subsidy(total direct telephone loans)34 (240)44 (344)45 (359)applicationsinformation infrastructure technology and applications4796dept. of education star schools program182327dept. of health and human services medical library assistance21213rea educational and medical links5510support of usersnational telecommunications and information administration (ntia)public telecommunications facilities2202021 information infrastructure networking pilot projects54other supportfederal communications commission operations126141130ntia operations182022national institute of standards and technology computer systemslaboratory121213source: budget of the united states government, fiscal year 1994; other u.s. government documents.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure187the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the general public goods rationale can further be divided into four principal arguments for federalinvestments in telecommunications:1. serving government missions. this rationale is used especially to justify federal investment in r&dand advanced communications systems in defense, space, and intelligence operations. a relatedargument states that the federal government should directly support telecommunications infrastructurethat provides net benefits to education, improved state and local government operations, and otheractivities that have public goods aspects, even when the federal government is not the direct providerof these goods or services.2. balancing private underinvestment in r&d. new knowledge is a true public good, expensive togenerate but generally cheap to replicate, and consequently yields social returns much higher thanprivate returns (cbo, 1991, p. 75; 1993a). private firms and individuals will thus consistently investless in r&d than is socially optimal. this argument lends particularly strong support for governmentfunding of basic research but also is used to justify government support of "precompetitive"technologies and prototypes such as the gigabit network testbeds under the nren program. it is alsothe underlying rationale behind the r&e tax credit.3. redressing other private market failures. beyond underinvesting in r&d, private markets may fail togive the right signals for optimal investments in telecommunications for such reasons as: economies of scale or scope, which characterize most infrastructure investments whether they behighways, electricity distribution systems, or telecommunications distribution networks.16 thetrend toward digital communications reinforces economies of scope, since a digital network canefficiently intermix voice, video, and data services and provide customized "virtual networks" tousers. economies of scale and scope constitute a principal rationale for government regulation oftelecommunications services; network externalities, which are more specific to telecommunications, since the value of thenetwork to each subscriber increases as others connect to it; uncertain demand for new services, which may lead telecommunications carriers and othersuppliers to underinvest and thus support government efforts to aggregate demand or subsidizecosts in order to seed the market; lack of information among users that hinders them from signing up for or usingtelecommunications services. this argument is often made to justify government subsidies topublicsector organizations, small businesses, and individuals; and high transaction costs for users, often related to lack of information.4. assuring equitable prices and access. a clear purpose of government is to make sure that all citizenshave fair access to and use of essential infrastructure. in the united states, issues of fairness in accessto and cost of telecommunications services are generally handled within the regulatory process. underthe communications act of 1934 and subsequent legislation, the fcc sets the basic rules for commoncarrier, broadcast, and cable services. state and local government agencies then regulate prices ofsome services, often providing lower rates to certain groups of subscribers through crosssubsidiesfrom other subscribers. federal direct investment has played a relatively minor role in fosteringequityšone exception being the reasubsidized loans for rural telecommunications systems. butconcern about the new technologies exacerbating the gap between the "information rich" and"information poor" leads some to propose direct federal programs to provide internet connections andother advanced services to disadvantaged groups.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure188the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal direct investment has played a relatively minor role in fostering equityšone exception being the reasubsidized loans for rural telecommunications systems. but concern about the new technologies exacerbating the gapbetween "information rich" and "infromation poor" leads some to propose direct federal programs to provide internetconnections and other advanced services to disadvantaged groups.table 3 shows how these rationales relate to the categories of direct federal support discussed above. ofcourse, the conceptual basis of an argument for federal support does not mean that such support is appropriate orsensible. many past federal investments in telecommunications to serve agency missions, for example, haveproved short sighted.17 where infrastructure investment comes predominantly from the private sector, the burdenfalls on the government to justify its direct involvement. a recent forum by the organization for economiccooperation and development (oecd) on "infrastructure policies for the 1990s" concluded:in order to exploit more fully the scope for making greater use of private capital and building infrastructure,government and the private sector need to explore new and flexible ways of cooperating with each otheršincludingthe possibility of mixed financingšand establish criteria for the allocation of roles between public and privateresources . . . . if a project's rate of return is perceived to be sufficient to attract private sector capital, then the projectshould be left to the private sector to construct. . . . where a project's profitability is a borderline case and/or socialequity considerations are involved, then the government should offer incentives to attract private capital . . . . onlywhere profitability is clearly negative but the social rate of return high should be project remain in the public domain(oecd, 1993, p. 6).table 3 rationales for direct federal investment in telecommunications infrastructurerationale for investmentcategory of federalinvestmentfederalgovernmentmissionsnonfederalmissionsunderinvestment inr&dother marketfailuresequitytax incentivesxresearch anddevelopmentxxnetworks andsystemsxxxapplicationsxxxsupport of usersxxxother federal supportxxxregulationpolicymakingstandardsdatabases andinformationgovernment investment in telecommunications infrastructure189the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussiondirect federal support of telecommunications infrastructure has primarily been on the supply side: support ofr&d, testbeds and prototypes, and operating networks and systems. these supplyside initiatives work best whenthe objective is to serve government missions or bolster privatesector underinvestment in r&d. underinvestmentin research may be of particular concern in a time of industry restructuring and uncertainty such as that facing thetelecommunications industry today.18 when the objective is to improve economic performance by reducingmarket failures, demandside initiatives seem more suitable. these can include stimulating adoption and diffusionof applications and innovative services or supporting users. when equity considerations dominate, legislativemandates (e.g., requiring carriers to provide services for the hearing impaired) or regulatory approaches may bepreferred.past studies have concluded that the u.s. government is not very good at picking commercial winners intelecommunications or other advanced technologies (cohen and noll, 1991; baer et al., 1977). some allege thatforeign governments have been more successful in building advanced telecommunications infrastructures, citingjapanese plans to deploy fiber optics to the home, and both european and japanese investments in integratedservices digital networks (isdns). under close scrutiny, however, these examples are not very persuasive.japanese plans for installing fiber to the home have been regularly deferred, so that the united states and japannow seem on roughly comparable schedules. and the ''isdn gap" between the united states and europe andjapan results largely from the ready availability of less expensive digital lines in the united states (ota, 1993a,p. 183; flamm and weingarten, 1993).market feedback becomes essential when direct government support extends beyond the r&d stage. thelessons from past government efforts to demonstrate new technologies are clear (baer et al., 1977): involve industry and users in the project design and at all subsequent stages. require significant cost sharing from participants and others who stand to gain if the demonstrationsucceeds. have an explicit plan to hand off the technology to the private sector. keep the demonstration focused on meeting its technical and economic objectives; insofar as possible,shelter it from capture by political constituencies. avoid rigid schedules or tight time constraints.these guidelines pertain to gigabit network demonstrations and testbeds under the nren program as muchas to past governmentfunded demonstrations in transportation or energy.the federal government has opportunities to restructure its own activities in support of advancing thetelecommunications infrastructure. the decision under fts2000 to lease virtual networks from private carriersrather than build separate government facilities is one excellent recent example. others include: making internet services available through the fts2000 system. assuring interoperability betweenfts2000 and the internet could improve federal agency operations and enhance public access togovernment information and services (ota, 1993b, p. 70). accelerating efforts to make federal information and databases available on the internet and otherelectronic networks. this is itself an important topic of current policy discussion, with controversies overdeveloping directories and other tools to make access easier, appropriate pricing, potential competitionwith privatesector information providers, appropriate use of the freedom of information act, privacyconsiderations, and other issues that are beyond the scope of this paper. nevertheless, federal agenciesshould be encouraged to provide the public with greater electronic access to governmentproducedinformation.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure190the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. extending federal technology transfer and technology extension services to make full use oftelecommunications networks. in some cases this may mean the redesign of technology programs toemphasize demandpull from users rather than technologypush from federal agencies. expanding federal agency use of electronic data interchange (edi) for forms and standard documents.the commerce at light speed system originated by the department of defense is a good example of howedi systems can lower costs and increase efficiency.these and other efforts to improve government services and operations by using the telecommunicationsinfrastructure more effectively have been a major theme of the administration's new program to "reinventgovernment" (gore, 1993).federal support can also help develop telecommunications applications in education, health care, libraryaccess to information, and other ways to improve state and local government services; and it can help new usersadopt these applications. the new programs for information infrastructure applications and networking pilotprojects are cases in point. but one should recognize that the federal government is a relatively small player inthese arenas. the federal role should be to support applications development and diffusion, not to providepermanent operating subsidies that could become expensive new entitlements. steadystate funding oftelecommunications applications should ultimately rest with the public and privatesector users who find value inthem.another way the federal government can directly advance the domestic telecommunications infrastructure isto reallocate spectrum from government to nongovernment use. according to legislation introduced in 1990, "the[federal] government currently reserves for its own use, or has priority of access to, approximately 40 percent ofthe spectrum that is assigned pursuant to the communications act of 1934."19 much of this spectrum was initiallyallocated to the federal government for national security purposes, but advances in technology and burgeoningcommercial demand for wireless services suggest revisiting that decision. reallocating underutilized governmentspectrum can greatly expand the infrastructure's capacity to provide cellular telephone, paging, and the nextgeneration of wireless personal communications services. by auctioning spectrum licenses, it can also bringsignificant new revenues to the federal government. congress began this process by authorizing the reallocation ofnot less than 200 megahertz as part of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993.20beyond direct investment, the federal government's most important role remains that of sustaining aninnovative, competitive telecommunications infrastructure provided by privatesector firms. government'sresponsibilities are to maintain a sound economic climate for private investment and a regulatory framework thatencourages fair and open competition among equipment and service providers. we no longer think of thetelecommunications infrastructure as dominated by a single network that provides all services to all users. rather,the infrastructure includes multiple networks with different functions, capabilities, and patterns of ownership anduse. assuring interconnection and interoperability of these networks is an important role of government at alllevels, so that society can gain the maximum value from both public and privatesector investments intelecommunications infrastructure.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure191the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesadvanced research projects agency (arpa). 1993. "technology reinvestment project: program information package for defensetechnology conversion, reinvestment, and transition assistance," arlington, va., march 10.akselson, sigmund, arne ketil eldsvik, and trine folkow. 1993. "telemedicine and isdn," ieee communications magazine (january):46œ51.baer, walter s., leland l. johnson, and edward w. merrow. 1977. "governmentsponsored demonstrations of new technologies," science196(may 27):950œ957.baran, paul. 1964. on distributed communications: summary overview, rm3767pr. rand corporation, santa monica, calif., august.broad, william j. 1993. "satellite a white elephant, some say," new york times, july 20, p. c1.cohen, linda r., and roger g. noll. 1991. "the applications technology satellite program," pp. 165œ166 in the technology pork barrel.brookings institution, washington, d.c.committee on information and communication (cic), national science and technology council. 1994. high performance computing andcommunications: technology for the national information infrastructure. office of science and technology policy, washington,d.c.congressional budget office (cbo), u.s. congress. 1991. how federal spending for infrastructure and other public investments affects theeconomy. congressional budget office, washington, d.c., july.congressional budget office (cbo). 1993a. a review of edwin mansfield's estimate of the rate of return from academic research and itsrelevance to the federal budget process. congressional budget office, washington, d.c., april.congressional budget office (cbo). 1993b. updating trends in public infrastructure spending and analyzing the president's proposals for infrastructure spending from 1994 to 1998. congressional budget office, washington, d.c., august.egan, bruce l., and steven s. wildman. 1992. "investing in the telecommunications infrastructure: economics and policy considerations,"pp. 19œ54 in a national information network: annual review of the institute for information studies. institute for informationstudies, queenstown, md.federal coordinating council for science, engineering, and technology (fccset), office of science and technology policy. 1992. grandchallenges 1993: high performance computing and communications, the fy 1993 u.s. research and development program.committee on physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences, office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c.federal coordinating council for science, engineering, and technology (fccset), office of science and technology policy. 1994. highperformance computing and communications: toward a national information infrastructure. committee on physical,mathematical, and engineering sciences, office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c.flamm, kenneth, and fred w. weingarten. 1993. "final report to the national science foundation: participation in international study ofhigh performance computing." national science foundation, washington, d.c.gore, jr., albert. 1993. from red tape to results: creating a government that works better & costs less: reengineering throughinformation technology, accompanying report of the national performance review. u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c., september.hart, jeffrey a., robert r. reed, and francois bar. 1992. "the building of the internet," telecommunications policy (november):666œ689.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure192the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993. the national information infrastructure: agenda for action. information infrastructuretask force , washington, d.c., september 15.johnson, leland l. 1988. telephone assistance programs for lowincome households. rand corporation, santa monica, calif., february.mechling, jerry. 1993. "a statelevel view of information infrastructure: aligning process and substance," pp. 31œ45 in buildinginformation infrastructure, brian kahin, ed. mcgrawhill, new york.national aeronautics and space administration (nasa). 1993. "acts technology being used by industry," acts quarterly. nasa lewisresearch center, cleveland, ohio, august.national communications system office (ncso). 1993. fy92 national communications system's annual report, ncs 2653/6. nationalcommunications system office, washington, d.c.national science board (nsb). 1993. science and engineering indicators, nsb 93œ1. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1991. the ntia infrastructure report: telecommunications in theage of information. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c., october.office of management and budget (omb). 1992. information resources plan of the federal government. office of management and budget,washington, d.c., november.office of management and budget (omb). 1993. management of federal information resources, circular no. a130. office of managementand budget, washington, d.c., revised june 25.office of technology assessment (ota), u.s. congress. 1989. linking for learning: a new course for education. office of technologyassessment, washington d.c., november.office of technology assessment (ota), u.s. congress. 1990. "communication and comparative advantage in the business sector," pp.107œ142 in critical connections: communication for the future. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., january.office of technology assessment (ota), u.s. congress. 1991. rural america at the crossroads: networking for the future. office oftechnology assessment, washington d.c., april.office of technology assessment (ota), u.s. congress. 1993a. u.s. telecommunications services in european markets. office oftechnology assessment, washington, d.c., august.office of technology assessment (ota), u.s. congress. 1993b. making government work: electronic delivery of federal services. officeof technology assessment, washington, d.c., september.organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd). 1993. infrastructure policies for the 1990s. organization for economiccooperation and development, paris.thompson, robert l. 1947. wiring a continent: the history of the telegraph industry in the united states, 1832œ1866.princeton universitypress, princeton, n.j.notes1. not everyone agrees with this assessment. for a discussion of relevant studies, see egan and wildman (1992) and ota (1989).government investment in telecommunications infrastructure193the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2. congress has extended the r&e tax credits for three years, and the administration has sought to make them permanent. see technology foramerica's economic growth, a new direction to build economic strength, washington, d.c., the white house, february 22, 1993, p. 27;technology for economic growth: president's progress report, washington, d.c., the white house, november 1993, pp. 2324.3. gibbons, john h., testimony before the committee on science, space, and technology, u.s. house of representatives, april 27, 1993. thehpccl is described in fccset (1992).4. ten additional volumes detailing baran's concept of distributed communications were also published by rand in august 1964.5. a good portion of the remaining 90 percent of costs is paid for by universities that receive some payments for indirect costs from the federalgovernment, and by state and local governments.6. presentation by tony rutkowski at inet '93, international networking conference, san francisco, california, august 1993.7. see, for example, ota (1989, 1991) and aksclson et al. (1993).8. see fccset (1993), pp. 4165.9. see fccset (1994), p. 25, and cic (1994), p. 50.10. u.s. congress, high performance computing and high speed networking applications act of 1993, h.r. 1757, april 21, 1993.11. u.s. congress, television decoder circuitry act of 1990, pl 101431.12. u.s. congress, americans with disabilities act of 1990, pl 101336, july 26, 1990.13. for example, see johnson (1988).14. see cbo (1993b), table 1, p. 3.15. pepper, robert, testimony before the subcommittee on technology, environment, and aviation, committee on science, space, andtechnology, u.s. house of representatives, washington, d.c., march 23, 1993. pepper estimates that the $50 billion is "split almost evenlybetween network equipment and customer premises equipment." some would argue that investment by regulated common carriers constitutes"public investment" in telecommunications infrastructure, noting that the ntia infrastructure report (ntia, 1991) compares u.s. commoncarrier investments with investments by govermentowned carriers in other countries (see table 5.2). however, this paper contends thatinvestments by regulated private carriers in the united states (and increasingly in other countries as a result of privatization of govermentowned telecommunications entities) are qualitatively different from direct goverment investments and should be clearly separated.16. wired distribution networks, including coaxial cable and fiber optic systems, show economies of scale; but wireless networks typically donot. whether scale economies apply at the level of telecommunications services, when labor and other costs are factored in, remains an openquestion. p. srinagesh, bell communications research, private communication.17. the rapid obsolescence of telecommunications facilities and equipment was a principal reason that the federal government turned to leasingand purchasing services from private firms under fts2000.18. the most recent data collected by the national science foundation on industrysupported r&d in the communication equipment sector(sic 366) show a small decline in constant dollarsšabout i percent per yearšover the seven years following the at&t divestiture in 1984(nsb, 1993, appendix tables 41, 432, and 433).19. u.s. congress, emerging telecommunications technologies act of 1990, h.r. 2965.20. title vi, omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993, august 10, 1993.government investment in telecommunications infrastructure194the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal investment through subsidies: pros and consbridger m. mitchellsubsidies for public programs have an appealing ring to many enthusiasts of the information infrastructurešuntil one confronts the need to finance them! the "shadow price" of a subsidy dollar today is high. additionalfederal spending for telecommunications investment requires increased taxes, a larger deficit, or cuts in othergovernment programsšeach is a measure of the opportunity cost of a greater subsidy. efficiency in publicbudgeting would adjust government spending across diverse programs to equate the marginal benefit per dollarspent.in this paper i consider the benefits that federal subsidies could yield by examining the types of marketfailures that may cause private investment to fall short of socially desirable levels. i then discuss policyinstruments for directing public funding to the industry, consider the characteristics of supplyside and demandside subsidies, and conclude with a highly stylized view of how subsidies may promote network growth.market failuresmarket failures can cause investment and consumption decisions reached in private markets to beeconomically inefficient. in such markets public tax and subsidy policy can potentially improve the performanceof the economy. in the telecommunications sector three types of market failures can arise.first, in a communications network existing subscribers place greater value on their network connection asmore users join the network. the consequence of this "network externality" is that the social value of enlarging thetelecommunications network by one user exceeds the private value expressed in a potential subscriber'swillingness to pay (his/her maximum demand price). to a large extent, a single network supplier is able tointernalize this effect by offering promotional prices and volume discounts that are recovered by increasedrevenues from a larger future network. however, if there are several competing suppliers, they may be unable toappropriate the full gains from eventual network expansion. the result is a failure of the market to reach itsoptimal size.second, the spread of telecommunications services is restricted by the limited income of some consumers.social goals and principles of equity may then establish "universal service" as an objective, one that calls forexpanding service beyond the point implied by the network externality.a third failing of markets occurs when the commodity is a public good that, once produced, can be consumedby any number of users without additional cost. information per se is a good that has zero marginal cost when anadditional user consumes it. many sources of information are consumed by using telecommunications services toperform search, access, and retrieval services atfederal investment through subsidies: pros and cons195the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a distance. as a result of this complementarity of information and telecommunications, the derived (net) demandfor information resources is increased as the costs of effective access (telecommunications and informationprocessing) fall.instruments for governmental fundinggovernments have several classes of policy instruments with which to transfer resources into thetelecommunications sector and to specific services.price discrimination and internal (cross) subsidies permit revenues to be transferred from profitable, highvalue services to other services. public regulation has traditionally encouraged monopoly networks to set selectedprices well above incremental costs and maintain low prices for favored services. such rates will be unsustainablein competitive markets. in the telephone network, business subscribers and longdistance callers have beencharged high rates in order to benefit residential users and local calling. however, major price discriminationrequires that the supplier have market power. as more markets are contested by new entrants, frequently with newtechnology, the scope for "crosssubsidization" is diminishing rapidly.direct governmental subsidies to the telecommunications sector include research grants, demonstrationprojects, matching funds, state assistance programs, and lowinterest loans.government provides inkind assistance in the form of discounts or preferential access to public resources.thus, the radio frequency spectrum has traditionally been transferred to private suppliers for only nominallicensing fees. the many inefficiencies that this allocative mechanism has created have long been understood,including the wasted resources expended by contenders for licenses that may largely dissipate any intendedassistance.finally, through broadbased tax preferences for investment and research and development expenditures,government encourages higher levels of activities in sectors, such as telecommunications, that are particularlycapital and research intensive.supplyside and demandside subsidiesgovernment subsidies can be applied on the "wholesale" side of the market to expand supply and lowerprivate costs or on the "retail" side to stimulate demand and reduce prices to users.a supplyside strategy requires the government to pick the probable winners when the market is young or torisk extended delays through administrative and legal processes. marketlike procedures, such as auctions, canhelp direct resources to highvalue suppliers and hasten the transfer. regulatory bodies, which have encouragedforms of price discrimination that direct suppliers' revenues to favored users and services, have found that theconcentration of divested interests that became entrenched as a result of such policies makes it difficult toterminate "crosssubsidies." the relatively recent shift away from a regime of costbased telecommunicationsregulation to a policy based on incentive regulation, combined with the shrinking size of the monopoly sector, isreducing the use of offbudget crosssubsidies.userbased "retail" subsidies place purchasing power directly in the hands of final consumers, giving themthe choice of vendor and technology. an effective demandside strategy requires network pricing mechanisms, sothat user values can be signaled to suppliers. while long established for the telephone network, user pricing ofservices has yet to develop in many computer networks. also, a program of enduser subsidies incurs relativelyhigh administrative costs. funds must be closely targeted to reach intended beneficiaries; otherwise, resources aredissipated in the form of inefficient funding of unintended uses.federal investment through subsidies: pros and cons196the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a stylized modelwe can distinguish the effects of supplyside and demandside subsidy strategies by considering a highlystylized view of the economic evolution of a telecommunications network. figure 5 shows both the average costof a connection and the average value subscribers place on being connected to the network as a function of thepercentage of the market coverage. in these stylized terms we can represent the change in cost per subscriber andvalue per subscriber during the time that the network grows from its inception toward 100 percent penetration.figure 5 economic evolution of a telecommunications network.initially, the average cost of a connection declines with network size, a cost improvement that combinesseveral effects. as a result of "learning by doing," the network suppliers improve production activities and achievelower unit costs. at larger scales, highercapacity technologies begin to substitute for the initial transmission andswitching facilities. because the growth in penetration occurs over time, technological improvements andinnovations that reduce average costs first become available when the network is larger. eventually, when thenetwork is mature, "diseconomies of scale" from switching connections between a larger number of subscribersandfederal investment through subsidies: pros and cons197the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the higher costs of extending the network to lowdensity and distant regions set in and cause average costs to leveloff or turn up.on the demand side, the average user's valuation of a network connection tends to decline with network size.the first subscribers are those who highly value communication with a small community of interest. consumerswith somewhat less to gain defer subscribing until the price has dropped. to some extent, network growth itselfcauses the average value of membership to increasešas more subscribers join the network and connectivityspreads, a connection becomes more valuable to existing subscribers and their network usage expands. (onerecent example is the fax subnetwork.) users, as well as the network supplier, also gain from learning by doingand discover unanticipated uses and value in network communication. the demand side of the market alsoexperiences innovation over time, as novel applications are developed and complementary services take hold.finally, as market penetration approaches high levels, the remaining nonsubscribers may perceive only limitedvalue in network membership and the average value of a connection declines further.the social value of the network at different stages of development is indicated by the difference between theaverage user value and the average cost, scaled up by the number of subscribers. viewed statically, the network isunprofitable to suppliers of network services at low penetration rates. assuming a common price is charged to allsubscribers, profits are negative in the region to the left of a breakeven point such as that shown in figure 5. if,using nonlinear pricing, suppliers are able to capture a higher fraction of the average value per subscriber, theywill begin to earn profits at penetration rates somewhat before the breakeven point is reached. beyond this pointsuppliers will strive to expand the network, potentially competing up to an equilibrium penetration point at whichprofits fall to zero.both supplyside and demandside subsidy policies can encourage network growth. in a young network,supply policies lower the average cost of a subscriber connection. demandside subsidies reduce the consumer'sprice of subscribing or support applications that increase the value of subscription and thus shift the value curveupward. each intervention reduces the breakeven size of the network and helps get the industry to a point of selfsustaining growth at an earlier date.in the mature phase of network development, subsidies can assist in pushing penetration toward achievinguniversal service. user subsidies, particularly if targeted to nonsubscribers, reduce the net price of subscription andeffectively shift the market demand upward.the case for public subsidies to the telecommunications infrastructure turns on the extent to which privatemarkets fail to achieve efficient outcomes and the policy objective of ensuring widely available service. subsidiesto both suppliers and end users can, in principle, improve on market outcomes. but such interventions also resultin administrative mechanisms and political interests that increase costs and dilute effectiveness. as a result federalsubsidies are purchased with highcost dollars, and the benefits of a federal subsidy policy need to be substantialand clearly established if they are to compete successfully with other demands for public funds.federal investment through subsidies: pros and cons198the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point ofviewcharles l. jacksonhere i discuss the carrier's point of view regarding public investment in the telecommunicationsinfrastructure. although i am not associated with any particular carrier, i have worked closely with many differentcarriers over many years. as a result, i think i provide a unique point of view, based partly on interviews withcarriers and partly on my own normative analysis. i see three very important points regarding telecommunicationsinvestment. these points are vital to effectively planning for tomorrow's telecommunications infrastructure.point one: privatesector investment is the key to tomorrow'sinfrastructureit is critical to realize that the private sector will have by far the greatest influence in developing thetelecommunications infrastructure. historically, government investment in telecommunications has largely beenlimited to military and research applications. more recently, growing public concern about u.s. economiccompetitiveness and social services has yielded several initiatives for federal government investment in thetelecommunications infrastructure. the clinton administration is promoting the development of a nationalinformation infrastructure to connect end users to vast amounts of information. however, the administrationcorrectly acknowledges government's role as secondary to that of the private sectoršone that serves to"complement and enhance" privatesector efforts. although such secondary federal support does aid infrastructuredevelopment, it can have nowhere near the impact of the private sector. any federal government investment in thetelecommunications infrastructure will be dwarfed by privatesector investment. to illustrate this point, table 4contains estimates of annual revenues and investment by major players in the private sector in recent years.these amounts far outweigh the public investment that can be provided through direct governmentinvestment programs, such as the high performance computing and communications initiative (hpcci). my(conservative) estimate of private investment [circa 1991] is over $45 billion. in contrast, the annual budget for thenational research and education network (nren) program, which is the hpcci component that most directlyadvances the telecommunications infrastructure, is about $123 million.1 there is some call for federal subsidiesfor telecommunications users as a way to expand the infrastructure. proposals to expand nren wouldnote: the contributing author is kirsten m. pehrsson of strategic policy research.telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of view199the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.support bringing schools, libraries, and other new users on to the network and training new users once they areconnected. however, there has never been any comparable funding to support telecommunications users in thepast. and even if such proposals were to be adopted, federal subsidies of telecommunications usage would likelybe so small as to do little to promote the infrastructure. a direct usage subsidy of $5 billion per year would affectonly about 3 percent of our nation's spending on telecommunications.table 4 privatesector revenues compared to capital investmentannual revenues ($b)aannual investment ($b)bat&t34.42.4mci8.31.4sprint5.41.2local exchange carriers82.2c19.9cable industry19.82.3cellular industry3.12.5dcimen/a15.4ftotal>150.045.1a sources: at&t, mci, and sprint: fcc (1991); local exchange carriers: usta (1988); cable industry: paul kagan associates, inc. (1992);cellular industry: leibowitz (1992); commercial, industrial, and military communications equipment: eia (1991). figures reflect 1991 exceptwhere otherwise noted.b sources: same as sources for revenues, except mci and sprint figures from standard & poor's (1992). figures reflect 1991 except whereotherwise noted.c 1987 figureštotal operating revenues.d derived by subtracting total capital investment as of december 1990 from that of december 1991.e commercial, industrial, and military communications equipment.f 1990 figurešestimated by electronic industries association marketing services department.the dramatic contrast between potential public and private investment highlights the importance of creatingan environment that invites private investment. this brings me to my second point.point two: regulatory policy is critical to privatesector investmentregulatory policy is an extremely important factor in creating an environment that favors investment in theinfrastructure. in fact, any major aspect of regulatory policy is likely to have a much greater effect on the nation'stelecommunications infrastructure over the next decade than could any politically feasible level of governmentinvestment.there are many examples of regulation's enormous influence over telecommunications investment. thefederal communications commission's (fcc) recent rules for personal communications services, for one, arebound to have a tremendous impact on the evolution of wireless communications for decades to come. limits onmarket entry (e.g., the cable/telephone company crossownership bar, local exchange carrier franchiserequirements) restrict areas in which certain telecommunications players may invest. and even within the area towhich investment is restricted,telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of view200the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.regulation may pose other deterrents to investing. prudence reviews threaten a ''headsyouwin, tailsilose"situation for the carriers, whereby profits on successful risky investments are limited, while at the same time lossesfrom unsuccessful risky investments are disallowed from the rate base. depreciation schedules that lag behindactual economic depreciation also deter investments.any one of the many facets of regulation may have an enormous impact on incentives for investment in theinfrastructure. consider, for example, depreciation policy. the amount of depreciation currently allowed could beadjusted to more closely match the decline in economic value of the resource being depreciated. as a result,investors would be more likely to get their money back from a resource before it becomes obsolete. this wouldserve as a catalyst to investment. and depreciation adjustment would encourage additional investment not merelyby the amount imposed in additional consumer charges each year, but by several times that amount. the dollarsaffected by even a slight change in one aspect of regulationšsuch as the acceleration of telephone companycentral office depreciation from, say, 18 to 15 yearsšis comparable to nren's total annual funding.due to the tremendous effects of regulation on investment, it is important to look ahead and consider howregulation is likely to affect carrier investment in the future. there are several possible scenarios that would deterinvestment. carriers could find themselves in a world where they are forced to unbundle services. while facingmassive competition, they may not be allowed to take measures to confront that competition. they could be in anenvironment that prevents them from recovering investments. in that case it might be rational for carriers to enter a"harvest" mode. they would reap whatever income is possible from current capital investments but not make anyadditional investment. as a result, the telecommunications infrastructure would begin to wither. it would then beleft up to new entrants in the telecommunications market to build the network for the twentyfirst century. nocarriers have yet adopted this strategy (at least not openly). but given the current direction of regulation andcompetitive entry, this scenario is not unimaginable.point three: the public sector has a role in infrastructuredevelopmentthe fact that regulation will have far greater impact on infrastructure investment than will public sectorinfrastructure investment does not mean that certain types of publicsector support are not importantševencritical. government initiatives in telecommunications research and development and promoting applications arebeneficial. history shows that government support of research and development has generated importanttelecommunications technology developments. over 20 years ago the advanced research projects agency(arpa) of the u.s. department of defense built the arpanet. arpanet's packetswitching technologyprovided the foundation for today's internet, which provides nationwide public access to an international network.federal funding supports the massachusetts institute of technology's lincoln laboratory, which has pioneeredimportant developments in telecommunications electronics, including communications satellite technology.although benefits from investments such as these are difficult to quantify, they advanced the state of the art oftelecommunications. past government funding of facilities has also promoted the telecommunicationsinfrastructure. the rural electrification administration's lending program helped extend telephone service toremote rural areas. federal funding helped establish the alaska telephone system. the national sciencefoundation's effort to network research centers to supercomputers has provided the backbone to the internetsystem.government funding in the future will be important because market failures happen. there will continue to beareas of telecommunications where the private sector lacks the incentive to make investments that would benefitsociety. government spending can make a significant contribution in those areas.telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of view201the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the clinton administration is already targeting many of the areas where publicsector support will bebeneficial. for example: research and development. public support of research and development of fundamental technologies willhelp to advance telecommunications state of the art. recall the extent to which arpa funding appears tohave driven computer and network technology. as of late 1993, funding for the arpaled technologyreinvestment program had fostered numerous proposals for information infrastructure technologydevelopment as well as applications. applications. another important role for government is in applications development, which serves tobridge the gap between new telecommunications tools and the user. for example, standardization ofelectronic medical and other types of forms would help promote use of telecommunications services. trials. the government can play a unique role in implementing largescale trials of new applications.past successes include the arpa/internet and electronic mail. electronic publishing/access. government can make more information electronically available to moreusers. it can do this by serving as publisher and central server of public information. for example, thegovernment could publish statistical abstracts and provide them via a central server or cdrom. or itcould provide access to fcc rules and filings on a central server. currently, the office of managementand budget has a new policy to encourage agencies to increase citizen access to public information. andthe white house has become accessible to the public via electronic mail. international parity. the federal government should promote international parity of telecommunicationsmarkets. u.s. telecommunications suppliers operate in many countries. a telecommunications monopolyin one of those countries might use its position as service provider to influence consumers against buyingfrom a u.s. supplier. government policymakers can be alert to situations where market distortions maydisadvantage u.s. suppliers and may help to neutralize such a situation.conclusionpublic investment in telecommunications infrastructure is unlikely to be of sufficient scale to make asignificant difference in the development of our nation. i have discussed areas in which the federal government cancontribute to infrastructure development. however, there are other areas that are obviously not candidates forpublic investment. for example, intercity fiber networks are not a candidatešthe private sector has already builtfive or six fiber networks.2 local fiber distribution networks do not appear to be a candidate for federalinvestment because they are too expensive for feasible additions to the federal budget. these types of investmentsin the infrastructure must come from the private sector. a look at history, federal budget realities, and the existinginfrastructure indicates that government investment in the telecommunications infrastructure per se is likely tohave little impact. however, government initiatives that expand our ability to use the telecommunicationsinfrastructure promise significant benefits. although carriers may engage in some such research, their incentive todo so is limited by how much they think they can capture the benefits of that research.changes in regulatory policy are the only realistic means of increasing infrastructure investment by anyeffective amount and, as i discussed earlier, may be necessary to maintain thetelecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of view202the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.status quo. therefore, it is critical to both preserving and advancing the nation's infrastructure that regulatorychanges encourage privatesector investment.referenceselectronic industries association (eia). 1991. electronic market data book. electronic industries association, washington, d.c.federal communications commission (fcc). 1991. statistics of communications common carriers. u.s. government printing office,washington, d.c.federal coordinating council for science, engineering, and technology (fccset), office of science and technology policy. 1992. grandchallenges 1993: high performance computing and communications, the fy 1993 u.s. research and development program.office of science and technology policy, washington, d.c.kraushaar, jonathan. 1993. fiber deployment updatešend of year 1992. industry analysis division, common carrier bureau, federalcommunications commission, washington, d.c., april 30.liebowitz, dennis. 1992. the cellular communications industry. donaldson, lufkin, jenrette, new york.paul kagan associates. 1992. cable tv financial databook. paul kagan associates, carmel, calif.standard and poor's corporation. 1992. corporation descriptions. standard and poor's corporation, new york.united states telephone association (usta). 1988. statistics of the telephone industry. united states telephone association, washington,d.c.notes1. estimate for 1993 from fccset (1992), figure 6, p. 28.2. major fiber networks include those of at&t, mci, sprint, and the local exchange carriers. the fcc reports that interexchange carriersother than at&t, mci, and sprint have more than 15,000 routemiles of fiber. see kraushaar (1993).telecommunications infrastructure from the carrier's point of view203the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an information provider's perspective on governmentinvestment in the telecommunications infrastructurewilliam f. gillisi have been asked to comment on the benefits, if any, of government investment in the socalled informationhighway. i will do so from the perspective of an information provider who soon will be introducing some of theservices that can utilize this muchdiscussed facility. this perspective is shaped by my experience in many of thebusiness sectors upon which this workshop's discussions will have direct impactšconsumer electronics, pre andpostdivestiture telecommunications, software, and online services. i operate on the basis of the marketplace beingthe final arbiter of discussions like those in which we workshop participants are engaged. i am a supporter of afree, open, and competitive marketplace unencumbered by historical beliefs and restrictions.here i address several questions that have been put to me: should there be any (or more) government investment in infrastructure, facilities, or services? is there a benefit from governmentprovided seed funding? do governmentsupported services really put a meaningful damper on investment in new or betterservices? how much government investment would be too much?before directly addressing the questions at hand, i offer the observation that we cannot and should not definethe ultimate delivery mechanism in terms that are too restrictive. to speak of it only in terms of copper or fiberpresupposes that the marketplace is unaccepting of additional delivery methods offered by various wireless andbroadcast techniques.should there be any (or more) government investment ininfrastructure, facilities, or services?i firmly believe that government investment should be directed to areas in which it serves to support a freeand competitive market. this would include investments in the timely creation of standards and to ensure networkinteroperability. it could also include the establishment of testbed facilities but should not include the creation ofservices.i have not observed conditions that traditionally suggest that government investment is warranted ininfrastructure per se. there have not been either marketplace failures or a demonstrated lack of ability or ofwillingness on the part of the private sector to invest.an information provider's perspective on government investment in the telecommunicationsinfrastructure204the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is there a benefit from governmentprovided seed funding?for the government to begin investing in the creation of commercial services is not necessary. there areample services being investigated and developed in the private sector. there is, however, a potential role forgovernment to provide seed funding to encourage the deployment of variations of selected servicesšin theeducational setting, for example.by way of illustration, two years ago while heading an unregulated unit of a telco, my unit conceived anddeveloped a fax machinebased social studies learning aid. it was deployed in two innercity schools in denver. itwas an immediate hit with students and faculty alike. not only was interest in the curriculum heightened but therewas also a dramatic reduction in absenteeism and a measurable improvement in writing skills attributed to theproject by teachers overseeing it. as a result of these positive results, there was a strong interest in deploying thecourse throughout the city's school system. unfortunately, an opportunity was lostšno government funds wereavailable to expand the program to other schools despite the equipment providers', curriculum designers', and ourwillingness to provide our services on a greatly discounted basis. if ever there was an opportunity that warrantedgovernment investment, this was one. it sits on a shelf, its promise unfulfilled due to a lack of funding. this is anarea in which seed funding would have been both productive and appropriate.seed funding in the area of acquiring equipment for classroom use and the training of instructors in its use isalso an appropriate investment for the government to make. consider, many schools across the country haverecently invested in computer equipment and have begun integrating it into classrooms. much of it will berendered obsolete by some of the services contemplated as the basis of this workshop discussion. much of theequipment in place in schools today is not suitable to display fullmotion video or generate the stereo sound ofservices.do governmentsupported services really put a meaningful damper oninvestment in new or better services?although there is no universal answer to the question of whether governmentsupported services put ameaningful damper on investment in new or better services, there is a distinct risk that governmentsupportedservices could limit the introduction of new and improved services. one of the primary incentives to the creationof new services is that they, due to the diligence of their creators, offer a degree of uniqueness in the marketplacethat, in turn, offers the hope of substantial return on investments. were there an existing or contemplatedgovernmentsupported service that offered competition to a proposed new service, would venture capitalists andcorporate investment organizations be as willing to invest as they are today? i believe not.not only would this present a reduced earnings scenario, but it could also have other impacts of significance.among these are: fewer patent disclosures and patents granted; slower and more widely spaced introductions of newer generations of products/services; and fewer creative ventures and small businesses formed.on the latter point, i believe that any action that could forestall the creation of new small businesses shouldbe avoided. small businesses continue to be a strong source of job creation in today's servicebased economy.in lieu of direct government spending on applications and services, rethinking investment tax credits andincentives may be a more beneficial form of government investment.an information provider's perspective on government investment in the telecommunicationsinfrastructure205the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there is an alternative area in which government investment would be beneficialšreorganizing its vastdatabases of information to make them more useful to the public. i read with interest the proposed nationalinformation infrastructure act of 1993 and its stated intent to digitize government data to allow public access. iapplaud this effort but also encourage us not to stop at simply digitizing the data. more importantly, i believe it isnecessary to reorganize the data into a uniform structure that allows the data to be more efficiently accessed andsearched. successful completion of this effort would simultaneously reduce access charges to constituents who usethe services and reduce the government's future data input and printing costs.once the data are suitably reorganized, two other areas of investment would seem appropriate. first,investment should be made in developing descriptive terminology and nomenclature that is readily understood bynonspecialists. refer to a tenpenny nail as just that and not with the "fastenerinterfibrous galvanized"terminology that i encountered during a recent search. next, once the nomenclature is revised into everydayenglish, online directories should be made available to facilitate searches. i recognize that this is a mammothundertaking, but it is both necessary and consistent with the aims of legislation recently contemplated andbecomes only more complex and unwieldy the longer we wait.how much government investment would be too much?obviously, there can be no definitive answer to the question of how much government investment would betoo much. in general terms, government investment should be sufficient to support creating interoperabilitystandards, revamping its vast storehouse of data, and providing classroom facilities for utilizing the newlyavailable information. these benefits and, i dare say, marketdriven aspects of such possible legislation as theproposed national information infrastructure act of 1993, are most appealing.with the government concentrating on its role as a facilitator, those of us who are charged with extractingvalue from visions can set about the task of delivering the products and services that the market demandsšproducts and services that save time and money and allow americans to better manage their lives on both personaland professional bases.finally, unlike a description i read recently that indicated that legislation such as the proposed nationalinformation infrastructure act of 1993 could help unleash an information revolution, i submit that it holds thepromise of harnessing runaway data and allowing it to be delivered as easily accessible and useful information.an information provider's perspective on government investment in the telecommunicationsinfrastructure206the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.economic dividends of government investment in researchand technology developmentrobert e. kahnin addressing the role of government with respect to information infrastructure, i start with the assumptionthat a role for government not only exists but also is essential; but there is no formula for it yet.second, the national information infrastructure (nii), as we have all been referring to it, is more than just thenetworks and the computers that attach to it; it includes the higher levels of this infrastructure and the applicationsthat sit on top of it. i tend to describe the nii in terms of the core, which contains the generic portions ofinfrastructure; the mantle, which contains the domainspecific portion; and the outer shell, which contains all thesystems and applications that run on top of it. i also tend to describe the elements that are at the network level asbeing the lower level. many people think that the network is all that there is in the infrastructure. identifying it asthe bottom layer implies that there are higher levels, too, and that there are applications that you can then put ontop of that.1but if all you have is a network on which to build enduser applications, it is no different than taking apersonal computer (pc) as a plain piece of hardware (without systems software) and writing an application on it.if somebody else were to write an application on it, there would be no guarantee that the two applications wouldwork together, because each person probably had to deal separately with all of the system problems for theirapplication on this raw hardware. each would have or develop separate naming conventions, file systems, buffermanagement, and all of that. so if you put the two programs in the same machine, they would surely collide witheach other.at least a few companies have made a big business out of building what i call the "middleware" of thepersonal computer industry. i think there is a similar problem and opportunity in the nii to build the middlewarešnamely, the generic and applicationsspecific services.i also see the nii as evolving more like the economy than a building to be architected. i don't think there willbe an architectural blueprint for the nii as there is for a building such that, having produced the blueprint, you thenhave somebody construct the nii. instead, i believe we are going to architect a framework in which the nii canevolve as a technical development; this will allow market forces to develop on their own. the framework willprobably involve notions of standard interfaces or standard objects and the like. but fundamentally the nii willbehave like an economic system. it is going to have a certain degree of brownian motion associated with it, buthopefully it can be guided by user needs and requirements.most important is going to be the process by which the nii is managed and evolves. a critical part of that,from the government's perspective, is the oversight that it can provide in ensuring that the process maintains alevel playing field, doesn't disadvantage parties, and so forth.my comments focus on the research and development (r&d) side of the picture. and although i was pleasedto hear walter baer mention some of the work that i had done on the use ofeconomic dividends of government investment in research and technology development207the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vouchers to take technology from a maturing state into commercialization, i am going to focus now on how wetake a technological idea and get it to the point where the technology reaches critical mass. if there is one examplethat embodies all of the attributes i want to touch upon, it is the internet.the genesis of this concept may be traced back to an idea that existed within the advanced research projectagency (arpa) back in the early 1970s. i was fortunate enough to be involved in that. we watched a network ofnetworks grow from a concept to something that is probably going to have more than 100 million users on it bythe end of this decade. it is a real success story in many different dimensions. the amount of government moneythat has gone into nurturing it is a tiny fraction of the total sum that is now spent on it.now, you probably know that some of the carriers at first saw the internet as their competition. it took awhile before they realized that the internet was really their market. so the question, then, was how to coopt it.but in fact the internet is likely to be part of the larger nii, and what they really want is to play a major role inproviding the nii.there are multiple competing forces as we develop this infrastructure. one force tends toward earlycommercialization. once a capability has reached a critical mass, it really wants to grow. in the case of theinternet today and what is happening on it, there are forces to spread connectivity to more places, to get it to theschools, to get it to the small businesses. this is the kind of demand for which lowbandwidth lines or even anintegrated services digital network (isdn) service would suffice, especially if the users were only going to use email. for many who don't use networks today, even that would be a major step forward. another set of people,those who are dealing with the most advanced supercomputers and moving billions of bits a second on gigabitnets, are looking forward to going to teraflop machines and terabytes per second.so there is a market pull on the lowend side as the usage base expands, but also a technology push at the topto take into account new technology opportunities or maybe even highend application opportunities. both of theseare important because this is where the market is, and this is where the future is, in some real sense.r&d and computer technologylet us focus on how r&d can move the cutting edge forward. in addition to creating new capabilities, r&dcan help to expand the market and improve services, making things more reliable and integrating commercialofferings with advanced research capabilities. these are essential elements of what government research fundingcan enable.my focus here is r&d rather than longterm infrastructure development in the sense of building networks andmaintaining them. but longrange r&d on computer architecture and, in fact, anything that is related to niitechnology should be coupled to prototyping key architectural concepts. if you have an interesting concept thatpeople have developed or on which some basic research has been done, you may want to prototype that concept,build pieces of it, a chip here, a cache therešwhatever it is, try it out, see if it works. you may want to actuallybuild a whole experimental system. if a systems idea is worthwhile enough to evolve but is not likely to begenerated spontaneously in the marketplace, building an experimental version is a useful way to proceed. if youbuild a suitable testbed, you would like to get it used in small numbers by a few groups of people who areknowledgeable in the area and also real users.those are all viable and important roles for the government to play.now, there are some unique missionoriented requirements where the government literally has to do morethan that (e.g., concerning space and embedded computing for the military). but in general it seems to me that thegovernment ought to avoid funding production development ofeconomic dividends of government investment in research and technology development208the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computing. they ought to piggyback on commercial development whenever possible. a couple of computerrelated examples can put this into context.case a involves computers that have been developed with direct government support. the illiacivproject was an arpa effort that started in 1965 and produced a working parallel processing machine that wasbuilt with government support. although many people thought it wasn't a success because there was only one ofthe machines (later dismantled), the project made several crucial contributions. it demonstrated to the world, at atime when a million instructions per second (mips) seemed like a very large amount of computation, that it waspossible to build a machine at the hundredmips level. illiaciv was actually used for real work at a time whenyou couldn't buy any commercial supercomputers, because no companies were making machines at that level. italso stimulated the commercial production of semiconducting memory.the connection machine was another example where arpa created a parallel processing computer that had64,000 processors on the way to a million processors. again, this was an attempt to actually develop a machine.yet in late 1993 it was unclear what the longterm commercial viability would be of the connection machine, butthinking machines corporation [which filed for bankruptcy in 1995] was then trying to sell those machines in thecommercial marketplace. the government also invested in the butterfly machine at bolt, beranek, and newman.this is not a machine that succeeded in the commercial marketplace.in the three examples above of government involvement in funding production development, the results aremixed. in some cases it really is important for the government to be involved; in these, not.2case b, which involves indirect government support, includes areas where the involvement of thegovernment is crucial, but the government never set out to fund the development of these machines. for example,some of the cray machines have been developed basically in close liaison with governmentsupported nationallaboratories. but instead of setting out to fund the development of a new supercomputer, the government involvedkey researchers at the national laboratories to generate concepts for a new machine and make specificationsavailable to industry. the government implicitly or explicitly agreed to buy a few of them when they becameavailable, if some company (e.g., cray) would build them. their initial production, in fact, started a process inmotion to make them available commercially to a larger set of customers. the government didn't contract for thedevelopment of the machines, but it did agree to buy a few of them if the machines were produced and met thespecifications.sun microsystems and silicon graphics are two spinoffs of arpa support. sun microsystems, a companythat is now the largest producer of workstations in the united states, got its start as a small arpasupportedresearch project at stanford. (the sun acronym stands for stanford university network.) arpa had funded asmall project at stanford to do innovative very large scale integrated (vlsi) circuit architecture work, and theprincipal investigator, forest baskett, needed some vlsi design workstations. after having looked at what waslikely to be available from other sourcesšresearch and otherwisešthey decided they needed to develop their owncapability and had a good idea for how to do it. a student named andy bechtelsheim had an interesting design for aframe buffer system. bill joy at berkeley had been funded by arpa to build a virtual memory version of unix.arpa gave stanford a very small amount of money to prototype a tool, basically, rather than a computer, fordoing vlsi design. that work became the basis for sun microsystems.silicon graphics actually had its genesis in that same effort. jim clark, who until recently was chairman ofthe board of silicon graphics, designed a chip that could manipulate graphic images. he called this the geometryengine, and based on that he then set up a company that could manufacture lowcost graphics workstations withthe geometry engine as an integral component. silicon graphics is now a leading producer of highquality, lowcost graphics workstations.economic dividends of government investment in research and technology development209the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.those are some examples where government involvement was critical, but the government didn't set out toactually build machines and in most of those cases not even to buy them, as in the sun microsystems and silicongraphics examples, although it did so with cray.case c includes examples where there has been no government support. one example is the personalcomputer, which didn't start from the government building the first personal computer. the microprocessor is asecond example. the interesting thing about these two developments is that they took off by themselves becausethere was a latent market for something at that level, given that it could be built.r&d and networkingthere are three stages to the development of networking. the first stage is what i call the seed stage, in whichyou have an idea and are trying to get it explained, just like with the machines mentioned above. the elements ofthat stage are technology development (generally experimental technology development, because you are buildingthings that need to work), testing and evaluation (generally through handson experience, initially in thelaboratory), and field testing deployment, hopefully with some friendly real users, and pilot projects.if, as a result of this seed effort, you learn that there are real users and that the technology really works, yougo into a second stage, an expansive mode, where you get more users, conduct further tests, and refine thetechnology, give it more capabilities, make it more stable, make it more robustšscale it up and iterate. what ishappening at this point is that a small market is being nurtured. one of the critical questions later is how to weanthat market from something that may be provided as a free good. this often occurs when the government has beeninvolved in setting a network up and operating it or funding it for its contractors.the third stage is to commercialize the technology, given that is has real commercial potential: it has beendemonstrated, it has a reasonably sized user base, it provides a meaningful capability, and one can see how it canexpand more broadly. hopefully, commercialization can be done without the government actually having to take adirect role in leading the effort.now, let us consider the critical mass phenomenon. there is a period of time before the infrastructure isactually deployed, when r&d on it is being conducted. when the technology infrastructure is ready, major r&dmoney has already been invested. more funding is needed for deployment of resources and for staffing theoperation. as the user base starts to grow, additional r&d money is needed for developing applications to run onit, for testing and refining the technology, and, at some point, if the market continues to develop, critical mass isreached. and then, around the critical mass point, the risk flow turns positive, and one can start to make a profit,although it may take a while longer to break even. so there is a big upfront cost in deploying infrastructure, whichcould be as long as 20 years in some cases. the private sector won't invest until the technology is close to thepositive side of profitability.now, there are different kinds of government involvement in networking infrastructure. one kind is directhandson involvementši call this procurement. the arpanet embodied this kind of model. no computernetworks existed, and nobody was taking steps to develop them (apart from continued use of dialup telephonelines). the government just jumped inšand it could afford to do so, a crucial element. it leased 50kbps lines fromat&t. the government funded bolt, beranek, and newman (bbn) to develop switches, because there were nonein existencešthese were the very first packet switches. they then procured the switches from bbn. thegovernment also took responsibility for managing the network, for controlling access to it, and for developingarpanet policy. the daytoday management was contracted out, but the government remained in charge. thisis an approach i would characterize as a procurement network.economic dividends of government investment in research and technology development210the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project involvement is a second kind of approach to infrastructure deployment. this approach is morecharacteristic of the early stages of the internet, which began with the arpanet as a central core but evolvedwith research networks, gateways, and local area networks connected to it, mainly for research initially. during theinitial phase, almost all of the r&d was funded by the federal government. the initial networks weregovernmentprocured networks, but soon thereafter privatesector networks were connected as well. the gatewaywas provided by both parties. the government became very much involved in managing the process by which theinternet evolved. it controlled the handing out of addresses and the standards process, and so actually had a tightrein on the internet system. there was no commercial use during this early phase.another kind of approach is benevolent partnering. in this example the government's role is not the dominantone. rather, the government manages selected elements of the process, rather than the whole process. i think thisapproach characterizes the nsfnet and certainly characterizes the internet development. in benevolentpartnering, the r&d is funded by both the private sector and the federal government. and, in fact, the standardsprocess is starting to involve privatesector efforts as well as governmentrelated efforts.the final approach is one that i think is going to be more applicable to the national informationinfrastructure. i call it oversight and steering. in this approach there is both private sector and governmentfundedr&d. the standards development is carried out largely in the private sector, perhaps overseen by the federalgovernment in some sense. there is widespread commercial use. instead of the government managing selectedelements of the process, it now provides oversight, because the actual management of the enterprise can reside inthe private sector as well.we have some experience with this approach in the context of the internet. when the internet started, it wasan r&d project within arpa. for the first 10 years or so, the project was run by just one or two of us withinarpa (kahn and cerf). few people had yet discovered the power or the latent potential in this technology.around 1978, as the technology deployment was continuing, i got worried that if vint cerf, who was theprogram manager and who had most of the project details in his head, got hit by a truck, we would have a realproblem. i thought we needed to get the community involved in a more direct fashion. and so vint formedsomething called the internet configuration control board, or iccb. the iccb helped in many ways but mainlywas in the path of the information flow. it could be aware of developments while they were in planning and evenhelp to plan them.in 1983, shortly after the split of the arpanet into two roughly equal partsšthe milnet and a residualarpanetšit became clear that the iccb meetings were too big to allow the iccb to serve its originalfunction. instead of 12 iccb members meeting around a table, an orderofmagnitude more people were comingto listen to the deliberations, because they had become interested in networking. coordination of iccb meetingshad become unwieldy. i had briefly retained vint cerf as program manager for the internet activities in late 1982and handed the responsibility to barry leiner about a year later.one of barry leiner's first acts was to set up something called the internet activities board, or iab. in thisnew model the work that had been a subject of discussion in the iccb meetings was farmed out to task forces.there were 10 task forces originally. they reported to the iab. that process actually worked very well. todaythere are close to 100 different task forces involved in the continued evolution of the internet. it was no longerpossible for the iab to coordinate this growing set of activities. and so something called the internet engineeringtask force (ietf), which was a task force of task forces, got created with phil cross as its chair.in the 1986 time frame, when this was becoming the mode of operation, there was no government bodydirectly involved. in 1986 arpa decided to get out of networking. arpa literally got out of it for a very shortperiod, and, during this period, nsf took steps to lead theeconomic dividends of government investment in research and technology development211the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal networking activities. so there was a period in which no part of the government was responsible for thiseffort; it freefloated.during the 1987 to 1988 time period, the u.s. government became involved once again. a federal networkwas established (originally called the fricc and later the federal networking council). doe, nasa, arpa, andnsf funded a secretariat, whose job it was to make sure that these internetrelated processes kept going and thatthe government maintained its involvement with the process. the iab ended up with not only an engineering taskforce, the ietf, but a small research task force as well.today, this process has evolved still further. the u.s. government funds an ietf secretariat and separatedother parts of the internet standards process. it continues to administer addresses, and it supports several networkinformation services. however, the process itself has gotten more mature. and, along with its educational andscientific uses, the commercialization of international usage of the internet has grown rapidly. the internet society(isoc) was recently set up as a professional organization to take responsibility for adopting and promulgating thestandards, for official publication of relevant information about the internet, and for holding an annual meeting tobring together the relevant parties. in addition, isoc engages in a variety of nonprofit activities that help topromote the internet in a professional society context.the old iab was replaced by a new body with the same acronym, the internet architecture board, which ispart of the internet society and serves as an appeals court for the standards process. adoption of standards is takenup by an internet engineering steering group, which basically is the leadership of the ietf.as of late 1993, connections between isoc and the ietf were not formally constituted. this is interestingfor a standardsmaking process, because the ietf meetings are open to anybody who wants to come. you don'thave to be a member of isoc to show up. while the analogy is not perfect, i could liken it to a gathering on themall, where one group handles the logistics, another group plans and leads what happens, and another groupreports on the events. you don't have to become a formal member of any organization to be present. you just haveto show up.let me now discuss the chickenegg syndrome in some of these network r&d activities. the single mostimportant concern, to me, is that if you don't have the technology in place to use the network and if you also don'thave the network in place to make use of the technology, how do you get started since you need both of them?in the case of very high speed networks, the computer industry won't build the machines that send and receivedata at a terabit per second or a petabit per second and the carriers won't deploy networks with these enduserspeeds until a market develops, resulting in a kind of a deadlock. one way to get started is through the use oftestbeds. the corporation for national research initiatives has effectively exploited that notion with support fromnsf and arpa under contributions from industry (and particularly the carriers). several gigabit testbeds havebeen created around the country. many of the bell regionals have participated and have been very helpful. so havesome of the longdistance carriers like at&t and mci. bellcore and ibm have been two of the most activeparticipants. bellcore has contributed advanced technology including an experimental atm switch. and ibm alsohas contributed technology. gte and bell are active participants in a testbed involving medical networkingapplications. many more of the computer companies were willing to participate both because the government wasbacking the effort and because the overall direction of the project was right. the federal government put up about$20 million for research to be carried out over about a fiveyear period. private industry, it has been estimated, putup something like several hundred million dollars in equivalent costs of their people, their facilities, and theirtechnology over that same period. i believe they would never have done that if the federal government hadn'tgotten involved. industry was able to capitalize on research in the universities, which is nominally where all thegovernmentprovided funding ultimately went, by providing facilities.economic dividends of government investment in research and technology development212the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.i would like to emphasize how hard it is to make this kind of collective effort work. even though a fewmillion dollars for facilities is a small fraction of a large company's budget, it comes out of somebody's budget.deciding to take that money and put it into an r&d project, which may not have any potential in the very shortterm, is not something that companies are usually likely to do.but when the government says that an investment is on the path to a national network, to our nii, then it maybecome quite a bit more important for them. what is in it for them to invest? well, they will learn abouttechnology and its applications, and they will get some early experience with deployment of the technology; this isrelevant because they think there is a followon. they may get to do some interoperability testing much earlierthan would otherwise be possible or in contexts not easily achievable. sonet was made to work as a result ofsome of these testbed activities. finally, there is the stimulation of applications as well as general businessdevelopment on their part.the same kind of thinking process applies to the computer companies. their motivation in participating inadvanced testbeds is to explore advanced technology, develop new knowledge, meet the needs that are perceivedin the r&d community, and, in many cases, develop a market for the technology. certainly all these companiesare getting market visibility. some of them are actually advertising their participation, which may have value in itsown right.having gone through this process once, i can tell you it is really hard. if we had to do it again, i don't knowthat we could create another national network initiative and motivate the carriers and the industry participants to dothis one more time. we need to find a way to make upgrading the national infrastructure part and parcel of thenormal r&d process in this country.there are things that we can do to help. one element is government funding for some of the earlyinfrastructure. in the case of gigabit testbeds, the infrastructure has all been contributed. no funding was providedfor the facilities. i doubt this can be replicated in a larger sense, however. another element might be tax credits forinvestment in advanced infrastructure testbeds. certain rights and imprimaturs that could be granted by thegovernment may also play a role.given that these testbeds have gotten to the point where they are viable demonstrations, can they be grown(individually or collectively) to include more of the research community or even to a critical mass state? what arethe mechanisms? is direct support from the government the answer, or is there another way to do it? are thereother approaches that would help us get there just as fast, if not faster and at least as effectively?referencescomputer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994. realizing the information future: the internetand beyond. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995. evolving the high performance computing andcommunications initiative to support the nation's information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.notes1. editor's note: the conceptual layering of the information infrastructure is described in chapter 2 of realizing the information future(cstb, 1994). dr. kahn was a special advisor to the nrenaissance committee that developed the report.economic dividends of government investment in research and technology development213the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2. editor's note: as discussed in evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative (cstb, 1995), commercialsuccess of a given company or a given product design is not a complete or even relevant indicator of the contributions of federal r&dinvestments. the investments in parallel processing have resulted, as of 19941995, in commercial adoption of moderately parallel processingsystems and scientific research benefits from the application of moderate and massively parallel systems.economic dividends of government investment in research and technology development214the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.perspective of the noncarrier transport providerlaura l. breedenas the executive director of farnet (the federation of american research networks), i work with 35organizations that are providers of internet services at the state, regional, and national levels. these organizationsvary greatly in size and in their objectives. some are small nonprofits with only a few employees, focused onserving a single state. others are large forprofit companies with hundreds of employees and a national reach. indiscussing their perspective i will, of necessity, be describing an idealized view that may not fully represent anysingle one of them. since a majority of the members of farnet are small to mediumsized nonprofitorganizations, that is the perspective i will lean toward.first, some definitions. by ''noncarrier transport providers" i mean valueadded systems integrators (who donot typically own the transmission facilities and who are not regulated as common carriers). because i havelimited knowledge about them, i have not included cable, wireless, bypass, and similar providers of "raw bits." idefine "transport" in this context to mean the movement of digital information from one location to another. notethat "transport" used in this fashion is an increasingly lowmargin (commodity) business, although when themarket is vast, there is plenty of room for niche providers to prosper. the recent frenzy of mergers and jointventures among telephone, cable, and entertainment companies attests to the perception in the industry that themost interesting, and potentially most profitable, new developments are in information delivery (of news, games,databases, and so on).the question before us is, what is the role of federal investment in building the telecommunicationsinfrastructure? for the community that i represent, this question can be approached by asking what supplysideinvestment has reaped? the history of federal support for the internet (and its predecessor the arpanet)demonstrates a movement from direct federal sponsorship of the network (including the research and development(r&d) required to develop it, the equipment needed to connect to it, and the ongoing operational expensesassociated with it) toward indirect support (to developers of network services, who then purchase commercialequipment and tariffed circuits, and to network users).i would argue that, through its policies in the 1980s in this arena, the government stimulated a group of"market makers," to use richard mandelbaum's phrase (see mandelbaum and mandelbaum, 1992) with their rootsin higher education, the computer industry, and research. this groupnote: at the time she developed this paper, laura breeden was executive director of farnet. since march 1994 she hasbeen division director for information infrastructure at the national telecommunications and information administration,within the department of commerce.perspective of the noncarrier transport provider215the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.was focused on the needs of the education and research communities initially, and federal support allowed them todevelop new services and develop the market for the internet by reducing risk, guaranteeing a certain level ofdemand, and creating a critical mass of users.in late 1993, as we contemplated the development of the national information infrastructure and how thegovernment's investment strategies should change, it became time to ask, "when do you move federal investmentfrom the supply side to the demand side?" (as many other members of this panel have said, it is also important tolook at all of the tools at government's disposal, such as tax policy and regulation, since these may be moreeffective and influential in many situations.)it is doubtful that if washington gave a $100 tax rebate to every teacher in america for "networking" (a $100million investment), the result would be a national research and education network. there is a social organizingprinciple at work here, which argues for targeted spending aimed at leveraging certain activities within the targetcommunity, whether that is k12 education, libraries, health care, or economic development.to be effective, federal investment policy will have to be designed to meet the needs of specific usercommunities, at specific points in time. generalizations about information infrastructure are becoming rapidlymore hollow as new technologies, service providers, and access devices sweep on to the scene. lessons from thepast will be useful only to the extent that they are carefully drawn from particular historical circumstances.policymakers will need to practice humility. they will need to be painfully honest about what they know andwhat they don't. data, and the recommendations that follow from them, will have to be looked at with a cold eye. alot of what we heard at this workshop was amazingly vague, imprecise, or not well supported. further, we need tomaintain a sense of scale in policy discussions. the u.s. telecommunications industry spent approximately $200billion in 1992. comparatively, as mentioned in this workshop today, defense research, development, testing, andevaluation for intelligence and communications accounted for $5.3 billion, the high performance computing andcommunications initiative (hpcci) accounted for $1 billion, and the national research and education networkcomponent of the hpcci accounted for about $100 million. typical research university computing cost $50million, the national science foundation's networking and communications research and infrastructure divisionbudget was $35 million, and the nsfnet backbone was $12 million.what can the federal government do effectively? is there a role for government investment? i believe thatgovernment has an obligation to promote equity, in the first place. further, public support at the right time and inthe right place can offer: risk reduction, in highrisk but potentially promising areas; proof of concept (when private capital is not available, because of the risk or because the benefits to beobtained are not likely to attract private investment); and support for network externalities (such as the development of a critical mass of users) and for publicgoods.there are a number of ways to achieve these goals, including support for: applications development; user connection to the network or information service; development of telecommunications networks and systems; direct r&d; and incentives (e.g., tax policy).perspective of the noncarrier transport provider216the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.i concur with walter baer's excellent test of investment policy as presented earlier at this workshop: involve industry and users in design and deployment; require cost sharing; have an explicit plan for handing off technology to the private sector; focus on meeting technical and economic objectives; shelter from capture by political constituencies; and avoid rigid schedules and time constraints.i would further recommend that formal evaluation and dissemination be required components of all federaltechnology and infrastructure investments.to summarize, i urge that policymakers: examine their data critically and carefully. data must be accurate, and conclusions that follow must berelevant to specific times and circumstances; admit their assumptions up front, and question them continually; and maintain a sense of scale. data presented at this workshop demonstrate that some of the areas that havereceived the most attention from policymakers actually loom small within the overall dimensions offederal activities. pay attention to the things that matter.referencemandelbaum, richard, and paulette a. mandelbaum. 1992. "the strategic future of the midlevel networks," pp. 59œ118 in buildinginformation infrastructure. harvard university press, cambridge, mass.perspective of the noncarrier transport provider217the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussionjoel engel: i would like to address a couple of things. the first is the whole issue of critical mass, whichso many people have spoken about. surely, there is a critical mass issue. but that doesn't require subsidies. wehave many examples, even from very recent history. for example, the very first purchaser of a vcr [videocassette recorder] found it not very useful if there were no cassettes to play on it, and it would not be very goodbusiness for people to make cassettes if there weren't very many vcrs. in the same way, without software theutility of pcs [personal computers] would be considerably less than it is today, but it was not very desirable forpeople to develop software if there wasn't a large mass of pcs and pc owners to sell it to. and yet, those are twoexamples of exploding industries that didn't require any kind of subsidy to get started, but were started by what weused to call investment.wally baer gave the example that even for the telephone industry, the entire telephone network was built onprivate investment. the government did invest. it invested in telegraphy, which is the other example of the abilityto choose winners.bob lucky gave the figure of about $25 billion as being required to convert the telephone network fromcopper to fiber cabling. but we ought to put it in perspective. as chuck jackson said, just the lecs [localexchange carriers] alone spend about $20 million every year to keep their networks modern. in the last few yearsabout a third of that has been in local distributions, but that is because all of us have been replacing our analogswitches with digital switches. that emphasis can shift. in addition, the front page of the business section ofyesterday's usa today shows that the free cash flow of the lecs ranges from $4 billion to $6.5 billion, whichmeans that even in addition to this shift, if there were good business reasons, those investments could as much asdouble. so, as wally baer pointed out, while we sit in this room and debate whether or not there is a critical massissue, the private investor is going to inconsiderately knock the legs out from under the debate.the other point that i want to make with much fervor has to do with the view that one of the necessities is tomake the upgraded infrastructure available to all americans. i don't think that is the critical issue. the critical issueis to make it interesting and attractive to all americans. i really want to reinforce the point that bill gillis madeabout the importance of applications and content. earlier today, both bruce alberts and george turin told abouthaving to either hide or lock up their tv sets because they didn't like the content that their children were gettingout of it. they didn't say, but from my experience as a parent, i am willing to bet that they didn't have to lock uptheir encyclopedias. i think that the real challenge is understanding what, when we build the infrastructure, is thecontent that will make them come.david messerschmitt: i think that particularly on the first pointšthat market mechanisms will takecare of the critical mass problemšthere may be some comment.discussion218the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles jackson: just a historical observation. i believe that the first widely known economics paperon critical mass issues in networks, network externalities, is by a colleague of mine named jeff rohlfs [formerly]of bell laboratories. he looked at the problem by looking at the videophone experience in the late 1960s, whenthe old bell system rolled out a product for which they charged $60 a month independent of usage. his analysiswas that if the charges had been based on usage so that people had the product on the desk but didn't have to payfor it if they didn't use it, the network might have grown a lot faster.economists have tools to analyze these issues. but i think that the insights that we get from networkexternality theory do give us clues about how to price new services, and maybe some ideas for promotionalactivities by the government. i think the point in the long runšwhich complements bridger mitchell's point that ifyou try to subsidize something and then it never quite makes it to the critical mass point, then you still have allthese people getting the subsidiesšis that you can lock yourself into a very unfortunate and wasteful situationpossibly, and we need to be sensitive to that.but nevertheless, i think that theory can give a lot of useful insights.messrschmitt: would those pricing mechanisms be consistent with making a profit during this criticalmass period?jackson: no. what you need at the beginning is a promotional price to get people into the network, andthen you profit from it later. and clearly you can imagine industry structures where that second stage isn'tpossible.walter baer: i don't think you are hearing any wild enthusiasm from this panel for large governmentinvestments in this area. what you are hearing, i think, is that there may be government roles on the r&d side indealing with some of the network critical mass issues.the two examples that you gave are interesting. the vcrs and the pcs really are kind of standaloneproducts, at least initially. they didn't require networking to be sold initially. and there may be some differencewhen you get this network externality effect. the other point is that the vcr actually did profit from a fairamount of governmentsupported r&d 10 or even 20 years before; much of it was, again, defense oriented at thebeginning.laura breeden: i agree with the point, though, that the applications that are going to be delivered overthe information infrastructure are critical. i heard larry irving, who at one point was very involved in thereevaluation of cable before he went to the department of commerce, say that the two biggest sellers on payfortelevision are tractor pulls and soft pornography. i believe that the government may have an interest in seeing thatother kinds of programming are available that perhaps are not driven by the market, because the market either isn'tthere or is so immature that no single private investor or group of investors can make a profit on thoseapplications.having said that, i don't think it is fair for the private sector to say that government should fund all the highrisk application development and that the private sector then will reap the benefit, the profits. one of the things thequestioner said was, "let's make it attractive," and that is the hard part. if there is one thing that u.s. industry isgood at, it is making stuff attractive. it is creating demand.so, i think there is an issue of balance here and it is not a blackorwhite decision between no governmentinvestment and socialized networking.lucy richards: since i come from an r&d committee on capitol hill, i want to make a couple ofcomments on the issue of government r&d. first, i appreciate the comments on the national informationinfrastructure act of 1993. that was our committee's bill and is basically a refinement of public law 102œ194,which funds a lot of the highperformance computing applications. as that bill went through our committee, wetried very hard to refine it, to try to make clear that the government was not trying to compete with the privatesector in the development of services or networks. that bill also makes significant changes to the nrenprograms, with one of the goals being to make clear that the nren is not trying to duplicate what private industrycan provide.discussion219the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a couple of other comments on funding. one concerns the issue of manufacturing, which we have addressedbecause we found it very relevant. it is contained in h.r. 820 as a separate provision. it is not a highperformancecomputing application. it is in s. 4, though, as a highperformance computing application, which is developmentof applications using information technologies to assist manufacturing. there is, in h.r. 820, the development of amanufacturing outreach program that will have as part of it an advanced communications network to help linksmall and mediumsized manufacturers and give them assistance, because we found that even though there aremanufacturing centers around the country, small business owners can't take the time to travel to them to getassistance. so we are going to try to link them up electronically, in a kind of extension network–.one last comment on financing. in h.r. 820 we have a title iii, which essentially provides for thegovernment to set up some venture capital mechanisms, funneling money into other organizations that willhopefully provide venture capital financing for the development of critical technologies. there are a lot ofcommunication technologies on the critical technologies list.the administration hadn't accepted that. they agreed to make it a study. but at the same time, when you lookat the national performance review, sally katzen, when she testified before us, was talking about a program tofinance the development of information technology applications for government purposes through a venturecapital fund. i think it was 1 percent of the agency's operating budget.then you have venture capital provisions in the seed act that was passed a couple of years ago, which has thegovernment in the position of giving government money to finance venture capital, startup funds in easterneurope but not for american companies doing the same thing in the united states. what we have heard is that thetreasury department has decided to set up an interagency group to look at the whole issue of governmentfinancing for new technologies.brian kahin: i think joel engel's example of the vcr was a bad one, because the vcr business took offon the basis of offair taping, rather than the existence of cassettes. and i think it is a problem with the pcanalogy, too.william gillis: maybe i can help just a bit. i introduced the vhsbrand vcr in august of 1977, and infact, it did take off immediately. there was a predecessor, the betamax, the onehour machine that was out in1975. we introduced the vhs in 1977 as a timeshift mechanism and to give the ability to record off the air. fromthe day that we first introduced it, i went into backlog for the next year and a half because of the incredibledemand.one story that i will share with you highlights the point. we were bold enough to put my namešit was anerroršin one of the ads that we ran. i got a call from a lady who said, "are you mr. gillis? are you the one that isresponsible for this vhs brand vcr?" i said, "yes." she said, "well, i called to say thank you.'' for the first timein 2 years her husband had taken her out to dinner on a monday night because he was able to record monday nightfootball.then she said, "i have a problem. last monday night's game went into overtime and he hasn't watched it allyet and we are out of blank tapes. could you please find me a way to get blank tapes?" and that was only one ofmany such calls.clearly, the overwhelming evidencešand there is certainly data availablešis that offair recording was thedriver; you can record when you are not at home or record when a competing program is running. thatinformation is very definitive.breeden: what was the cost of that device when it was introduced in 1977?gillis: we introduced the first one at $1,000 suggested retail. we sold it to distributors for $750. we mademoney the first year.michael roberts: i want to make a brief comment on the issue of winners and losers and the federalrole in that, which gets everybody's blood moving. i was surprised, with all of the economists in the workshop,that nobody has mentioned christopher ferrell. one of his observationdiscussion220the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is that one of the great advantages of capitalism comes through innovations and asset reallocation. it harnesses alot of creative energy and improves society.but intrinsic to that is the notion of whether an asset reallocation is going to destroy industries. when dieselengines did away with steam engines, or henry ford did away with horses, thousands of jobs were destroyed, butthat wasn't considered a big government policy issue. since world war ii, the government has become themajority force in technological innovations. so, the government is now linked to the destruction as well as thecreation of a tremendous number of jobs, which means that there isn't any way for us to get the winners and losersout of this policy space.i think that the challenge that we have is evolving a policy space around the nii [national informationinfrastructure], which we really haven't donešcertainly this day and a half has shown how primitive the policyspace is around the nii. we have to manage that issue, not wish hopefully that it will go away.kahin: there is also the example, on the other side, of the internetšnetwork externalities, the governmentleveraging with an extremely small amount of money what has turned out to be an outstanding and increasinglycommercial success.the general information infrastructure development problem has been well phrased. there are manyarguments for government investment. a couple wally baer mentioned that haven't been pointed out are theinformation cost and the transaction costs, which is why the government investment of the producer's subsidy intothe backbone has made sense at the beginning.the basic problem is the information management problem and the risk of the government interfering inprivate investment. if the government doesn't have the information flowing to it in a way that enables it to refrainfrom stepping on private investment, it is not going to work. and that is a problem in the applications area, too,that we really haven't faced yet.i was struck by bill gillis's comments that he has been relying on patents in this piece of the infrastructure heis building. this is a situation where the government is directly involved in issuing patents, and it is an informationmanagement problem. the government is doing an absolutely crummy job of handling patents in the softwarearea. it is a disaster. it is taking 32 months to process the applications, and the quality control is absolutelyabysmal. at the same time, what you have witnessed in industry in general is a moving away from proprietarypositions because the users won't accept it.so, you are building a proprietary system, you are placing your bets on a proprietary infrastructure system,and you are taking a big gamble that there won't be some kind of standard that passes you by.gillis: on that, i think you misunderstood. while we do hold parents, we are not necessarily basing oursystem on patents as its protections. and you will find that the customers, who number among the householdnames for the products and services, would differ. if i left the impression that that was our sole safeguard, i wantto point out that what we are going to deliver is the highestquality service that is available. it is not an issue ofproprietary software or not that is really driving our market, because we are taking the information of our variouscustomers and we are delivering it back to them in a form that they and their customers find useful.carol henderson: i want to thank the national research council for including various usercommunities in this workshop, such as health care and education and libraries. to misquote a former fcc chair,this particular infrastructure is not just about selling toasters. unlike, say, the agriculture or the transportationinfrastructure, it really is the infrastructure that is related to what makes us human, the ability to communicate.and it certainly has the potential to be in the future the main way that humans communicate beyond just shoutingdistance to each other. as such, it will have enormous and probably unpredictable effects on society at large.in the discussions on how we go forward, what the government role is, and how we rearrange the regulatorylandscape, i think that the effects on society are something that must be considered, if it is not just economicstimulus alone. concerning some of the government roles wediscussion221the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.talked about, there seems to be some general consensus on what might be useful, such as stimulating certain kindsof applications and fostering at least startup activities for certain communities. those roles are very useful, and isupport them.but in a way, i take libraries, which i represent, as an example. giving a library a little bit of money to getstarted in doing something new in the telecommunications or computer networking area is very useful. it requiresthat institution to come up with some matching money and stimulates a lot of additional activity. but it doesn'tnecessarily solve the systemic problem of making sure that that publicly funded institution is able to get from theinfrastructure what it needs to continue its mission in the future.and some of what, say, schools and libraries will need is similar to what other communities need in terms ofubiquity and interoperability and a fair amount of capacity and so on. but there may be other things needed thatdon't necessarily coincide with the mass market approachšpricing mechanisms, for instance, such as the ability topredict what that cost is going to be and to have that cost not be too usage sensitive. otherwise use in theeducation, research, and library areas will be hindered, which actually is harmful to society.these are points that we need to pay attention to in the basic regulatory structure.baer: i think you raise very good points, and you bring us back to the question of pricing and appropriateregulation, which is very real. i also relate to your early comment about selling toasters because, interestingly, weare dealing with different cultures in the various media, in terms of how we are generating universal access.obviously, in the broadcast media, the way we get nearuniversal access to low prices is to use advertising insupport of content.it is interesting that the culture of the internet so far has not only avoided that kind of service, but has alsoactively rejected it in many cases. i think it is an issue, as we move ahead and look toward larger mass use of theinternetrelated networks, as to whether we are going to allow selling toasters to be a part of the system.alfred aho: i would like to make two points that i don't think have had adequate attention during thisworkshop. one is the importance of software in the information infrastructure. a number of industries today, say,the telecommunications industry, run on hundreds of millions of lines of code in operation. to develop 100 millionlines of code could cost anywhere from $10 to $100 per line of code. we are talking about investments of tens ofbillions of dollars to create the software to run the infrastructure. i just want to make sure that people understandthe importance of software.yet, there is another consequence to this, and that is the embedded base of software that is already there. andthis embedded base may be more of a bottleneck than many people realize. companies and universities just can'tafford to get rid ofšor the internet, in particular can't get rid ofšits embedded base of software overnight.bill gillis mentioned the importance of standards and interoperability. i would like to add a third point, andthat is evolvability of the infrastructure. the technology is changing very quickly, and the applications are alsochanging very quickly. whatever kind of infrastructure we put in place should be an evolvable one, so that 20years from now we won't be stuck with a narrowgauge railway system that we can't get out of. we have seensomewhat similar effects already with the current infrastructure that is in place.the second observation that i want to make with respect to direct investments (and in particular, whether thisis something for the government) concerns investment in people, people who understand not only how to createthe new infrastructure, and the evolving infrastructure, but also how to use the infrastructure.vice president gore talks about reinventing government, and we have had a number of excellent presentationabout how, by changing business processes or the process we use in various segments of industry and other humanendeavors in health and education, we can do business and restructure the manner in which we interact with oneanother and conduct business in those arenas.discussion222the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.i think we are just now beginning to see, in a very early stage, the profound impact of this kind of businessprospectšrestructuringšthat is going to take place in almost every area of human endeavor because of thisinfrastructure. what we need to do is to train people to be able to take advantage of this.robert kahn: i couldn't agree more about the importance of software. between the physicalinfrastructures and the enduser applications is the socalled middleware, which is largely services based onsoftware. it is, in some sense, the network analog of the operating system, plus some more things, that is allsoftwarebased. and obviously, investing in people is what you ultimately end up doing with your investments. iagree with al aho completely.i would like to comment about that $5 billion number that laura threw out, just for clarification. basically, as iunderstood that number, it goes for a number of things that are unique to defense. defense has a centralizedcapability for communications and also a distributed part that the army, the navy, and the air force separatelyadminister. they have their command and control messaging systems, which are part of the command structure ofthe military, for getting orders out and controlling our forces. they have a command and control backbone thatthey maintain. it is secured and protected against a variety of threats.they worry about security technology a lot. they worry about systems that operate on the ground, in a fieldheadquarters of the army, and on ships, planes, and a variety of spacebased systems like milstar and the gps[global positioning system], and they also provide support for a lot of other organizations. the r&d involved inthose systems, often unique, oneofakind military systems, is large. that is what the r&d budget goes for. theactual maintenance and operation of that stuff can be much larger.dale hatfield: while we are congratulating ourselves on the success of the internet, i think we shouldremember something that the fcc [federal communications commission] called the enhanced serviceexemption, and also the special access exemption from the payment of access charges, which means, essentially,that when you make a circuitswitched call, you pay a subsidy, and when you make a packetswitched call, you donot. obviously the packetswitching community has benefited greatly by that exemption. i think we have to bevery careful when we talk about success to recognize that we are not calculating all the costs. i think that should beconsidered.messerschmitt: can you elaborate on that a little bit more, dale?hatfield: yes. let me give you an example. my elderly parents live in ohio and i call them on a regularlongdistance network. about half the cost of the call is split between the two carriers on either end. and a fractionof that is a subsidy that goes to maintain universal service.when i call on the packet node in denver and i sit there for two or three hours, it is a flatrate call and i ampaying no common carrier line charge on the originating side of that or on the terminating side. so, essentially,when i make that packetswitched call, i am not paying the subsidies that i do when i make a circuitswitched call.and that is one of the reasons that a fax call is free on the internet and yet costs x dollars on the circuitswitchednetwork, because of the payment for access. when i call, an enhanced service exemption of the fcc says i canmake a circuitswitched call to that packet network and i am not paying the access charge. it is treated as a localcall, even though it is terminating in columbus, ohio.jackson: when the commission proposed removing the enhanced service exemption, it became quitecontentious.hatfield: and we were inundated with computergenerated mail that went to congress that put politicalpressure on the commission to maintain the exemption.jackson: never pick a fight with an interest group whose hobby is word processing!hatfield: let me make one other distinction that i think we are missing here. i think we all agree thatmost taxpayers are also telephone subscribers, that those two communities are roughly the same.discussion223the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there seems to be a consensus against government investment. but then, i hear chuck jackson saying that ifwe just speeded up depreciation a little bit –, and i hear joel engel saying that if we have all these billions ofdollars of free cash flow, if you just make it a little bit more attractive, we will make this investment.but if you are making an investment as a utility and there are constitutional provisions against confiscationand so forth, if this turns out to be a bad investmentšin other words, if the investment doesn't work outšthen youand i as ratepayers are going to be stuck with paying for that investment through higher rates. i think some of thedistinction here between private investment and public investment is a little bit wrong, because ultimately, asratepayers, we are going to be responsible for that investment at some point anyway, if it is made under thetraditional sort of public utility type of investment.so my conclusion is, let's not kid ourselves. there is not so much difference between public investment andprivate investment as one might think, from the public utility standpoint.messerschmitt: thank you, dale. any comments on that?jackson: yes, i want to respond, because there are some differences. one is that, although the budgetprocess is difficult and contentious, once you vote to make the investment, you can go ahead.with privatesector investment and even the regulated utilities, if their management decides that they aren'tgoing to get that money back, then they aren't going to make that investment. we haven't seen that kind of drawingup of investment in telecommunications yet, but i understand that with electric utilities now, about half to twothirds of the generating capacity being built in this country is what are called qualified facilities rather than beingbuilt by the utilities. the combination of prudence reviews, disallowances, nuclear plants, the whole nuclearfiasco, has dried up utility investment in powergenerating facilities.if a telephone company chooses not to invest in new infrastructure, it is very hard to order it to do more. it ispossible, but it is a tough fight.hatfield: on the other side of the coin, if they go ahead and do it and it turns out to be a bad investment,we are not going to let telephone companies go out of business.jackson: well, we might let them go out of business at some time in the future. we will have to wait andsee. we have let longdistance carriers go out of business when they imprudently invested in obsolete satellitefacilities, things like that. but if it is the only phone company in town, then i think society will be very reluctant tolet it go out of business, although we have had some electric utilities lose a huge amount of money in nuclearpower plants. i think that nuclear power plants lost something like 10 percent of their equity in the late 1980s fromfailed nuclear power plants.i think that some people have put forward a variety of schemes, like price caps, for moving away fromtraditional utility regulations so that you can free up this investment and not face the specter that, if the investmentfails, then the residual monopoly ratepayers are going to bear all the costs.but those are very contentious issues, and a lot of people who support reform are quite unwilling to say okay,we will let it go, we will cap the prices, and if the returns run up to 30 percent on equity because of some great newefficiency, we will let them keep it.john richardson: i believe one of the most important points made by the panel, through laurabreeden's remarks, was the need for an estimate of the benefits of the nii. i have felt this for a long time and i amvery glad to hear this come out.i do remember one of bob lucky's popular columns in ieee spectrum a few months ago, perhaps a yearago, discussing the nren. i believe his point of view in that column was build it and they will come. perhapsmuch of the nii is based on this same sort of religion, but for firm policy development, i do think that we needsome sort of impetus. we need to begin that task.discussion224the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.my question for the panel is, do you have some ideas or some suggestions of how to approach this estimatingof the future benefits?baer: that is obviously a hard topic to quantify at this point, because of both the longterm nature of theinvestment and the problem of confounding a number of government objectivesšthe equity objective along withany kind of efficiency ones.one very crude measure of the effectiveness of government programs past the r&d stage is to requirematching funds from private industry. how much is the private sector willing to invest to match a dollar ofgovernment money? that is not the only measure, but it seems to me it is a reasonable one to place on a wholevariety of proposed government investments beyond basic r&d. and on that measure, so far, it looks like thenren would have come out pretty well.richardson: you are suggesting that we feel our way. and i am asking for something more than that.breeden: i am not an economist, so i am not putting my professional reputation at stake here and i can sayanything i want. having prefaced my remarks with that comment, i would say that if you are going to make aninvestment decision as a nation, you want to try to evaluate the longterm or mediumterm benefits of thatdecision.now, if this information infrastructure succeeds, presumably there are going to be more devices sold, whichmeans healthier industries in computing and personal communications systems and so forth. it means that moretransport is going to be sold, which i think is why you see lots of phone companies doing deals with lots ofentertainment and information service providers.i think you can probably make a casešand again, i am not an economistšthat a lot of spending decisions inthe private sector are going to be stimulated by the development of an infrastructure that we can all use. if we lookat highways and cars, and gasoline and fast food, there is maybe a similar relationship there. and i think theexercise is worth doing, because, you know, we, as a nation, have some very hard choices to make. are we goingto increase our national debt indefinitely, or are we going to do something different with our capital and ourcountry?kahn: it is clearly an interesting question to pose, and it would be very nice if we could get some answers toit. you could even broaden the question to ask not only what the benefits are, but also what the return oninvestment is, and you could phrase that in various different terms. the thing that i would like to caution us on isnot holding our breath waiting for an answer to those questions, because i am not sure they are going to be veryeasily forthcoming.if you were to try to ask that same question in other areas where, i think, people have naturally just boughtinto the concept, you would have an equal amount of difficulty. for example, if you asked what the benefits ofpersonal computers are in the workplace, i can make a strong argument that they are negative as well as positive,that you are spending too much money and it takes too much time and it has encumbered you. if you were to askabout the value of education, which we spend a lot of money on, you would have a tough time quantifying thebenefit of any one year of the educational process, or the whole thing, or even what society would be like if youhad more or less of it or a different kind. likewise, i think you have much the same problem with health care,despite the fact that everybody knows the need for it and wants it. estimating the benefits of it would be very hardto do.i think you would have an even worse time trying to explain what the benefits were of the economy ingeneral, even though i think you could make a better stab at that than perhaps all the others. so i just wouldn't holdmy breath waiting for the answer, despite the fact that i wouldn't mind seeing something that tries to describe theanswer.richardson: i appreciate your point of view and i agree with it. my point of view is to encouragesomebody to try to get quantitative, even though it is a feeble first step.bridger mitchell: i think laura steers us in an interesting direction of trying to be specific. but tryingto answer the broad question about the benefits of the nii is almost doomed todiscussion225the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fail from excessive generality. if we can focus on specific programs, specific kinds of initiatives, there is somechance of advancement.for example, we have a particular quantitation of the way federal action has held up gains in consumer valuein the cellular area where, for nearly 10 years, it delayed the introduction of a technology that was clearly there.we have market evaluation processes for measuring that sort of thing. but the market may not send adequatesignals to evaluate the "public good" aspects of education and consumption of raw information.clifford lynch: in listening to this, i have felt that an aspect is missing in some of the discussions. iwant to try to quickly outline it and then solicit some reaction.i think that when we have been talking about this information infrastructure and looking at some of theeconomic models that might provide insight, we tend to be thinking about a communications network. and wethink about universal service objectives in terms of getting everybody connected. i have some reservations aboutwhether the primary use of this new network world is going to be persontoperson communication for the vastmajority of users. certainly, things like the telephone work really effectively for a lot of people right now. andthings like the picture phone haven't been roaring successes.i suspect that a lot of the use of this system is going to be access to various kinds of information services. ifyou think of that as accounting for a lot of the use of an information infrastructure, a bunch of questions come up.what does universal service mean in that sense? you have connected people to something, but they can't afford touse most of the services on it, because they cost many many times what the connection costs. as with the phone,just because we give them universal service doesn't mean that we give everybody a blank check for 900 numbers.another point. it seems to me that another area of potential government investment choices to be consideredis placing information services on your network, including, as you mentioned, some of the enormous stores ofgovernment information that could be organized and made accessible, either at very low cost or perhaps, in somecases, for free if there are policy or legislative mandates to do so, for access by the citizenry. it seems to me thatthat is a whole other dimension of potential government investment that could move along the creation of theinfrastructure by giving people reasons to want to make use of it.breeden: i think cliff is right. it is incorrect to focus only on the communications aspect of this and toassume that that means people communicating directly with other individuals. one of the other panelists made apoint about the need to standardize presentation of data. cliff has done a lot of work in something called z39.50,which is an information standard. i think those areas are going to be tremendously important.i tend to think that the equity issues, if we are going to avoid having a society of information "haves" and"have nots," are going to be solved in the public libraries.messerschmitt: laura made a very important point from my perspectivešthat is, increasingly, the costto users in terms of equipment and services is often for equipment that they buy themselves, rather than fornetwork transport services, which are rapidly being driven toward zero. bob lucky made this point in his talk, thatinternet was so cheap in comparison to the telephone. so i think that the issues with respect to customerownedequipment that is necessary are quite different, probably, from the issues having to do with the communicationinfrastructure and yet may ultimately be more important in terms of issues like universal service.discussion226the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix contributors and participantsappendix contributors and participants227the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix contributors and participants228the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix contributors and participants229the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix contributors and participants230