detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4940emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research336 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309052764 | doi 10.17226/4940raymond s. nickerson, editor; committee on human factors, national researchcouncilemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iemerging needs and opportunitiesfor human factors researchraymond s. nickerson, editorcommittee on human factorscommission on behavioral and social sciences and educationnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1995emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ¥ washington, d.c.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the nationalacademy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencesand with regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtheranceof science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of thecharter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it toadvise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is presidentof the national academy of sciences. the national academy of engineering was establishedin 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization ofoutstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federalgovernment. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimedat meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. harold liebowitz is president of the national academy ofengineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the service of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibilitygiven to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to thefederal government and upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research,and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was established by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõs purposesof furthering knowledge and of advising the federal government. functioning in accordancewith the general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principaloperating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy ofengineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. harold liebowitz are chairman and vice chairman,respectively, of the national research council.the work of the committee on human factors is supported by department of armycontract no. daad0592c0087 issued by the u.s. aberdeen proving ground support activity.the views and opinions, and findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) andshould not be construed as an official department of army position, policy, or decision, unlessso designated by other official documentation.library of congress catalog card no. 9570762international standard book number 0309052769additional copies are available from national academy press, 2101 constitution ave., n.w.,box 285, washington, d.c. 20055. call 8006246242 or 2023343313 (in the washingtonmetropolitan area).copyright 1995 by the national academy of sciences.printed in the united states of americaemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee on human factors1990  1994raymond s. nickerson (chair, 19911994), bolt, beranek, andnewman laboratories (retired), cambridge, massachusettsdouglas h. harris (chair, 19881991), anacapa sciences, inc.,charlottesville, virginiapaul a. attewell, department of sociology, city university of newyorkm.m. ayoub, department of industrial engineering, texas techuniversityjerome i. elkind, lexia institute, palo alto, californiapaul s. goodman, center for management of technology, carnegiemellon universityjohn d. gould, ibm corporation (retired), yorktown heights, newyorkmirian m. graddick, at&t corporation, basking ridge, new jerseyoscar grusky, department of sociology, university of california,los angelesrobert l. helmreich, nasa/ut aerospace crew research project,austin, texasjulian hochberg, department of psychology, columbia universitywilliam c. howell, american psychological association sciencedirectorate, washington, d.c.roberta l. klatzky, department of psychology, carnegie mellonuniversitythomas k. landauer, department of psychology, university ofcolorado, bouldertom b. leamon, liberty mutual research center, hopkinton,massachusettsherschel w. leibowitz, department of psychology, pennsylvaniastate universityann majchrzak, human factors department, university of southerncalifornianeville p. moray, percoteclamih (laboratory for automation,mechanical, industrial and human engineering), universit” devalenciennes, francewilliam b. rouse (chairelect, 19941997), search technology, inc.,norcross, georgiajoyce l. shields, hay management consultants, arlington, virginialawrence w. stark, school of optometry, university of california,berkeleyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcontentschristopher d. wickens, aviation research laboratory, universityof illinois, savoyrobert c. williges, department of industrial engineering andoperations research, virginia polytechnic institute and stateuniversityj. frank yates, department of psychology, university of michiganlaurence r. young, man vehicle laboratory, massachusettsinstitute of technologyanne s. mavor, study directorharold p. van cott, principal staff officer (until 1992)beverly m. huey, senior staff officerjerry kidd, senior adviserevelyn e. simeon, senior project assistantivemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsvcontributors to part iipaul a. attewell, department of sociology, city university of newyorkm.m. ayoub, department of industrial engineering, texas techuniversityjoseph b. cavallaro, hay management consultants, arlington,virginiajerome i. elkind, lexia institute, palo alto, californiapaul s. goodman, center for management of technology, carnegiemellon universityjohn d. gould, ibm corporation (retired), yorktown heights, newyorkdouglas h. harris, anacapa sciences, inc., charlottesville, virginiarobert l. helmreich, nasa/ut aerospace crew research project,austin, texasbeverly m. huey, committee on human factors, national researchcouncilroberta l. klatzky, department of psychology, carnegie mellonuniversityherschel w. leibowitz, department of psychology, pennsylvaniastate universityneville p. moray, department of mechanical and industrialengineering, university of illinois, urbanachampaignraymond s. nickerson, bolt, beranek, and newman laboratories(retired), cambridge, massachusettsd. alfred owens, whitely psychology laboratory, franklin andmarshall collegepenelope m. sanderson, department of mechanical and industrialengineering, university of illinois, urbanachampaignkaren seidler, u.s. west advanced technologies, denver, coloradojoyce l. shields, hay management consultants, arlington, virginiaharold p. van cott, committee on human factors, nationalresearch council (retired)christopher d. wickens, aviation research laboratory, universityof illinois, savoyrobert c. williges, department of industrial and systemsengineering, virginia polytechnic institute and state universityj. frank yates, department of psychology, university of michigancarolynn a. young, department of psychology, university ofmichigan (deceased)note:affiliations current as of the report preparation period.vemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viicontentsprefaceixexecutive summary1part i:summary report11part ii:background papers691productivity in organizations712training and education863employment and disabilities1064health care1315environmental change1586communication technology and telenetworking1777information access and usability2008emerging technologies in work design2209transportation24110cognitive performance under stress26211aiding intellectual work291emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe committee on human factors was established in october 1980 bythe commission on behavioral and social sciences and education of thenational research council. the principal objectives of the committee areto provide new perspectives on theoretical and methodological issues, toidentify basic research needed to expand and strengthen the scientific basisof human factors, and to attract scientists inside and outside the field forinteractive communication and performance of needed research.human factors issues arise in every domain in which humans interactwith the products of a technological society. to perform its role effectively, the committee draws on experts from a wide range of scientific andengineering disciplines. members of the committee include specialists insuch fields as psychology, engineering, biomechanics, physiology, medicine, cognitive sciences, machine intelligence, computer sciences, sociology, education, and human factors engineering. other disciplines are represented in the working groups, workshops, and symposia organized by thecommittee. each of these disciplines contributes to the basic data, theory,and methods required to improve the scientific basis of human factors.since its inception in 1980, the committee on human factors has issued more than a dozen reports regarding the state of knowledge and research needs on topics deemed important by the committee and its sponsors.this report is the product of a committeeinitiated project. it identifiesmajor problem areas in which human factors research can make an important contribution during the next few decades. part i provides the committeeõsrecommendations and conclusions. these conclusions are drawn from theixemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background papers prepared by committee members, staff, and their colleagues and included in part ii of the report. the committee list is acomplete membership roster covering the report preparation time. duringthis time, some members completed their terms and new members wereadded.throughout the project the committee received encouragement and support from a variety of sources. in particular, we would like to express ourgratitude to our sponsors for their continuing interest and important insights. the sponsors include: the air force office of scientific research,the army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences, thenational aeronautics and space administration, the air force armstrongaerospace medical research laboratory, the army advanced systems research office, the army human engineering laboratory, the army natickrd&e center, the federal aviation administration, the nuclear regulatorycommission, the naval training systems center, and the u.s. coast guard.the committee would also like to thank staff of the national researchcouncil for their important contributions to our work. harold p. van cott,study director until his retirement in 1992, was involved in shaping theearly planning stages; beverly m. huey, acting study director from 1992 to1994, supported the committee through its deliberations and the many stagesof report drafting; and anne mavor, the current study director, helped bringthe project to a successful conclusion. finally, we gratefully acknowledgebarbara white for her fine editorial contribution and evelyn simeon for herexcellent administrative assistance and hard work on the manuscript.raymond s. nickerson, chair 19911994committee on human factorsxprefaceemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging needs and opportunitiesfor human factors researchemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary1this report identifies 11 areas considered by the national researchcouncil committee on human factors as fertile ground for human factorsresearch during the next few decades. the papers in part ii, written bycommittee members, staff, and colleagues and addressing these areas, provide the basis for the conclusions and recommendations articulated in part iof the report.the committeeõs first report, research needs for human factors, published in 1983, three years after the committee was established, focused onsix topics that reflected interests of the sponsors at the time and were withinthe expertise of the committee members to address. since the committeeõsestablishment, both its sponsorship and the composition of its membershiphave broadened considerably. technology has also advanced rapidly, andboth the national and world situations have changed in significant and remarkable ways. some of these changes create new challenges and opportunities for human factors research.the committee therefore thought it appropriate to again attempt to identify research needs and opportunities for human factors. the process ofselecting the topics to emphasize in the report was lengthy and deliberative.it was agreed at the outset that committee members should write the report,that the report should be forwardlooking, that it should focus on problemsthat need attention rather than on the research that is currently being done,and that it should be selective rather than comprehensive. the processproduced a consensus on 11 topics, which can be fairly easily groupedunder three major headingsñas follows:emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchnational or global problems¥productivity in organizations¥training and education¥employment and disabilities¥health care¥environmental changetechnology issues¥communications technology and telenetworking¥information access and usability¥emerging technologies in work design¥transportationhuman performance¥cognitive performance under stress¥aiding intellectual workin keeping with the committeeõs decision to be forwardlooking, relatively little past research is reviewed in the report, and that is done only tohelp provide an appropriate frame of reference for thinking about futurepossibilities. some of the recommendations are relatively general; others,quite specific. some follow traditional lines of research; others relate toproblems that have received little attention from the human factors community so far. in the latter cases, the recommendations are offered more aspoints of departure for further discussion and planning than as items for aresearch agenda.productivity in organizationsproductivity is a major national and international concern. economistssee productivity as a primary determinant of competitiveness both for companies within an industry and for national economies. productivity is alsobelieved to be causally linked to standard of living, so increasing productivity globally is seen as the best hope for improving living conditions worldwide. human factors researchers have given considerable attention to howto improve human performance in the workplace and thereby increase individual productivity; they have put relatively little effort into determininghow individual productivity relates to the productivity of the groups, organizations, or industries in which the individualsõ work is done.our focus is on the latter issue, in particular on identifying the conditions under which increases in individual productivity are likely to be reflected in increases at organizational levels. research needs and opportunities include developing a better understanding of the linkages among withinjobactivities that have implications for totaljob productivity, determining howindividual jobs within an organization are causally linked to the productivemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3ity of the organization as a whole, and identifying structural differencesamong organizations that show how the productivity of higher organizational units depends on the productivity of their components.training and educationit is widely recognized that education and training are of critical importance to the national economy and to the wellbeing of the nation and thatthe countryõs educational and training systems have not been meeting thenationõs needs. the problem is compounded by the expectation that in thefuture the workforce will have to be more proficientñespecially more versatile and adaptiveñin order to cope effectively with the rapidity of technological change in the workplace. as a discipline that historically bridgespsychology and engineering, human factors should be important in applyinglaboratory discoveries about learning to the design of educational and training systems.determining how best to do this is a major challenge for research. aclosely related research challenge is the identification of training and educational requirements that arise from interactions among changing technologies, changing workforce demographics, changing organizational structures,and other developments that are likely to have implications for the design ofeffective educational and training systems. other opportunities for humanfactors research in this area include evaluating technologically innovativeapproaches to education and training, applying usercentered design principles to educational and training systems, developing approaches to support lifelong learning within work settings, and anticipating technologyinduced changes in jobskill requirements and their implications for educationaland training needs.employment and disabilitiesthe population of people with one or another type of disability is large.the rate of unemployment for people with disabilities who would like towork is several times higher than the unemployment average nationwide,and the percentage of people who live below the poverty line is two to threetimes greater for people with a disability that interferes with their ability towork than for the total working population. these circumstances not onlyrepresent a severe problem for many people with disabilities, but they alsocreate a significant economic burden for the nation. most of the previousresearch on how to enhance employment opportunities for people with disabilities has tried to find ways to use technologyñespecially computer andcommunication technologiesñto mitigate the limiting effects of disabilitiesin the workplace and elsewhere.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchwith more than half the workforce now engaged in informationoriented jobs, we need to continue our efforts to find ways to use computerand communication technologies to increase employment opportunities forpeople with disabilities. another major challenge for research is to increaseour understanding of how the capabilities and limitations of people withspecific disabilities compare with the requirements of specific jobs; such anunderstanding is essential to the design of devices, systems, and proceduresthat will expand the range of jobs that people with disabilities can effectively perform. there is also a need to explore ways in which specific jobsmight be designed or redesigned to accommodate people with disabilities.health caremany health risks, such as cancer and heart disease, stem at least inpart from behavioral and occupational factors. significant threats to healthare even found within the increasingly complex technology used for thedelivery of health care. many of these threats arise from the possibility ofhuman error in using healthcare equipment and carrying out healthcareprocedures, for example in trauma centers and by people without medicaltraining in their homes.a major challenge to human factors research is to help improve thedesigns of medical devices and health care procedures so that they are lessconducive to human error. another challenge is that, as the percentage ofour population that is elderly and very elderly continues to grow, it willbecome increasingly important to learn to design living environments thatlimit the risk of accidents without sacrificing the functionality that residentsneed or want; this effort must include work on the design of spaces thataccommodate the types of health care devices that are more and more commonly utilized in the home. other challenges include developing effectivememory aids for helping people to take medicines in proper dosages onschedule; improving the interpretability of labels, warnings, and instructions on medicines and health care devices that are intended to be used bynonprofessionals; developing and evaluating practical ways to train peoplein using such devices, and devising ways to convey health care and healthmaintenance to consumers generally.environmental changethe topic of detrimental environmental change is not usually associatedwith human factors research but is included in this report because it is aserious national and international problem that has elements that deserveattention from human factors researchers. scientists, policy makers, andthe general public have become increasingly concerned about the threat thatemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5certain changes in the environment pose. this threat has many dimensions,and human activities are among its causes. because these activities areaimed at satisfying human needs and desires, it is reasonable to assume thatthey will increase as world population grows. some research has been doneon how to get people to modify behavior to make it more environmentallybenign. a complementary effort is needed to find ways to modify technology so as to decrease the opportunities it affords for harming the environment without impairing its effectiveness in meeting human needs.because many of the most significant threats to the environment aredirect consequences of the production and use of energy, a major objectiveshould be improving the efficiency of energy use and substituting forms ofenergy that do not harm the environment for those that do. computer andtelecommunications technologiesñincluding electronic mail, teleconferencing, computersupported work facilities, and virtual reality systemsñprovide many opportunities to substitute energylight and materiallight resources for energyheavy and materialheavy ones. the challenge to humanfactors researchers is to help ensure that such facilities are sufficiently welldesigned from the usersõ point of view that they will be used in ways thatdecrease overall energy demands. other challenges include helping to makemass public transportation a more attractive alternative to private automobiles for transport in urban areas; improving, from a human factors perspective, approaches to recycling and waste management, including proceduresfor handling radioactive and toxic wastes; and increasing accessibility ofinformation in environmental databases to users and potential users of thatinformation.communications technology and telenetworkingsince the establishment of the first computer networks, network technology has advanced rapidly. the arpanet began as a fournode systemin 1969; its successor, the internet, now connects computers around theworld, and the number of users, already in the millions, has been doublingannually for some time. with the carrying capacity of networks continuingto increase, it is now possible to transmit enormous amounts of data (including digital voice and highquality video) from almost anywhere to almost anywhere at relatively low cost. people have unprecedented access toinformation (in libraries, museums, news databases, and other repositories),to informationbased tools and resources, and to other people. computerbased communication should remain a high priority for human factors research, because in the future nearly everyone is likely to be a user of thistechnology, directly or indirectly, for work and for numerous other reasons.humancomputer interaction has been the focus of considerable humanfactors research in the past. many of the problems that have receivedemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchattention will continue to be major challenges for research. these includeissues relating to interface design, information finding and utilization, personal information management, and usersõ comprehension of the systemswith which they interact. speech as a means of communication deservescontinuing human factors research, and òwalkaround,ó threedimensionalrepresentations of objects and environments with which users can interactñi.e., virtual realityñare innovations that will require the resolution of avariety of human factors issues before their potential can be fully realized.other needs and opportunities for human factors research involve the development of tools to facilitate interaction with huge and complex databasesand studying interpersonal communication through computerbased systemsto compare it with more traditional communication and to learn how toshape its technology to enhance its effectiveness for the various humanpurposes it is intended to serve.information access and usabilityamong the more striking characteristics of modern societyñthe òinformation societyóñis the dependence of its many institutions on constantaccessibility to accurate, uptodate information. associated with this increasing dependence on information is a greatly increased quantity of information available to people in all walks of life. availability does not necessarily mean ready accessibility, however, and users, or potential users, ofinformation that is available often experience frustration in locating, accessing, and interpreting the information they want. any effort to make information more accessible to people who need or want to use itñincludingmany people who are not technically trained or orientedñmust devote attention to a variety of human factors issues relating to the ways in whichpeople might interface with information repositories and tools that are intended to facilitate finding, using, and conveying information.much relevant work has focused on the design of interfaces and querylanguages for databases representing restricted domains, on the effects ofalternative organizations or representations of databases for search and retrieval, and on the relative effectiveness of various information search techniques. these issues will continue to require research. as databases continue to increase in both size and complexity, effective ònavigationaló toolswill become more important to the user and more difficult to develop. evaluatingthe effectiveness of information systems is, in large measure, a human factors problem. to support the design of effective automated search andretrieval systems, or retrieval aids, progress is needed on quantifying thevalue of information as distinct from the amount of information retrieved.assessing the effectiveness of systems that are intended to facilitate browsing, as opposed to structured search, is another difficult, and unsolved,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7problem. related problems include the need for a better understanding ofhow to exploit the potential of computerbased information systems forpresenting data and information in innovative visual forms and of how touse the spatial metaphor to construct data worlds that can be explored effectively by moving around within them.emerging technologies in work designmany u.s. industries, especially in manufacturing, have found it increasingly difficult to remain competitive in the global marketplace. competing effectively in the future will depend on the ability of the country touse its material and human resources more efficiently, and especially on itsbeing able to adapt quickly to rapidly changing technology and marketconditions. this means, among other things, that firms must become sufficiently flexible to shift production quickly from one item to another andthat they must be able to produce items economically in relatively smallquantities. this in turn requires a different job design from that found onconventional twentiethcentury assembly lines. emerging technologiesñautomation, robotics, information technologiesñwill figure prominently inthe workplace changes that will occur.jobs have always changed over time as new technologies have beenintroduced in the workplace, but the rate of change has accelerated considerably in the recent past with the pervasive infusion of computerbased technologies. human factors researchers must devote more attention to the introduction and use of new technologies in the workplace. this need has becomeevident in such disparate problems as the physical difficulties (e.g., eyestrainand carpal tunnel syndrome) that are sometimes associated with the use ofinformation technology devices and the claims of some investigators thatthese technologies are not providing the expected increase in productivity.other challenges include reducing human error in the workplace, especiallyin information work in which errors that are difficult to identify can significantly affect the quality of work products; determining the skill requirementsof new hightechnology jobs and of ways to combine human and machinecapabilities effectively; and developing a better understanding of the increasing demand for people to play the role of supervisory controllers, and ofbackups in the case of failure, in highly automated systems. a special challenge is helping to ensure that the work climate, culture, and environment arehumane and fulfilling to the human beings who work within it.transportationthe goal of all forms of transportation systems is the expeditious movement of people and goods from place to place with a minimum risk to lifeemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchand property. these two objectivesñmaximizing speed and minimizingriskñmake up only one of several tradeoffs involved in the design andoperation of any transportation system. helping to resolve these tradeoffsis, in part, a human factors problem because these tradeoffs involve questions of (1) how well vehicles can be controlled in various situations givenhuman capabilities and limitations and (2) considerations of human attitudes and preferences with respect to comfort, convenience, and risk acceptance.considerable research has been done on driver and pilot performance,and many sources of driver/pilot error have been identified, some of whichhave affected vehicle and cockpit design. there are, however, many remaining needs and opportunities for human factors research, especially inview of the everincreasing technical complexity of vehicles and transportation systems. an example of a problem relating to driving safety that hasreceived some attention but that needs further research is the dependence ofdriving performance on dynamic visual acuity. to receive a license, driversare currently tested for static visual acuity, but there is evidence suggestingthat dynamic visual acuity, for which tests are not given, is a more effectivepredictor of accident probability. more work is needed on this importantquestion. we also need work leading to a better understanding of the rolesof alcohol and drug intoxication in driving and of the effects of driverattitudes toward risk. the introduction of increasingly sophisticated equipment in automobiles and airplane cockpits, as well as the automation orsemiautomation of more and more functions, raises many issues that humanfactors research should address.cognitive performance under stressstress manifests itself in modern life in a variety of ways, sometimestragically. some occupations are generally viewed as especially stressful,air traffic controllers being a case in point. here the reason for the stressñthe possibly tragic consequences of a significant errorñis obvious. jobscan also be stressful for much more subtle reasons; they may cause lowlevels of relatively continuous stress, a situation that can also have majorconsequences for workers. although much research has been done on theeffects of stress on cognition, the need for research on this topic is likely toincrease over the foreseeable future for several reasons, including threats tojob security from increasing competitive pressures in many industries, theneed to accommodate to increasingly rapid change in the workplace, thegreater cognitive demands of many jobs, and the application of new methods of electronic monitoring and surveillance.laboratory studies of stress have been limited by wellgrounded restrictions on exposing participants in experiments to genuinely threatening situemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9ations and the infeasibility of the longterm experimental studies that wouldbe required to study chronic stress. one priority for future research must bea search for feasible ethical solutions to the problem of these limitationsand for ways to study the influences of stressors that more closely approximate those that occur in realworld situations. possibilities that have beenused to some extent but that should be more fully and creatively exploitedinclude analyses of naturally occurring incidents and the use of simulations.virtual reality technology should extend the possibilities for simulating stressfulsituations with a high degree of realism without exposing people to physicalthreats; how best to exploit this technology for this purpose should be onegoal of research. other major goals of research should be to develop abetter understanding of how the more detrimental effects of stress can becounteracted, how to predict individual differences in reactions to stress,how to train people to cope with stressful situations, and how to makepersonmachine systems more resistant to the detrimental effects of stress.aiding intellectual workas computer technology has become widely available in the workplace,many software tools have been developed to help people perform intellectual tasks. efforts to develop additional and more powerful aids to intellectual work will undoubtedly continue for the foreseeable future. humanfactors research is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of such aids, toprovideñthrough task analysesña better understanding of what further aidswould be useful, and to participate in the design, implementation, and iterative improvement of such aids. past research has demonstrated that theintroduction of technological aids to intellectual work has not had the anticipated effects and has not always increased either productivity or peopleõssatisfaction with their jobs.evaluative studies are needed to provide the insights required to improve upon existing aids and to ensure that they accomplish what is intended. there is also a need to study the demands of intellectual work inspecific settings to identify how it could be aided by the development ofnew tools; any such studies should be done with a sensitivity to the fact thatnew tools often change the nature of a job by making it possible to dothings that could not be done before. human factors researchers can contribute to the design, implementation, and evaluation of new aids for intellectual work, especially by bringing to the process an iterative design philosophy and a focus on usersõ needs; these factors have proved to be importantin the development of systems whose ultimate characteristics are impossibleto specify in detail in advance. other challenges for human factors researchinclude (1) identifying nonobvious but important aspects of current ways ofperforming tasks (e.g., spatial arrangement of papers on a desk serving asexecutive summary9emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchreminders of task priorities) for which some substitution should be made inan electronic aid and (2) developing a better understanding of why peopleoften fail to use aids that could improve the performance of their jobs.conclusionthe needs and opportunities for research discussed in this report areconsidered by the committee on human factors to be among the moreimportant challenges to the human factors research community for the immediate future. the list is not exhaustive, nor was it intended to be, but thecommittee believes the items on it to be important without exception. thecommittee recognizes too that none of the problems discussed is the exclusive province of human factors research; most of them are broad in scopeand deserve attentionñespecially collaborative attentionñfrom many disciplines, human factors among them.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11part isummary reportemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13emerging needs and opportunities forhuman factors researchintroductionthis summary report identifies the areas that the committee on humanfactors believes represent new needs and opportunities for human factorsresearch during the next few decades. it is organized as follows: after abackground discussion, we describe the process by which the committeedetermined which topics to cover. each topic is then considered in turn,and the committeeõs consensus regarding needed research is presented.a set of papers addressing these topics appears as part ii of this volume. these papers were written by committee members, sometimes withassistance from colleagues, as part of the process of informing the committeeõsdiscussions of the topics addressed. the conclusions and recommendationsarticulated in this report draw heavily on these papers.backgroundthe national research council established the committee on humanfactors in 1980. the committeeõs original sponsors were the office ofnaval research, the air force office of scientific research, and the armyresearch institute. the national aeronautics and space administrationbecame a sponsor in 1981. the committeeõs charter was to identify basicresearch needs of the military services as they relate to human factors issuesand to make recommendations for basic research that would improve thefoundations of the discipline.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe committeeõs first report, research needs for human factors, published in 1983, focused on six topics: human decision making, elicitingexpert judgment, supervisory control systems, usercomputer interaction,population group differences, and applied methods. these topics were selected after committee discussions of research needs, tours of military laboratories, and solicitation of suggestions from the human factors communitythrough an article in the human factors society bulletin. topics wereselected because they were germane to the sponsorsõ interests, within theexpertise of the committee members to address, incompletely addressed byprevious or ongoing research, and important vis‹vis the committeeõs charter.since the publication of research needs for human factors, the committee has been responsible for numerous panels and workshops, many ofthem about problem areas discussed in that report. figure 1 gives a complete list of the reports produced by these panels and workshops.since the committeeõs establishment, its sponsorship has broadened con1994organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox1993workload transition: implications for individual and team performance1992human factors specialistsõ education and utilization: results of asurvey1990application principles for multicolored displays: a workshop reportquantitative modeling of human performance in complex, dynamicsystemsdistributed decision making: report of a workshophuman factors research needs for an aging population1989human performance models for computeraided engineeringfundamental issues in humancomputer interaction1988human factors research and nuclear safetyergonomic models of anthropometry, human biomechanics, andoperatorequipment interfaces: proceedings of a workshop1987human factors in automated and robotic space systems: proceedingsof a symposiummental models in humancomputer interaction: research issues aboutwhat the user of software knows1985human factors aspects of simulationmethods for designing software to fit human needs and capabilities:proceedings of the workshop on software human factors1984research needs on the interaction between information systems andtheir users: report of a workshopresearch issues in simulator sickness: proceedings of a workshop1983research and modeling of supervisory control behavior: report of aworkshopfigure 1 reports of the committee on human factors, 19831994.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report15siderably, and new sponsors have come from both military and civiliansectors. the committeeõs composition has also broadened to include notonly researchers who represent traditional human factors interests in equipment design and use but also some with more cognitive and social orientations.concurrently, technology has been advancing rapidly, and both the nation and the world have changed in significant and remarkable ways. someof these changes offer new challenges and opportunities for human factorsresearch.in view of these developments, the committee found it appropriate toagain address the general topic of research needs and opportunities forhuman factors. committee members agreed that the report should be:¥reflective of the committeeõs views and opinions, and also informedby inputs from several sources;¥forward looking: short on reviewing old and current work and longon identifying problems and opportunities for the future;¥problem/opportunityoriented: the subject matter being determinedmore by what the committee perceives the needs and opportunities to bethan by its understanding of what the existing research activities of thehuman factors community are; and¥selectively focusedñwith no attempt to be comprehensiveñon afew major topics that the committee believes to be among the more important problem/opportunity areas for the near future.committee members took the lead in writing the papers that constitutepart ii and that provide the material on which part i is based.topic selectionthe process of selecting topics for emphasis was lengthy and deliberative. the decision was made early to cast a wide net for ideas and opinionsand then, through committee discussion and debate, to attempt to reach aconsensus regarding a subset on which to focus. suggestions of majorresearch needs were solicited from current and former members of the committee, from committee sponsors, and from numerous other members of thehuman factors research community, including several human factors leadersin europe. the committee also reviewed the topics generated as candidatesfor inclusion in the original research needs report, the list of technicalgroups of the human factors and ergonomics society, the list of titles ofcommittee on human factors reports published or in process, and recentproject suggestions from sponsors. this yielded a long list of suggestedresearch topics.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchas the list grew, the committee discussed it at several meetings. at onesuch meeting, an analysis of responses to a written request for suggestionsfrom past and current committee members was presented and discussed. acomplete list of all suggestions from all sources was then distributed tocommittee members, and at a later meeting, the members engaged in astructured exercise designed (1) to permit every member to identify all thesuggestions he or she considered worthy of further consideration, (2) tofacilitate grouping the suggestions to eliminate redundancies and replacesimilar suggestions with a more general category, and (3) to prioritize theresulting list through a quasiformal, iterative voting procedure.at all of these meetings, the discussions were long and spirited. allmembers saw the goal of identifying human factors research needs andopportunities as very important. however, the task of selecting a few problems or problem areas for special attention was difficult because selectingsome areas for inclusion meant excluding others.the committeeõs deliberations eventually led to a consensus on thetopics that should be covered in its report. continuing discussion resultedin some minor changes in terminology in the interest of clarity and themerging of some topics because of content overlap. some of the selectedtopics are well within the mainstream of traditional human factors research;others are not. the committee intentionally took a relatively broad view ofhuman factors and did not exclude a problem area simply because it has nottraditionally been a major focus of the discipline. as it happens, the topicsare fairly easily grouped under three major headingsñnational or globalproblems, technology issues, and human performanceñas follows:national or global problems¥productivity in organizations¥training and education¥employment and disabilities¥health care¥environmental changetechnology issues¥communication technology and telenetworking¥information access and usability¥emerging technologies in work design¥transportationhuman performance¥cognitive performance under stress¥aiding intellectual worktwo topics the committee considers to be priority research areasñhuman performance modeling and human errorñare not covered in thisemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report17volume, because committee panels were established on both. a report onhuman performance modeling was recently published (baron et al., 1990)and one on human error management in highhazard systems is currently inpreparation. with these exceptions, the topics on which the committeefinally settled constitute the titles of sections of this summary report and ofthe papers that make up part ii.the committee believes that these areas are, without exception, veryimportant. however, failure of a topic to appear as a heading should not betaken as evidence that the committee considers the topic unimportant. thecommittee recognizes that many more human factors problems and problemareas are deserving of research than can be covered in a report of this sort.this report focuses on needs and opportunities for human factors research; however, the committee also wishes to note that one of the mostpressing needs at present, and probably during the near future, is to get theresults of human factors research applied to equipment, procedures, systems, and situations. it continues to be easy to find equipment and operating procedures being designed in ways that are inconsistent with welldocumented human factors research results. how to improve the disseminationof the results of human factors research, how to make this informationreadily available to users in a helpful form, and how to make potential usersaware of its existence, are continuing major challenges to human factorsresearchers and to everyone who recognizes the potential usefulness of theresults of human factors research.the reportintended audiencethis report is intended for people who identify research funding priorities and sponsor research programs and projects and for those who performhuman factors research. people responsible for identifying research funding priorities and sponsoring research efforts will find here the collectiveopinions of the committee on how needs and opportunities for human factors research relate to several problems of major national concern. researchers will find specific questions that the committee believes constitutechallenges to research that could contribute significantly to the solution oramelioration of these problems.contentsin keeping with the committeeõs decision to be forwardlooking, littleeffort was made to review research extensively in problem areas that are oremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhave been major foci. a very modest amount of reviewing is done in thissummary report and somewhat more in part ii, but, in both cases, only tohelp provide an appropriate frame of reference for thinking about futureneeds.some of the committeeõs recommendations are relatively general; others, quite specific. some follow traditional lines of research; others relateto problems that have not received much attention from the human factorscommunity in the past. in the latter cases, the recommendations are offeredprimarily as points of departure for further discussion and planning ratherthan as items for a research agenda. the justification for including them isthe perceived seriousness, from either a national or a global perspective, ofthe problem areas involved.the opinions expressed in part ii are those of the authors of the papers,but their shaping has been strongly influenced by inputs from other members of the committee on human factors and the other sources of ideasmentioned above. the recommendations that appear in this summary reportare made by the committee as a whole.organizationthe remainder of this summary report is organized by topic. a sectionis devoted to each of the topics selected by the committee for emphasis. ineach case, the section describes the problem, briefly discusses representative previous work that relates to the problem, and gives a set of recommendations for research.productivity in organizationsthe problemproductivity is a major national and international concern. economistssee productivity as a primary determinant of competitiveness both amongcompanies within an industry and among national economies. because it isalso believed to be causally linked to standard of living, increasing productivity globally is seen to be the best hope of improving living conditionsworldwide.although the united states is the most productive country in the world,its annual rate of increase in productivity has been considerably smallerthan that of several other industrialized countries during the last few decades (bureau of labor statistics, 1988a, 1988b). as a consequence, ournational competitiveness has decreased significantly in the automobile, steel,shipbuilding, and textile industries and appears to be slipping in electronics,computers, robotics, and biotechnology as well. the u.s. share of the totalemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report19world economy decreased from 35 percent in 1965 to 28 percent in 1985(johnston and packer, 1987).this trend can be attributed to many factors, such as the diffusion oftechnology, the globalization of work, and the development of new workprocesses and new work structures throughout the world. many economists, however, are concerned that productivity in the united states is notwhat it should be and that the nationõs competitiveness will continue todecline if ways are not found to accelerate the rate of productivity increase.human factors researchers have given considerable attention to the questionof how to improve human performance in the workplace and thereby increase individual productivity. yet they have made relatively little effort todetermine how individual productivity relates to the productivity of thegroups, organizations, or industries within which the individualsõ work isdone. our focus is on organizational productivity and how the humanfactors community can contribute to improving it.the prevailing assumption appears to be that increases in individualproductivity automatically translate into increases in productivity at higherlevels of organization, but this assumption gets little support from research.there is little evidence that increases in productivity at one level, say thelevel of the individual worker, automatically translate into increases in productivity at a higher level, say that of a work team, a corporation, or anindustry. similarly, there is very little theory or research that helps usunderstand how observed changes in organizational productivity relate tochanges at the individual or group level.the challenge is to better understand organizational productivity. wewant human factors researchers to think about their work in terms of improvement in organizational productivity.previous researchmost of the research on productivity has dealt with productivity at aparticular levelñindividual, group, corporation. the research that has beendone by applied psychologists and human factors specialists has dealt primarily with the individual. training has been identified as an importantdeterminant of individual productivity (guzzo, 1988), along with goal setting (locke and latham, 1990) and the details of the design of specifictasks (guzzo, 1988).at the level of work teams or small groups, selfmanagement has received some attention as a determinant of productivity (goodman et al.,1988; hackman, 1990). several studies of larger systems have focused onthe effects of the introduction of automation technologies in the workplaceand, interestingly, have not found that greater automation invariably meanshigher productivity at the system level. in particular, technological changeemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchoften has had little or no positive effect on system productivity unless appropriate organizational change has accompanied it (goodman, 1979; macduffieand krafcik, 1990).although the previous research has provided some knowledge of thedeterminants of productivity at specific levels of organization, very little ofit has been directed at determining how improvements at one level do or donot effect changes at higher levels of operation. in particular, we knowsomething about how to increase the productivity of individuals, but we areunable to specify the conditions under which improvements at this levelwill translate into improvements in the productivity of an organization as awhole.research opportunitiesworkplace interventions that appear to have the potential to increaseproductivity not only at the level of the individual worker but also at that ofthe organization as a whole are sometimes not implemented successfully(goodman and griffith, 1991). there is a need for better understanding ofthe implementation process and, in particular, of how to ensure that innovations that would increase individual and organization productivity will beadopted and used.one opportunity for research is the exploration of how changes in organizations or in technology are related to improved productivity. billions ofdollars have been spent on new forms of technological and organizationalchange, many of which have clear or inherent benefits. there is, however,growing research evidence that many innovations are not successfully implemented or are implemented on a temporary basis. as a result, the objectivebenefits of the proposed technological and organizational changes are canceled out. if we cannot successfully implement improvements at the individual, group, or organizational level, we cannot expect to see productivitychanges at the organizational level.the challenge, then, is to find new research approaches to successfulimplementation and institutionalization. much of the work over the pastdecade is on how different variables (e.g., top management support) facilitate the change process. this work suggests that new developments willcome from identifying the critical processes that drive the implementation.furthermore, a change in methodology is requiredñfor example, there arevery few multivariate and/or longitudinal studies capturing the implementation of new technologies or organizational intervention.another opportunity for research is the linkage between individual andorganizational productivity. focusing on single levels of analysis (e.g.,individual, group) will not increase our understanding of organizationalproductivity. we assume that successful implementations create productivemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report21ity increases at the individual level and that these changes will eventuallyappear at the organizational level. this assumption is incorrectñchanges atone level may have no effect on other levels of analysis. there is neithergood theory nor research about this linkage issue.the challenge for the human factor researcher is first to acknowledgeand understand the issues associated with these linkages. what are thefactors that prevent productivity changes at the individual level from increasing productivity at the individual level? what are some of the enablers?concepts such as organizational slack and different forms of organizationalinterdependence are starting points of our analysis. increasing productivityon some jobs can simply create slack time that does not translate into increased organizational interdependence. the degree and form of interdependence between jobs and between organizational units may to a largedegree determine whether changes in one unit will lead to positive, negative, or no changes in other units. horizontal and vertical linkages arecritical in determining whether changes in productivity at one level gettranslated to another level.a third research opportunity is the congruency among technology, people,and organizational factors. it seems inevitable that organizational productivity must depend, in part, on the ways these factors interrelate. theempirical evidence supports the view that focusing solely on one factor(e.g., productivity) will not increase organizational productivity; rather it isthe simultaneous restructuring of organizational, technological, and peoplefactors that is key to increases in organizational productivity.although we know that congruency among these three factors is important, much of our research evidence is after the fact. we do not have anyex ante models about how combinations of organizational, technological,and people factors lead to increased organizational productivity. this is animportant issue because the workplace is changing rapidly. all indicationsare that rapid change in technology, organizations, and characteristics of theworkforce will continue. the opportunity for human factors researchers isto provide new insights into how combinations of changes in technology,organization, and people factors contribute to organizational productivity.a fourth opportunity for research concerns internal and external integration. new innovations in design processes and linking production processes in manufacturing and retail/distribution organizations signal the importance of internal integrations. at the same time, there have been dramaticchanges in relationships with suppliers and customers. òarmõslengthó transactions are a thing of the past. boundaries between customers, suppliers,and the focal organization have become very permeable.although these forms of integration are initiated with the expectationsof improving organizational productivity, little research is available. consider the following: in our analysis of organizational productivity, we genemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researcherally focus on linkages among levels (e.g., individual and group) withinthe organization. but let us assume that greater levels of integration between the organization and its customer increase productivity for the customer. the interesting question is: how do changes in productivity for thecustomer feed back and affect productivity of the focal organization?training and educationthe problemthe critical importance of worker training to the national economy andto the general wellbeing of the nation is widely recognized. it is alsorecognized that the educational level of prospective trainees strongly influences the efficiency and effectiveness of training. unfortunately, neitherour education nor our training systems, as currently structured, appear to bemeeting the countryõs needs. a key symptom of the problem is the growingnumber of programs in which employers attempt to provide remedial education for incoming employees as a way to build a base upon which specific,joboriented training can proceed.the seriousness of the education and training problem has been documented by numerous published studies, including the widely cited a nationat risk (national commission on excellence in education, 1983) and subsequent reports by the hudson institute (johnston and packer, 1987), thewilliam t. grant foundation (1988), the commission on workforce quality and labor market efficiency (1989), the commission on the skills ofthe american workforce (1990), the office of technology assessment (1990),and the national council on education standards and testing (1992).the problem could become worse in the future because the workforcewill need to be even more proficientñespecially more versatile and adaptiveñthan it is now. this expectation is rooted in the rapidity of technological change and the increasingly tight interconnectedness of the economies of the world into a single global ensemble. technological changemeans changes in job requirements. the ability to satisfy changing, and notentirely predictable, job requirements in a complex, culturally diverse, andconstantly evolving environment will require a literate workforce that hasgood problemsolving and learning skills. the challenge to education andtraining will be amplified by expected changes in the demographics of theworkforce. in the aggregate, these changes mean that an increasing percentage of the labor needs will be met by nontraditional sources; in somecases, special training will be required to tap these sources effectively.furthermore, because advances in technology tend not only to create newjobs but also to increase the speed with which many existing jobs becomeobsolete, the need for worker retraining will become increasingly common.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report23previous researcha great deal of research on education and training has been done bypsychologists and educational researchers. inasmuch as our focus is primarily on postsecondary and workbased education and training, it suffices tomention here the following publications that, taken together, provide extensive coverage of research on the design, delivery, and evaluation of trainingmethods and systems: druckman and bjork (1991), druckman and swets(1988), goldstein (1988, 1992), wexley (1984), latham (1988), and tannenbaumand yukl (1991).unfortunately, many of the basic research findings on learning and skilldevelopment do not cross the boundary between the laboratory and theworkplace. as a discipline that historically bridges psychology and engineering, human factors should be able to help transfer what has been discovered in the laboratory to the design of education and training systems.how best to do this is itself a question that will require intensive study.training and human factors are sometimes characterized as complementary ways of getting humanmachine systems to function smoothly, theidea being that the objective of human factors research should be to determine how to design systems so that little, if any, training is required for thesystem to function effectively. here we take the broader view that humanfactors encompasses whatever enhances the performance of humanmachinesystems, including training. however, even within the traditional, narrowercharacterization of human factors, many questions arise regarding the design and evaluation of training materials, methods, and systems. the research challenges that are identified in the following section arise from bothmodes of characterizing the field.research needs and opportunitiestraining systems tend to be complex both functionally and structurally;they have to work under numerous constraints to achieve multiple objectives. many variables are involved in the operation of such systems. understanding the interactions among these variables requires using a systemsanalytic approach that human factors researchers have effectively applied tothe study of many other kinds of complex systems. the challenge is toapply such methods to the study of training when outcome requirementsarise from interactions among changing technologies, changing workforcedemographics, and changing organizational structures.technology has the potential to change the methods of education andtraining drastically. computer and communication technologies, in particular, provide the possibility of new approaches involving interactive graphics, process simulation, individualized adaptive training, embedded trainemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researching, and a host of other innovations. each of these methods, however, isvaluable only to the extent that it contributes to accomplishing the teaching/learning objectives of the training system into which it has been incorporated. there is a need for evaluations of technologically innovative approaches to education and training that reveal not only how effective theapproaches are but also how they might be improved. human factors researchers can perform evaluations of the type required.an example of a type of evaluation that is much needed is a study todetermine how much (and what type of) physical fidelity is required in asystem simulation generated by virtual reality. inasmuch as small increasesin physical fidelity can mean large increases in costs, it is important toknow how much fidelity is enough in specific cases.the human factors community has promoted usercentered designñdesigning systems to match the capabilities and limitations of their intendedusersñand has widely applied it to the design of many kinds of systems,especially, but not exclusively, in military contexts. usercentered designprinciples that have proved to be effective should be applied to the designof education and training systems as well. the challenge is to devise,evaluate, and perfect ways to transfer the methods, data, and principles ofhumancentered design to the development of training systems and to ensure that feedback from applications closes the loop between research andpractice.technology has had two particularly striking effects on jobs during thelast few decades: (1) a decrease in the manual component of many jobsaccompanied by an increase in the cognitive component and (2) acceleration of the pace of change in the workplace. the probability that thesetrends will continue establishes a need for a greater research focus on howindividuals and organizations can best learn to adapt to rapid changes inwork procedures and organizational structures while continuing to be engaged in production processes. there is need for the development of theory,tools, and techniques that will support lifelong learning in many occupations.because of the increasing rapidity with which jobs and the skill requirements of jobs for them are changing, it is also becoming increasingly important to have effective methods for anticipating future job requirementsso that education and training programs can be designed to provide workerswith the requisite skills in a timely way. formal procedures used by humanfactors researchers to identify or analyze the skills, knowledge, and abilitiesthat are requisite to the adequate performance of specific tasks should beuseful in establishing education and training goals, but there is also a needfor the development of more effective methods of identifying cognitive, asopposed to psychomotor, task demands.despite the widely acknowledged imperfection of current education andtraining systems and programs and the considerable amount of money andemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report25effort that continues to be spent on developing them, the technology forevaluating their effectiveness is still primitive and not very sensitive. amajor practical need is for significant improvement in the means for performance assessment. human factors researchers have experience in evaluating the effectiveness of complex systems of many types and thus should bein a position to help meet this need.employment and disabilitiesthe problemthe population of people with one or another type of physical or cognitive disability is very large. according to the u.s. census bureau, there areabout 75 million people with some sort of disability in the united states,about 30 percent of the entire population (bureau of the census, 1987,1989). not all of these disabilities are sufficiently severe to interfere withwork or other activities, but, if we count only those that are, the number isstill large, probably as many as 30 million in the united states (elkind,1990).the rate of unemployment among people with disabilities who wouldlike to work is several times higher than the unemployment average nationwide (kraus and stoddard, 1989). and the percentage of people who livebelow the poverty line is between two and three times greater for peoplewith a disability that interferes with their ability to work than for the totalworking population (vachon, 1990).failure to find more effective ways to make employment available topeople with disabilities is costly to the national economy in two ways. thecost of maintenance support programs is approximately $100 billion peryear and is increasing rapidly (vanderheiden, 1990), and the cost of thecountryõs lost opportunity to utilize the knowledge and skills of people withdisabilities, although difficult to quantify, is surely also great.previous researchmost of the previous research that directly relates to enhancing employment opportunities for people with disabilities has aimed at finding ways touse technology to mitigate the limiting effects of disabilities. the objectivein many cases was the development of a device of some sort to help peoplecompensate for the loss of sight, hearing, mobility, or other specific functions.for at least two reasons, much of this work has focused on computerand communication technologies. first, the versatility of the computer provides opportunities for creative approaches to the augmentation of abilitiesemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthat have been diminished by physical or cognitive disorders, disease, oraccident; this has been amply demonstrated by the innovative ways thatpeople with disabilities have adapted these technologies for their own use(bowe, 1984). second, because more than half the workforce is now engaged in informationoriented jobs (strassman, 1985) and the percentage isexpected to increase in the future (kraut, 1987), it is also natural to look tocomputer and communication technologies as a source of job opportunitiesfor people with disabilities.some emphasis on computer and communication technologies to enhance work opportunities for people with disabilities in the future is warranted and for the same reasons. we believe that these technologies offergreat, and largely unrealized, potential to help remove barriers that havekept people with disabilities from jobs. we also believe that many, if notmost, of the new job opportunities that could be readily made available topeople with disabilities are likely to be in areas that make heavy use ofthese technologies.unfortunately, most of the research on how the requirements of specificjobs relate to the capabilities and limitations of prospective jobholders hasexcluded people with disabilities from consideration. data have almostinvariably been collected only on ablebodied people; people with disabilities are not even statistically represented in the results. as a consequence,little is known of how the capabilities and limitations of people with specific disabilities compare with the requirements of specific jobs. a requirement in this context is something that is essential to getting a job done; jobrequirements are to be distinguished from the architectural, social, and otherbarriers that hinder a person from getting to a job location or situation butare not essential aspects of the job itself.research needs and opportunitiesmost disabilities are impediments only to certain activities, and typically many fewer activities are affected than are not. specifically, anygiven type of disability usually impedes only some of the activities requiredby some jobs, and often even those impediments can be removed or overcome by restructuring the job or using assistive technology. a major needis for a much better understanding of precisely how the capabilities andlimitations associated with specific disabilities relate to the functional requirements of specific jobs. this need suggests the following two objectives:(1)development of a database of information on the performance capabilities of people with the more prevalent types of disabilities, with a viewemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report27to incorporating such information in design references, design texts, and inhuman performance models, thereby enhancing the ability to design forpeople with disabilities; and(2)systematic analysis of the skill requirements of jobs, especially jobsin the information sector, to match requirements with the performance capabilities of people with disabilities. a clear distinction should be madebetween essential job functions and nonessential aspects of job situationsthat may have evolved as conveniences to ablebodied individuals who typically perform them.some jobs cannot be done by people with certain types of disabilities inthe same way in which they are standardly performed by ablebodied people.it is important to know whether those jobs could be performed just aseffectively in alternative ways that would be manageable by people withdisabilities. a useful first step would be an extensive study of previousefforts to redesign jobs to accommodate people with specific disabilities;such a study should identify differences between efforts that have workedand those that have not.as was noted already, the development of devices to assist people withdisabilities in overcoming specific functional limitations has received considerable attention, especially from scientists and engineers who may bekeenly aware of the kind of assistance that is needed because they aredisabled in some way or because someone close to them is. human factorsresearchers have been somewhat involved in these efforts, but this has notbeen a major focus of the discipline as a whole. the discipline has much tocontribute to this design challenge and much to learn from involvement inthis type of work.unfortunately, knowledge of much of what has been done to applytechnology to benefit people with disabilities is not readily accessible, because the work was not all done by people who are members of the sameprofessional community for which the channels of communication are wellestablished and known. much of the information exists in relatively inaccessible documents as opposed to mainstream technical journals. it can bevery hard to obtain detailed information on a particular assistive device ortype of deviceñor even to discover whether a device to serve a specifiedpurpose exists. a very useful objective would be to develop a set of computerbased information resources on assistive devices, training programs,job opportunities, and job requirements for people with disabilities. suchresources could also serve the research community, making information onpast and ongoing research much more readily accessible than it currently is.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhealth carethe problemhealth risks stem from many sources. prominent among them are behavioral and occupational factors. cancer and heart disease, for example,are often attributable to smoking, diet, or other lifestyle variables (newelland vogel, 1988; williams, 1991). longterm occupational exposure toradiation or toxic substances is known to be a significant cause of certaintypes of illness, as is chronic jobrelated stress (levi, 1990; smith, 1987;swanson, 1988).paradoxically, significant threats to health are to be found even withinthe technology for the delivery of health care. many of these threats arisefrom the possibility of human error in using health care equipment andcarrying out health care procedures. such errors can have tragic consequences. for example, bogner (1991) has cited the substantial number ofpotentially preventable incidents in which anesthesia has resulted in braindamage or death.much of the equipment in modern hospitals and trauma centers is complex, and even highly trained people can inadvertently use it incorrectlywith injurious effects. in addition, more and more commonly, people without medical training are using complicated equipment, including ventilators, infusion pumps, and kidney dialysis machines, in their homes; thesedevices can extend and enhance the quality of life when used correctly, butthey can cause irreparable harm when used erroneously.injurious errors can also occur in the administration of drugs, either byadministration of the wrong substances or incorrect doses of the right ones.this problem too is compounded by the fact that patients are often responsible for their own drug regimens and are sometimes confused as a consequence of the effects of illness or age. an important challenge to researchis developing ways to reduce the incidence of human error in the delivery ofhealth care; this issue is likely to grow in importance as the technology thatis available for health care delivery becomes ever more complex.previous researchalthough there have been attempts to call attention to the many challenges that medicine and health care delivery provide for human factorsresearchers (e.g., pickett and triggs, 1974), health care has not traditionallybeen a major focus of human factors research.the human factors community has done considerable research both todetermine the causes of human error in a variety of situations in whichpeople interact with machines and to identify ways to decrease the probabilemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report29ity of such errors or reduce harm when they do occur (reason, 1990; senders and moray, 1991). relatively little of this work has been done inmedical or health care contexts.innovative work has been done on evaluating the relative effectivenessof medical imaging devices (swets et al., 1979; swets, 1988) and on humanfactors aspects of the design of imaging workstations (oõmalley and ricca,1990). some human factors evaluations have been done of glucose measuring devices of the type used by people with diabetes (kelly et al., 1990;mcdonald, 1984; moss and delawter, 1986). such studies have revealed anumber of problems with the use of even these devices, which are relativelysimple compared with many that are likely to become common for homeuse in coming years.research needs and opportunitiesaccident prevention and wellness maintenance are important aspects ofhealth care. as the population continues to age and as more and moreelderly and very elderly people are able to live independently, an importantobjective of human factors research will be to determine how to designliving environments that limit the risk of accidents without sacrificing thefunctionality that residents need or want. an aspect of this challenge thatdeserves increasing attention is designing living spaces for the elderly thatcan accommodate the types of health care devices that are more and morecommonly utilized in the home.research in several other areas would also enhance the opportunities ofpeople to live relatively independently, despite various types of sensory,psychomotor, or cognitive limitations. these include developing and evaluating memory aids to help people take medicines in proper dosages onschedule; improving the interpretability of labels, warnings, and instructions on medicines and on health care devices that are intended to be usedby nonprofessionals in the home; and developing and evaluating practicalapproaches to training in the use of such devices.important questions for research are how to convey to nonspecialistsaccurate and understandable representations of (1) the health risks (or benefits) associated with specific behaviors and (2) the prospects for the various possible outcomes from specific types of treatments of their medicalproblems. more generally, the challenge is to find effective ways both toconvey the information that people need in order to make truly informeddecisions about their health care and to ensure that the information conveyed has been understood.the need for group programs to increase positive health practices offersan opportunity for human factors involvement in healthrelated work. programs to reduce smoking, decrease fat intake and increase fiber, reduceemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchrecreational sun exposure, and induce participation in screening programsfor such diseases as breast and colon cancer should have beneficial results.human factors, broadly defined, could help both in designing such programs and in evaluating their effectiveness.the designs of medical devices need to be evaluated for usability andsafety, just as do the designs of other devices. such evaluations are especially important for medical devices because a patientõs wellbeing oftendepends on the deviceõs being used effectively.information systemsñmedical databases, diagnostic and decision aids,expert systems, and computerbased advisersñare becoming increasinglyavailable for medical practitioners of all types. these tools differ greatly inhow well they meet adequate design standards from a human factors pointof view, and the amount of use they get varies greatly among potentialusers. inclusion of the design features that have traditionally been considered essential to usability for a computerbased device or system appearsnot to be sufficient to ensure acceptance or use by health care providers.research is needed to learn why potentially helpful computerbased systemsare or are not used.among the many spectacular developments in medical technology during the recent past is the wealth of new imaging techniques (e.g., computedaxial tomography, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance imaging) that permit noninvasive visual exploration of the bodyõs internalorgans and structures. in part because these techniques are very expensive,it is important to understand exactly what advantages they offer and howuseful they are for diagnosis, compared with one another and with moretraditional diagnostic techniques. the appropriate costbenefit comparisonsrequire the use of psychophysical and statistical approaches of the type thathave been widely used by human factors researchers and applied psychologists on similar comparison problems and on this problem as well (swets etal., 1979; swets, 1988).another challenge to the human factors community is helping find waysto reduce the frequency and severity of the injuries suffered by health careprofessionals in the performance of their jobs. back injury, for example,appears to be an occupational hazard for nurses and nursing aides, whofrequently put unsafe levels of stress on the spine in performing their work(gagnon et al., 1986; stubbs et al., 1983). both training and the development of more effective devices to assist in lifting tasks could help remediatethis problem.human factors, especially that part of the field that focuses on biomechanics, has much to offer not only in preventing the chronic pain anddisabling injuries that can result from inappropriate physical stresses inwork situations, but also in rehabilitating people after an injury and preemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report31venting its recurrence (khalil et al., 1990; rosomoff et al., 1981). developing better biomechanical models could be an important part of this effort.environmental changethe problemalthough the problems of harmful environmental change are not usually associated with human factors research, the topic is included in thisreport because the committee considers it a serious national and international problem and believes that human factors research could contribute toa better understanding of, and perhaps solutions to, aspects of it.concern about the threat that certain changes in the environment posefor the future has been growing among scientists, policy makers, and thepublic. aspects of this threat include the possible impact on the worldõsclimate of an increasing concentration of carbon dioxide and other ògreenhouse gasesó in the atmosphere (houghton and woodwell, 1989; nationalresearch council, 1983); the acidification of precipitation and its effects onlakes and streams, forests, and materials (baker et al., 1991; mohnen, 1988;schwartz, 1989); air pollution and urban smog (gray and alson, 1989;national research council, 1991; office of technology assessment, 1988);thinning of ozone in the stratosphere (stolarski, 1988; stolarski et al., 1992);contamination and depletion of fresh water supplies (la riviere, 1989; national research council, 1977; postel, 1985); depletion of the worldõs forests (myers, 1989; repetto, 1990) and wetlands (steinhart, 1990; wallace,1985); and an accompanying decrease in biodiversity (soule, 1991; wilson,1989) and worldwide loss of arable land (crossen and rosenberg, 1989;national research council, 1990; schlesinger et al., 1990).human activities are believed to be among the major causes of thesethreats. the burning of fossil fuels contributes to the atmospheric accumulation of greenhouse gases, air pollution, and the production of acid rain.the use of chlorofluorocarbons as coolants and aerosols is believed to be acause of the thinning of stratospheric ozone. water contamination resultsfrom runoff from agricultural use of fertilizers and pesticides, from improper disposal of toxic wastes, and from salt used for roadway deicing.the list of ways in which human activities affect the environment is easilyextended (stern et al., 1992).because these activities are aimed at satisfying human needs and desires, it is reasonable to assume that they will increase as world populationgrows. many of these activities have been much more common in theindustrialized world than in underdeveloped countries, because they areassociated with industrialization and the products of technology. theseactivities are expected to grow even more rapidly as countries in many ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe underdeveloped regions of the world try to accelerate their rate of technological development.previous researchpsychologists have done much research on how to get people to modifyenvironmentally harmful behavior to make it more environmentally benign(holahan, 1986; russell and ward, 1982; saegert and winkel, 1990; stern,1992). this work includes studies of the use of incentives, rewards, education and information campaigns, persuasion, and other techniques to motivate people to conserve energy or water, participate in recycling programs,generate less waste and decrease littering, and make other changes in theirbehavior that would be desirable for environmental preservation (baum andsinger, 1981; coach et al., 1979; cone and hayes, 1980; geller, 1986;geller et al., 1982).these studies have demonstrated that the desired types of behaviorchange can be effected through the techniques that have been used. unfortunately, studies that have checked for the persistence of the new behaviormuch beyond the end of the intervention period have generally not reportedpositive results (geller et al., 1982).a complementary approach is to try to change technology so as tomaintain its effectiveness in meeting human needs while decreasing theopportunities it affords for harming the environment. except for workaimed at identifying causes of industrial accidents, which often have substantial environmental impact (reason, 1990; senders and moray, 1991),this approach has not received much attention from researchers. it is, however, one the human factors community should be well suited to take. webelieve there is a need both for continuation of research on ways to motivate people to behave in environmentally benign ways and for much greaterattention to the possibility of shaping technology so that the natural consequences of its use will be less environmentally damaging.research needs and opportunitiesinasmuch as many of the most significant threats to the environmentare direct consequences of the production and use of energy, highpriorityobjectives must include improving the efficiency of energy use and substituting forms of energy that are not harmful to the environment for those thatare. demands for energy can be decreased whenever goals traditionallyserved by transporting people and material can be served equally well bytransmitting information. computer and telecommunications technologieshave the potential, through such media as electronic mail, teleconferencing,and computersupported cooperative work facilities, to reduce the need foremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report33travel for certain purposes considerably. the extent to which the potentialof these technologies is realized in this regard will depend on their acceptability to industry and potential users. a challenge to human factors researchers is to help ensure that such facilities are well designed from theusersõ point of view; there is, however, also a need for research that willlead to a better understanding of what factors, in addition to interface design, make these systems more acceptable to potential users and of how tofacilitate the transition to their use.making mass public transportation more attractive, so that it is moreoften used as an alternative to private automobiles in urban areas, is also inthe interest of environmental protection because it will reduce the energyexpenditure per passenger mile traveled. this could also help reduce noisepollution, traffic congestion, traffic accidents, and other problems that attend excessive traffic in urban areas. greater use of carpooling could havesimilar beneficial effects.paper and paper products account for about onethird of all the solidwaste produced in the united states. much of the paper that becomes awaste disposal problem is used to store and distribute information via newspapers, magazines, books, and other print media. the technology to storeand distribute much of the information electronically exists and is rapidlybecoming available to the public. a challenge to research is to determinehow to design the display and input devices that provide people with accessto electronic information so that they are acceptable, if not preferred, substitutes for paper.òvirtual realityó technologyñwhich has been receiving a lot of attention in the press recently, in part because of its potential use in entertainment and educationñcould have implications for environmental issues. forexample, to the extent that virtual systems can be effectively substituted forthe sometimes material and energyheavy systems that have been requiredin the past for training purposes, the environment should benefit. determining how real a virtual reality must be to be effective for specific trainingpurposes is largely a human factors question.a variety of other challenges for human factors research relate to theproblems of waste reduction and waste management. one need is for thedevelopment of design criteria for consumer goods that includeñin addition to functionality, usability, and user safetyñsuch considerations as longevity, maintainability, and recyclability or disposability. another is forimprovement, from a human factors perspective, of recycling and wastemanagement. the handling of radioactive and toxic wastes poses someespecially difficult problems that human factors researchers should be ableto help solve.other human factors challenges that would help the environment include making the information in environmental databases more accessibleemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchto users and potential users who would use that information for research on,and the monitoring and predicting of, environmental change; continued studyof the problems of risk assessment, management, and communication; andcontinued emphasis on designing industrial systems to reduce the probability of human error, especially when it can significantly harm the environment.the problems of environmental change has not received a lot of attention from the human factors research community in the past, and there hasbeen relatively little debate or discussion about what the community has tooffer toward solutions in this area. we believe that human factors researchcould have an impact on various aspects of these problems. the suggestions made here are but a few of the possibilities; they are offered in thehope of stimulating more thought and discussion by which others would beidentified.communication technology and telenetworkingthe problemsince the experimental establishment of the first networks linking computers from different geographical locations in the mid1960s, network technologyhas advanced very rapidly. the arpanet, which became the largest operational network in the world and remained so for many years, was startedas a fournode system by the advanced research projects agency of theu.s. department of defense in 1969 (heart, 1975; heart et al., 1978).according to a recent science report, its successor, the internet, now connects about 1.7 million host computers and between 5 and 15 million users,and the numbers are doubling annually (pool, 1993). it now appears thatthis technology will continue to advance rapidly and that its applicationswill become increasingly pervasive over the foreseeable future.the establishment and proliferation of computer networks have beenaccompanied byñindeed made possible byñan everincreasing blurring ofthe distinction between computer and communication technologies. forinstance, computing resources are heavily used in the operation of communication networks, and the capabilities and services to which these networksprovide access include electronic mail and bulletin boards, computermediated teleconferencing, and information utilities of many types.networks are almost certain to continue to increase in number, in complexity, and in the rate at which they can move information from place toplace. if their bandwidth, or carrying capacity, continues to increase atanything like its recent rate, the transmission of enormous amounts of data(including digital voice and highquality video) from almost anywhere toalmost anywhere will be possible at relatively low cost. concurrently withemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report35advances in the technology, the uses to which it is being put are multiplyingas well.the evolving macrosystem of interlinked networks can be thought of asone enormous global nexus that has the potential to increase by many ordersof magnitude the extent to which individuals and information resources allover the world are interconnected and therefore accessible to each other.such capabilities should give people unprecedented access to both information (in libraries, museums, news databases, and other repositories) andpeople. they have the potential to greatly facilitate not only the distribution and exchange of information in the conventional sense, but also longdistance collaboration involving a realtime sharing of workspaces, tools,and resources (national research council, 1993; wulf, 1993).previous researcha great deal of human factors research has focused on certain aspectsof computer and communication technology and especially how the interfaces through which people use this technology for various purposes shouldbe designed. indeed the general area of humancomputer interaction hasperhaps been the fastestgrowing area of research done by human factorsresearchers and others in closely allied fields over the last few decades.this work has been reported in several journals that focus on the subject,most of which have come into existence during the last 20 years.much less work has focused more directly on the human factors oftelecommunications and the resources that are accessible through telecommunications systems. teleconferencing (carlisle, 1975; kerr and hiltz,1982) was perhaps the first service provided by telecommunications networks that received some human factors research attention. more recently,cooperative work supported by telecommunication systems has been thefocus of some research (special 1992 issues of humancomputer interaction and interacting with computers), as have electronic mail and electronicbulletin boards (sproull and kiesler, 1991).computerbased communication should become a high priority for human factors research for many reasons, not the least of which is the expectation that eventually nearly everyone is likely to be a user of this technology. a growing percentage of the workforce will find it essential in theperformance of their jobs; many people will use it for personal reasonsñinformation acquisition and exchange, personal business transactions, entertainment, interpersonal communication. the user community will be asdiverse as the general population, and the range of uses will be great. asthis technology continues to evolve, challenges to human factors researchthat we cannot now anticipate are bound to emerge; here we mention only afew that are already apparent.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchresearch needs and opportunitieshumancomputer interaction, the focus of much research in the past,deserves continued attention from human factors researchers. issues ofinterface design, information finding and utilization, personal informationmanagement, and usersõ comprehension of the systems with which theyinteract continue to be important research challenges. most terminals todaydepend primarily on twodimensional visual displays and on typewriterlikekeyboards, typically complemented with a pointing and drawing instrumentsuch as a mouse or trackball. speech will become an increasingly feasibleoption for both input and output (makhoul et al., 1990; weischedel et al.,1990), as will threedimensional, òvirtualrealityó representations of objectsone can òwalk aroundó and environments with which users can interact(durlach and mavor, 1995). refining these and other innovative inputoutput techniques requires that a variety of human factors issues be addressed.realization of the potential benefits of computer networks requires thedevelopment of a variety of tools that facilitate interaction with complexdatabases by both specialists and the public. tools are also needed to helppeople apply information technology effectively to manage their personaldata stores and to cope with the information overload that a greatly increased connectivity to information resources and to people can create.with computerbased systems playing increasingly important roles inpeopleõs lives, there is a need to learn more about peopleõs attitudes andbeliefs about these systems. we also need to understand how to increasethe likelihood that peopleõs conceptualizations of what computerbased systems can do and how they do it are reasonably accurateñor at least notinaccurate in counterproductive ways.many important challenges to human factors research arise becausecomputerbased communication technology has the potential to greatly increase the ways in which people can communicate with each other. moreand more people are using electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, electronic forums and discussion groups, and computerbased teleconferencingfacilities, but these provide only a hint of what is likely to be possible in thenotdistant future. much human factors research needs to be done on thedesign and utilization of such facilities to ensure that they develop in directions consistent with the needs and preferences of their prospective usersand in ways that really enhance and enrich interpersonal communication.questions involve how interpersonal communication through computerbasedsystems compares, favorably or unfavorably, with communication throughmore traditional media and how the emerging media might be shaped so asto increase the opportunities for interpersonal communication as well as toenhance the quality of the communication that occurs.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report37communication technology and telenetworking should have importantimplications for the problem of increasing the employment of people withdisabilities. this technology should be able to greatly increase the accessof people with mobility problems to many resources that once were available only to people who could travel to them. the full realization of thispotential will require that questions of a human factors nature be addressedregarding how best to design the interfaces and operating procedures thatwill ensure the usability of the technology by people with various types ofdisabilities.even though the use of network technology to hold conferences amongòattendeesó located at different places has been of interest since the mid1960s, teleconferencing has not yet become a widely used alternative tofacetoface meetings, even when the meetings involve the expense andinconvenience of considerable travel. some of the technical limitations ofteleconferencing systems are being eased as networks acquire sufficientbandwidth to support the realtime transmission of sufficiently highfidelityvideo representations of participantsõ images to create a realistic impressionof an actual gathering. this should help make teleconferencing more attractive, but there is still much to be learned about the human factors aspects of this technology before it becomes the communication asset itsoriginators intended it to be.the term telecommuting captures the idea of using telenetworks to provide people with the resources to enable them to work at home or in locations other than their traditional workplaces. substituting the transmissionof information via computer networks for the transportation of people toand from places of work is attractive for several reasons, not the least ofwhich is the possibility of conserving energy and easing some of the loadon urban areas (traffic congestion, parking problems, air pollution) to whichcommuting traffic contributes. a significant fraction of the workforce isalready doing telecommuting, and increasing this fraction manyfold is believed to be technically feasible. impediments to greater use of telecommutinginclude the need for additional useroriented tools to ensure that workerscan perform the desired tasks; other impediments involve issues of workersatisfaction and related psychological variables. human factors studies areneeded to address both types of issues.with the help of computer networks, colleagues can cooperate at adistance in ways that were impossible until fairly recently. teams of experts, all in different places but drawing on the same resources and sharinga common òvirtualó work space, can collaborate on problems that requiretheir collective knowledge and skills. the success with which this scenariocan be played out in specific instances will depend, to no small extent, onhow well the many human factors issues relating to the design of the underlying systems are resolved.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchas the bandwidth of computer networks continues to increase, it will bepossible to transmit an increasingly detailed and veridical representation ofa physical situation to a remotely located individual. it seems unlikely,however, that it will be possible, at least anytime soon, to represent mostnontrivial situations in sufficient detail that one could not tell the virtualreality from the real thing. fortunately, such verisimilitude is not necessaryfor most applications, but the question of how real (in appearance) is realenough is open and probably must be answered on a casebycase basis.representations of reality that would be more than adequate for some applications might be inadequate for others. there is a need for work on how todetermine the degree of fidelity required in specific instances.information access and usabilitythe problemamong the more striking characteristics of modern society is the dependence of its governmental, economic, and social institutions on constantaccessibility to accurate, uptodate information of many types. the primacy of information and knowledge as resources in todayõs world is reflected in the growing tendency to refer to our society as the informationsociety (e.g., salvaggio, 1989) or the postindustrial society (bell, 1973).an associated development is the greatly increased quantity of information available to people in all walks of life. the material published forprofessionals in specific fields has long exceeded the capacity of individuals to stay current except in very narrow subspecialties. the amount ofinformation that is available to the public is also enormous and growing.being available, however, does not necessarily mean being readily accessible, and users, or potential users, of information that is available oftenexperience frustration in locating, accessing, and interpreting the information they want.technological developmentsñincluding ever more powerful informationmanipulation and display facilities, òintelligentó interfaces, and informationfinding and utilization aidsñmay help to address this problem. anessential aspect of any effort to make information more accessible to peoplewho need or want to use it, however, must be attention to a variety ofhuman factors issues relating to the ways in which people might interfacewith information repositories and tools that are intended to facilitate finding, using, and conveying information. moreover, this attention will needto extend beyond the technical user of information systems because theproportion of the labor force that engages in information handling has beenincreasing rapidly and is expected to continue to do so (koenig, 1990);many people tap into information resources for purposes other than theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report39requirements of their jobs. given the unlimited diversity of the communityof users of information systems, designers cannot rely on user perseveranceor high technical skills to overcome poor interface design.previous researchconsiderable research has been done on the design of interfaces fordatabases representing restricted domains. menu organization, for example,has been the focus of numerous studies (card, 1982; giroux and belleau,1986; kiger, 1984; miller, 1981; norman, 1991; shneiderman, 1987; snowberry et al., 1983). most of these studies have used relatively small, homogeneous, and often abstract databases (fisher et al., 1990) unlike thosetypically found in operational settings, and search questions have generallybeen goaldirected, which means that the results may not help us understandbrowsing behavior.work has also been done on the design of query languages for providing database access (belkin and croft, 1987; shneiderman, 1987), and studies have addressed the effectiveness of various possible search techniques(blair, 1984; muckler, 1987; vigil, 1985). investigators have also studiedthe strategies that people use spontaneously to search for information in alarge database (brooks et al., 1986; chen and dhar, 1991; harter and peters, 1985). attempts have been made to enhance database search throughartificial intelligence techniques (croft and thompson, 1987; hawkins, 1988).the versatility of the computer for generating graphical representationshas sparked some interest in how databases might be represented so as tomake the information in them easier to find. among the approaches beingexplored are some that represent data sets as threedimensional structuresthat users can inspect from different angles and at adjustable viewing distances, thus permitting views of the data from relatively global as well asnarrowly focused perspectives (card et al., 1990; clarkson, 1991; newby,1992). little is known, however, about the relative effectiveness of different forms of data representation as aids to understanding complex data sets(jensen and anderson, 1987; liu and wickens, 1992; merwin and wickens,1991).research needs and opportunitiesa continuing human factors challenge relating to complex informationsystems is interface design. this applies even to systems that representhighly restricted areas of knowledge, for example, an online help systemfor a wordprocessing program or an airline flight reservation system. aneffective interface should allow users to readily locate and access items ofinformation as they are needed and to make a rapid transition from one setemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchof related items to another. these capabilities relate to the organizationalstructure of the database (e.g., hierarchical, matrix, network; durding et al.,1977) and the navigational tools for moving from entry to entry (seidlerand wickens, 1992). the organizational structure may or may not be independent of the navigational tools. for example, a database may be organized in a strict hierarchical fashion, but navigational tools may allow theuser to access any node in the database from any other node with a singlecommand, obviating the need to travel up and down the paths in the hierarchy. whatever the relationship between the database structure and thenavigation aids, the important requirement from the userõs point of view isthat it facilitate and not impede access.there is some evidence that the effectiveness of a menu design for aninformation system may partly depend on how closely the structure represented by the menu corresponds to the userõs mental model of the structureof the database (roskehofstrand and paap, 1986). in some cases, however, there are many ònaturaló ways to organize a database, and there islittle or no guidance as to whether one way is preferable to another, whetherone corresponds more closely than another to a mental model, how homogeneous these mental models are across different users, or whether the organizational structure that is appropriate for one task (e.g., normal operation)differs from what is needed for another (e.g., fault diagnosis and troubleshooting). many human factors issues must be addressed if interface designs are to be optimized for particular combinations of information systems and the users they are intended to serve. the use of electronic databaseòmapsó has proved to be a promising method of making the organization ofa database visible to the user (vincente and williges, 1988), but majordesign challenges confront the human factors community if such maps areto represent the vast number of nodes and entries in very large databases ina truly useful way (mackinlay et al., 1991; shneiderman, 1987).some databases are fluid, in that the information in them is continuallychanging and they may not have a permanent structure. the database ofhuman factors research is a case in point; not only is new information beingadded to it all the time, but people do not agree on where its boundariesshould lie. menubased interfaces have serious limitations when used withsuch systems. query languages that rely on keyword searches have someadvantages, but also their own limitations.a relatively neglected, but important, question pertaining to evaluatingthe effectiveness of any information system or information search procedure is how to determine the value of information to its prospective users.this issue will have to be considered in the design of automated search andretrieval techniques. not all the information that is relevant to a given topicof interest is of equal value to a user, but little is known about how toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report41convey to a search procedure the distinction between what would be considered important and what would not. more generally, evaluating the effectiveness of information systems is a continuing challenge. simply countingòhitsó or computing the ratio of hits to false alarms does not suffice, because it begs the question of what should be considered a hit, and it doesnot distinguish among hits and misses of different degrees of importance.taking into account the use to which information is put would probablygive a more accurate picture of system effectiveness, but often this may notbe practical. we also do not know how to assess effectiveness for systemsthat are intended to facilitate browsing as opposed to structured search, andthis will be a difficult problem.a special challenge for human factors research relates to the unprecedented capability of computerbased systems to represent information ingraphical or pictorial form. the rapid development of capabilities for dynamic threedimensional displays and of tools that permit users to manipulate and interact with such displays has outdistanced our ability to exploitsuch capabilities to full advantage. there is a need both to analyze thetasks for which sophisticated visualization tools could be especially helpfuland to find better ways to evaluate how well visualizationaiding systemshelp users perform their tasks. the considerable current interest in betterunderstanding the use of visualization in science and the application ofcomputerbased displays to the development of more powerful techniquesfor visual data representation emphasize the importance of humanfactorsresearch in this area.for systems that are intended to have some builtin intelligence, designers have often stated that one of their goals is to give the system the abilityto adapt flexibly to the needs of individual users, and even perhaps to adaptto changes in those needs over time. too much adaptability, however,could prove to be counterproductive. the research done to date provideslittle guidance as to the conditions under which intelligent adaptability maystop being beneficial and may actually be harmful. in general, there is aneed to explore the tradeoff between flexibility (adaptability to usersõ needsor preferences) and consistency in the characteristics and operational features of information systems.people already have extensive experience navigating in space; this creates a strong argument for attempting to exploit spatial metaphors in thedesign of tools for helping people interact effectively with large complexdatabases and information networks. but effective use of spatial metaphorswill require addressing a number of unresolved issues: determining howbest to represent data that have a dimensionality greater than two or three,developing effective methods for helping users maintain their orientation(keep from getting lost) when navigating a database, providing easy meansemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchof conveying to the system desired control actions (zooming, panning, relocating), and numerous issues involving other aspects of userinformationsystem interaction.emerging technologies in work designthe problemremaining competitive in the global marketplace has been an increasingly difficult challenge to many u.s. industries, especially in the manufacturing sector of the economy. the u.s. lead in several industrial areas hasbeen eroded in recent years, and the prospects for competing effectively inthese and other areas will depend on the countryõs ability to use materialand human resources more effectively.it appears that a critical aspect of industrial competitiveness will be theability to adapt quickly to rapid technological developments and constantlychanging market conditions. this means, among other things, being sufficiently flexible to shift production quickly from one item to another andbeing able to produce items economically in relatively small quantities (pioreand sabel, 1984). production flexibility requires a very different job designfrom that of conventional twentiethcentury assembly lines. other innovative ways to increase competitiveness, such as justintime manufacturing,which is intended to save costs by minimizing the need for large inventories, also have implications for work design (national research council,1986).emerging technologiesñmany forms of automation, robotics, and information technologiesñwill figure prominently in shaping the workplacesof the future. in some cases, workers will be displaced as technologicaladvances make their tasks obsolete or performable by machine. other jobswill be transformed by the availability of new tools that workers will haveto learn how to use. and jobs that do not now exist will be created.change will be the norm.human factors research has something useful to contribute to maintaining the industrial competitiveness of the united states as these changes takeplace, but the goal of the research must be more than the design of betterdisplays and controls (which is not to discount the importance of this objective). improving manufacturing, for example, will require attention to human factors issues conceived sufficiently broadly to include the social psychology of the functioning of work groups as well as classical ergonomics.the realization of the need for a relatively broad perspective has led to thecurrent interest in macroergonomics.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report43previous researchjob design has been a focus of human factors research from the earliestdays of the discipline. originally attention was focused primarily on theindividual worker and the demands of specific tasks. òtaylorism,ó as atheory of job design, was concerned with the optimization of physical effortin order to increase speed of production. jobs were subdivided into repetitive tasks to minimize the amount of learning required by the worker and tomaximize the speed with which a task could be performed (knights et al.,1985). òfordismó introduced the assembly line, which organized taylorizedtasks into patterns that would yield automobiles and other complex consumer products.the assembly line approach was very effective in massproducing consumer goods that could be sold at affordable prices, but it left much to bedesired from the workerõs perspective and often led to stress, low workermotivation, absenteeism, and labor conflict (kornhauser, 1965; walker andguest, 1952). researchers interested in job design began to see workersatisfaction and quality of life in the work setting as important complementsto worker efficiency. in time, the importance of taking into account theinteractions among individuals in work settings was recognized, as was theneed to apply a systems perspective to the study of complexes involvingboth people and machines.despite the attention that job design has received from human factorsresearchers, most jobs still are not designed in any rigorous sense, but theyevolveñoften being forced to change in order to accommodate the introduction of new technology, but not necessarily in optimal or even satisfactory ways. what was already a complex problem has been exacerbated insome instances by the extraordinary rapidity with which informationbasedtechnologies have permeated the workplace.the need for more attention from human factors researchers to theintroduction and use of informationbased technology in the workplace isseen in such disparate problems as the biochemical and physiological difficulties that are sometimes associated with the use of informationtechnology devices (e.g., eyestrain and carpal tunnel syndrome) and the claims ofsome investigators that these technologies do not increase productivity asthey were expected to do. there have also been calls for a better understanding of the ways in which the new technologies are changing the skillsrequired of workers (national commission on employment policy, 1986)and of why these technologies appear to be underused or inefficiently usedin some contexts, especially manufacturing (national academy of engineering/national research council, 1991).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchresearch needs and opportunitiesif u.s. industry is to compete effectively in world markets, it must givea high priority to product quality. the importance of quality increases withthe amount of competition that an industry faces, and many of the industriesthat are important to the economic health of the nation have much competition on the world scene. quality flaws in products typically derive eitherfrom worker error or from suboptimal work processes and procedures. thereare many opportunities for human factors research on both decreasing theprobability of human error in the workplace and enhancing product qualityby improving the designs of work processes and procedures. the study ofhuman error in certain types of information workñprogramming or software design, for exampleñposes a special challenge because errors may bevery difficult to identify and it may be almost impossible to trace back tothem from their eventual effects.workplace health and safety will continue to be major foci of humanfactors research. lighting, air quality, potentially dangerous machinery,noise, fatigue, biomechanical stress, and other traditionally important human factors issues relating to work and the workplace will still requireattention, but new problems will also surface as jobs and workplace technology continue to change. certain types of musculoskeletal disorders,sometimes referred to as repetitive strain injury, appear to have been becoming increasingly common among people who make constant use of computerterminals or similar keyboard devices. so also have certain ailments thatare probably attributable to psychosocial properties of some jobs that seemto create undue psychological stress. effectively addressing workplace healthand safety will require attention both to the traditional ergonomic concernsof proper equipment design and to psychosocial factors that can directly andindirectly affect workersõ health and safety.the integration of human and machine labor in semiautomated industrial operations continues to be a challenge, and so far it has not been meteffectively. the idea that machine intelligence might substitute for humanintelligence in many manufacturing processes appears to have been givingway to the idea that what is needed, for the foreseeable future at least, is abetter understanding of how to combine human and machine capabilities intruly symbiotic ways (brodner, 1986; de greene, 1991; kellso, 1989; kuoand hsu, 1990). if such systems are to be realized, many human factorsissues will have to be addressed; they range from the traditional problemsof interface design to planning, scheduling, and coordinating activities totoplevel policy setting (sanderson, 1989).many industrial jobs of the future will involve people as supervisors ofhighly automated operations. when things are operating smoothly as intended, òsupervisory controllersó may have relatively little to do; however,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report45when systems fail or malfunction, they may have to take quick and decisiveaction to avoid serious consequences. such situations pose problems ofboredom and skill maintenance. how are supervisory controllers to be keptattentive and interested in their jobs when everything is proceeding as intended without their involvement, and how are their skills to be kept honedso they can do what is required in moments when they are needed to avert acrisis? more generally, there is a need for systematic and detailed descriptive research about the skills, especially the higherlevel cognitive skills,that workers need in the various job situations that high technology is creating and that will be even more common in the future.one effect of the new information technologies on many jobs has beento put some distance, real or symbolic, between workers and whatever theyare producing. this is illustrated most strikingly in the use of teleoperatorsand other remotely controlled devices in some production processes, and itis apparent in other contexts as well. many machinists no longer do anymachining by hand with traditional machine tools; instead they feed theirspecifications to a programmable machine tool. even people who generatepaper products (reports, drawings, blueprints) typically do so via a computerbased system that yields the paper only after the work has been done.there has been some speculation about the effects of this change on workers and on the skill requirements of their jobs (zuboff, 1988), but there hasbeen little empirical investigation into the matter.the emphasis in the foregoing has been on the need to find ways toensure the competitiveness of u.s. industry in a rapidly changing world;this is indeed a serious challenge for the nation. we believe human factorsresearchers can significantly contribute to meeting this challenge. it isimportant, however, that in doing so, this community maintain the complementary objective of ensuring that the work climate, culture, and environment are humane and fulfilling to the human beings who work within it.job satisfaction will require attention as long as there are jobs, but theanswer to the question of how to promote it is likely to change as thecharacteristics of jobs change, and not always in predictable ways.transportationthe problemmost people interact with transportation systems as operators and aspassengers. millions of us operate motor vehicles, and millions more arepassengers on airplanes and railroad trains. in both cases, the goals are toachieve convenient, fast, and safe travel. automobiles offer individualmobility; air and rail transport offer efficient travel over long distances. asemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchspeed and convenience have increased through advances in technology, therehas also been increased concern about public safety.in the united states, motor vehicle accidents are the primary cause ofdeath for people under age 38. current statistics show that there are also1.7 million disabling injuries from motor vehicles every year. becausetraffic accidents take a disproportionate toll from the younger population,the average number of life years lost is two to three times higher than forheart disease and cancer. a large proportion of these accidents can beattributed to human error. sources of such error include lack of experience,misperception of events, poor vision, use of drugs and alcohol, fatigue, andhigh levels of risk tolerance.air travel, in contrast, is the safest form of mass transportation in termsof accident occurrence and loss of life. however, when accidents do occur,the toll is often catastrophic. in over twothirds of these accidents, humanerror is cited as the primary cause. the sources of human error in airaccidents are different from those in automobile accidents. in modern aircraft, pilot errors may stem from poor mental models of the functions beingperformed by highly complex automated systems, from information or workoverload, or from failures in coordination and communication among members of cockpit crews or between cockpit crews and air traffic controllers.we can anticipate that, as technology advances and greater demands areplaced on both motor vehicles and commercial aircraft for convenience andspeed, understanding the capabilities and limitations of the human operatorswill become even more critical. human factors can make important contributions by developing coherent models of the human as an operator and ofthe team and organizational environment in which the human must function.in addition, human factors can provide insights into what functions shouldbe automated and how this should be done to ensure efficient and safeoperation.previous researchthe available knowledge base for understanding proficient driving andtraffic safety skills in motor vehicle operation can be characterized as extensive but fragmented. as already mentioned, several sources of humanerror have been researched; what is missing, however, is a conceptual modelthat specifies a coherent research agenda for describing driving performanceunder a variety of conditions with a range of technological alternatives.the main lines of researchable questions have focused on deficits in vision,the influence of alcohol and drugs, attention and automaticity, aging, andthe misestimation of risk as potential contributors to reduced driving performance.tests for visual acuity currently assess static acuity on one eye at aemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report47time. however, recent research (burg, 1967, 1968, 1971) suggests thatstatic acuity alone is a poor predictor of accident probability and that testsfor dynamic acuity are preferable. moreover, the degree to which both eyeswork together to provide the widest possible field of view has also beenfound to be a crucial factor. one problem is that the current tests used tomeasure visual acuity for drivers are based on evaluating only the thresholdfor resolution for highcontrast optotypes whereas, in many situations, thedriver must distinguish lowcontrast objects under low illumination. thetests of vision that appear to have higher predictive power for safe drivinginvolve peripheral vision, contrast sensitivity, and motion perception (johnsonand keltner, 1983).recent findings on alcohol and drug intoxication suggest that impairment that would affect driving can be detected in individuals with muchlower bloodalcohol levels than those now used to determine legal liability.also, strong interaction effects between individuals and conditions havebeen recorded; this should lead to a radical rethinking of the legal limits onblood alcohol.another line of research on drivers deals with vigilance and the usefulfield of view. there is evidence that repetitive tasks can result in generaldrowsiness or a narrowing of the effective field of view for attention, andsome studies show that restrictions in this field can pose serious problemsfor older drivers (ball and owsley, 1992). furthermore, as alertness decreases, reaction time can become significantly longer.work is also going forward on driver attitudes toward risk or risk tolerance. recent findings suggest that some drivers have a risk tolerance thresholdthat is constant. if such drivers have vehicles with automatic seat belts orair bags that lower risk, they tend to increase risk by driving faster thanthey otherwise would. the net effect is that the benefits of technologicaladvances are canceled out.research on motor vehicle drivers has focused on the characteristics ofthe individual and how those characteristics interact with performance. humanfactors research on aircraft operation, however, has concentrated both onthe individual and on teamwork in multiperson operator crews. in recentyears programmatic movement in this area has emerged under the rubric ofcrew resource management (crm). crm is based on the recognition thatmany vehiclesñparticularly large commercial aircraftñare actually pilotedby a team rather than a single individual. the performance of the vehicle asa system thus depends in part on how well the team members accommodateto one another in addition to how well they operate as competent specialists. the approach has, as a first focus, the training of the crew. currentpractices put great emphasis on the creation of training situations that exercise the teamwork functions. in a dynamic flight simulator, for example,the whole crew is exercised simultaneously. what takes place is not justemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchskill learning in the sense of interpersonal communication skills but also asolid sense of mutual confidence that can allow team members to compensate for one anotherõs weak points.research needs and opportunitiesthere is no shortage of needs for rigorous research in advanced transportation systems. a truly basic need is for a better systemic representationof the human in the system. ideally, the community of human factorsresearchers would create a model to identify the human attributes that contribute most to performance. the framework should include the distributionof individual differences for each such attribute and something similar to amultiple regression equation, describing in quantitative terms how each attribute contributes to the quality of performance in challenging work situations. given such a framework, the analysis of a set of particular driverbehaviors would be more straightforward and would be more likely to pointclearly to reforms at the practical level, such as the design of tests used toscreen drivers for licensure.another key opportunity exists in the area of automation and functionallocation. the present atmosphere appears to favor the development andevaluation of computerbased aids rather than complete reassignment ofoperator responsibilities to a computer. for example, it is now possible touse information from satellites to determine oneõs exact position in threedimensional space. such positional information could be used, in turn, todrive maptype displays in a cockpit of an aircraft, bridge of a boat, cabinof a locomotive, or instrument panel in a car. what effect would suchdisplays have on the performance of the operator and on the system as awhole? would the presumptive improvement in performance make up forthe additional cost? would people drive automobiles more recklessly ifthey thought that the new display reduced risk?the time has come when the operatorõs role could be totally automatedin many transportation systems. would passengers (or, indeed, nonparticipating bystanders) permit the total automation of any common carrier vehicles? what are the predominant attitudes of various cultures toward automation? how do these attitudes influence the willingness of individuals todisengage automated systems and revert to human control when conditionswarrant?a third important issue is the differential reactions of various culturesto team training such as crm. for example, in collectivist cultures a highvalue is placed on the group, whereas in individualist cultures, such as theunited states, more value is placed on individual performance. these values and their consequences should be explored in detail so that training canbe appropriately designed. one important goal of human factors is to deemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report49fine curricula that are relevant to the task, understandable to those beingtrained, and acceptable in the context of societal values.finally, there is a need to develop an improved methodology for understanding human error at the group level and for evaluating group and system performance. accident investigations have found that a number offactors at the regulatory and organizational level, as well as at the individual level, contribute to the inadequacy of safeguards against fatal decisions. effort should be directed toward developing a taxonomy of humanfactors problems at various levels that could be applied to the analysis ofaccidents and incidents. this would be an invaluable tool for researchersand for those responsible for ensuring safety (jones, 1993).the field of transportation provides rich opportunities to expand thescope of human factors in areas in which outcomes can have major consequences. optimizing the interface between individuals and groups thatwork with complex technology and systems requires a multidisciplinaryapproach that embraces the full range of concerns of human factors specialists. concern with a particular problem, whether vehicular or aviation safety,should not blind researchers to concepts that transcend problem areas andthat reflect more broadly on human capabilities and limitations.cognitive performance under stressthe problemstress is a fact of life in modern society and it manifests itself in avariety of ways, sometimes tragically. incidents of violence in the workplace have sometimes been attributed, at least in part, to stress. stress hasalso been implicated both in highprofile accidents, such as the three mileisland incident, the downing of an iranian airliner by the vincennes, and thecrash of air ontario flight 363 (helmreich, 1992; wickens, 1992). stressis also involved in the countless less spectacular mishaps that occur everyday in the workplace, in the home, and elsewhere (druckman and swets,1988; manuso, 1983).since hans selye (1956) first directed the attention of the scientificcommunity to the problem of stress and articulated his theory of the ògeneral adaptation syndrome,ó the concept of stress has evolved considerably.in this report the term is taken to mean reactions to perceived significantthreats to oneõs welfare, reactions that often entail heightened emotion (seekeinan, 1987; yates, 1990). stress, according to this conception, is dependent on both the person and the situation. what is threatening to one personat a particular time may not be so to another person or to the same person ata different time. a type of threat that is especially germane to understanding how stress affects cognitive performance is the threat of task demands,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchespecially timelimitation demands, that appear to be beyond oneõs capabilities to meet.some occupations are generally viewed as especially stressfulñair traffic controller, for example. generally, any occupation that puts one in theposition of being able to cause great harm to other people or to oneself as aconsequence of making an error is likely to be considered stressful. otherjobs can be stressful for much more subtle reasons, and the stress they causemay be at a lower level but relatively continuous. jobs at which peoplemust work continuously at a nearmaximum pace to maintain productionquotas, or in which inadequate personal space or privacy create social tension, or in which one has little job security are examples of jobs that cancause chronic stress.previous researchthe psychological literature on stress is huge, and a considerable amountof work has been done on the effects of stress on cognition (hamilton andwarburton, 1979; hockey, 1983, 1986; hockey and hamilton, 1983). webelieve that the need for research on this topic will increase over the foreseeable future for several reasons: threats to job security that will comefrom increasing competitive pressures in many industries, the need to accommodate to increasingly rapid change in the workplace because of technological advances and other factors, the greater cognitive demands of manyjobs and the possibility that errors will have farreaching implications, andthe stress evoked by new methods of electronic monitoring and surveillance.there seems to be general agreement among researchers that stressadversely affects shortterm memory, although it is not clear whether stressreduces capacity or imposes a greater load on shortterm memory (cohen,1978). another consensus conclusion is that stress reduces the scope ofperceptual attention (baddeley, 1972), a phenomenon sometimes referred toas perceptual narrowing or òtunneling,ó but there is some doubt about whichstimuli do and do not receive attention when this narrowing occurs (yates,1990). resolving these and similar theoretical questions that have beenprompted by previous research would facilitate the development of adequateapproaches to training people to function well under stress.one difficulty that has plagued laboratory studies of stress and its effects on performance is the impossibility, for ethical reasons, of exposingsubjects to situations that are threatening in a nontrivial way. informedconsent requirements also preclude the element of surprise in experimentation, inasmuch as subjects must be told the details of the experimentalprocedure in advance. for these reasons, much of the laboratory work onemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report51the effects of stress on performance has limited applicability to the realworld situations that seriously, and often unexpectedly, threaten peopleõssafety or wellbeing.another limitation of most laboratory studies of stress is that even themild stressors used are applied for relatively short periods of time. it isvery difficult to imagine practically feasible laboratory situations for studying the effects of longterm or chronic stress. but such stress is as much aproblem as is shortterm or acute stress. as suggested by the work ofcohen (1980) and cohen and spacapan (1978), the effects of chronic stresshold surprises that seem inaccessible via standard laboratory techniques.research needs and opportunitiesa priority for future research on the effects of stress on cognitive performance must be a search for feasible solutions to the limitations of laboratory methods. if laboratory results are to be generalizable to the realworld situations of interest, ethical but effective ways must be found tostudy the influences of stressors that more closely approximate those inrealworld humantechnology systems. we mention here two strategies thatmight be applied to this end: (a) analyses of naturally occurring incidentsand (b) simulations, including competitive games. both of these strategiesare used currently; we recommend that they be exploited more fully andcreatively.incident analysis could be considerably facilitated by the developmentof formal protocols for use in specific incidents, such as those involvingnuclear power plant operation, aviation, and surgical procedures. the availabilityof such protocols, appropriately evaluated, would make it practical for incident analyses to be commissioned regularly (e.g., by the nuclear regulatory commission, the federal aviation administration, and various surgeryreview boards) to better understand their causes. statistical analyses ofincidentrecording databases, such as the aviation safety reporting systemthat is maintained by the national aeronautics and space administration, isone means of investigating the effects of stress on performance; nonintrusivestudy of people in stressful situations in which they have voluntarily placedthemselves is another.the simulation of stressful situations is a possible approach if simulators can be built that create a convincing illusion of stress without actuallyputting subjects at risk. how to build such simulators is itself a researchchallenge because of the limitations of our present knowledge of the determinants of stress, but common experience with frightening films, amusement park rides, and similar emotionarousing stimuli attest to the possibility of feeling stressed even while not believing oneõs self to be in actualdanger. virtual reality should offer the possibility of simulating stressfulemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchsituations with a high degree of realism without exposing people to physicalthreats. how best to exploit these possibilities in the study of the effects ofstress on performance is a question that will require some research to answer.in addition to learning more about the effects of stress on cognitiveperformance, a major challenge for human factors research is the development of effective ways to counteract the more detrimental of those effects.approaches to handling stress include attempting to eliminate stressors orto lessen their strength, reducing the stress reactions of individuals, selecting people with high tolerance for stress for stressful jobs, training peopleto function effectively even when stressed, and òstressproofingó systems sothey will function smoothly even when their operators are stressed. all ofthese approaches are worth pursuing.we know that people differ both in the situations they find stressful andin their ability to function under a given level of stress (see hockey et al.,1986, especially section iv). and considerable attention has been given tothe question of how to distinguish people who are more and less stressresistant (allred and smith, 1989; kobasa, 1979; parkes, 1986). we needto know more about such individual differences in response to stress, butperhaps even more importantly, we need to be able to predict how individuals are likely to be affected by specific stressors in specific situations.some research has been done on how to train people so that they willbe able to perform their tasks well even under highly stressful conditions,but more is needed. it is not clear from the results obtained to date whetherit is better to train people primarily under nonstressful conditions or to givethem a lot of practice under conditions that approximate the stressfulnessunder which they may have to function. it is clear that high degrees ofstress usually impede learning, but it does not follow that, given the need tobe able to function under stress eventually, the training methods that aremost successful in the short run will prove the most efficient from a sufficiently longrange perspective. there is a need for some systematic research on this problem to explore the range of possible approaches that willbest prepare people to perform under the full spectrum of situations theycould encounter on the job. these might include hybrid approaches thatwould, for example, provide training under nonstressful conditions and òovertrainingó under stress.complementing the need to determine how best to train people to function effectively under stress is the need to make systems as stressresistantas possible. the research objective in this case is to determine how todesign humantechnology systems so their operational goals will be realizedeven when their operators are stressed and more prone to make errors thannormally. considerably less is known about effects of stress on the performance of groups or personmachine complexes than about the effects ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report53stress on the performance of individuals (davis et al., 1992), so this challenge involves the need to acquire knowledge at a relatively fundamentallevel. in addition, however, there is a current practical need to identifyfeatures that could be designed into systems to safeguard against knowneffects of stress on human performance. to illustrate the point: becausestress often results in restricting oneõs range of attention, a system might begiven the capability to force operators, during emergency situations, to explicitly acknowledge their attention to every item on a checklist designedfor that contingency.eliminating or reducing high levels of stress in work situations shouldbe a continuing objective of research. however, prudence dictates the assumption that, no matter how successful we are in this objective, there willarise from time to time in many modern work contexts stressful situationsthat either cannot be anticipated in detail or cannot be precluded. it istherefore essential that research seek effective ways to deal with those situations through personnel selection, training, and system design.aiding intellectual workthe problemalmost all work is done with the assistance of tools of one sort oranother. this is true of intellectual as well as physical work. as computertechnology has become widely available in the workplace, many softwaretools have been developed to help people perform intellectual tasks, such aswriting, designing, decision making, and analyzing. these tools includeelectronic dictionaries, thesauruses, spelling verifiers, spreadsheets, designaids, conferencing systems for group work, models for weather forecasting,medical diagnostic aids, and systems to help people visualize structuressuch as complex molecules or airflow patterns on an aircraft wing.it seems certain that efforts to develop additional and more powerfulaids to intellectual work will continue for the foreseeable future. thiseffort will be driven in part by continuing rapid advances in the enablingtechnologies and in part by the promise that such aids hold for increasingproductivity and creativity in the workplace and for enriching peopleõs intellectual experience in many other contexts.the human factors issue of overriding importance is to help ensure thatthe technology really has the effect of enhancing the quality of life on thewhole. human factors efforts are needed (a) to evaluate the effectivenessof such aids, (b) to provideñthrough task analysesña better understandingof what further aids would be useful, and (c) to participate in the design,implementation, and iterative improvement of future aids.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchprevious researchalthough many electronic aids to intellectual work have been developed, some of which are used daily in work settings, surprisingly few systematic studies have been done to evaluate their effectiveness. the evaluative data that do exist suggest that some aids do not increase productivity(attewell, 1994).studies conducted in the 1970s on the use of dictating equipment illustrate the importance of checking prevailing beliefs about the difficulty oreffects of introducing new technologies in the workplace against objectivedata. in this case, common assumptions about the difficulty of learning todictate effectively, and about the efficiency of dictation as compared withmanual writing for experienced users of dictation equipment, proved to bewrong (gould, 1980). experimental studies also showed that people foundit easier to compose òvoice documentsó for listening than to dictate documents to be read. such findings were instrumental in shifting the focus ofsome developers from dictation systems to voicemessage systems (gouldand boies, 1983).other experiments have assessed the effects on productivity of the increasing trend among office professionals, including managers, to use textprocessing systems to compose and edit text themselves instead of using theservices of a secretary or clerical staff (card et al., 1984; gould, 1982).again, major savings in time or improvements in product quality were notalways found.field studies of organizations that have introduced innovative technological aids to intellectual tasks in the workplace have also shown that it ispossible for these aides to increase productivity while lowering employeemorale and job satisfaction (kraut et al., 1989). negative reactions sometimes occur, for example, because using the technological aids changes theamount of social contact and facetoface interaction that people have intheir jobs.recent research has also focused on the development or evaluation ofaids to facilitate collaborative work among the members of a group (turnerand kraut, 1992). some of this work has been done in the laboratory, somein real work situations, and some in both (olson et al., 1992). the mainconclusion to be drawn from this early work is that much additional research will be needed before firm design guidelines for the development ofaids for intellectual work by groups can be articulated.a few efforts have been made by human factors groups to initiate thedevelopment of one or more aids to intellectual work and to see this throughto implementation in a work setting (e.g., gould et al., 1993; harris, 1980;landauer et al., 1993). these are atypical, however; more commonly human factors researchers have become involved in development efforts onlyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report55after they are under way, usually in support rather than leadership roles, andoften for the sole purpose of validation testing at the end of a developmental cycle.research needs and opportunitiesevaluative studies are needed, not so much to determine the relativemerits of existing aids but to provide the insights required to improve uponthem and to ensure that they accomplish what is intended. evaluative research should focus not only on aids, but also on the processes that are usedto develop them. we need to know what developmental approaches aremost effective and how they might be improved.there is also a need to study the detailed demands of intellectual workin specific settings with a view to identifying how the development of newtools could aid that work. it would be useful, for example, to study successful physicians diagnosing, nurses providing nursing care, musicians composing, architects designing, and teachers teaching; the aim would be toidentify the intellectual skills involved and develop a theory about the taskdemands that would guide the search for new tools to aid performance.this effort should be conditioned, however, by the recognition that frequently providing new tools results not so much in making the current jobeasier to do but in changing the nature of the job by making it possible todo things that could not be done before.several studies, using either observational techniques or questionnaires,have been done of how whitecollar workers spend their time (klemmer andsnyder, 1972; kraut and streeter, 1995; mintzberg, 1973; panko, 1992).although these studies have been valuable, they have not led to the development of new intellectual work aids, nor were they intended to do so.insights that could lead to such development are most likely to come fromstudies designed for that purpose, and this probably means studies thatrelate specific activities to personal and organizational goals and that attempt to determine how well the activities serve those goals. one generalconclusion that all of these studies support is that interpersonal communication is a major component of most whitecollar jobs, so it would seem tofollow that a major opportunity for performance enhancement should lie inthe development of more effective aids to that communication.human factors researchers can also contribute to the design, implementation, and evaluation of new aids for intellectual work. they bring to theprocess an iterative design philosophy and a unique focus on usersõ needsthat has proved to be important in the development of systems whose ultimate characteristics were impossible to specify in detail in advance.some evaluation studies must focus on people in actual work settings,as opposed to laboratory simulations of these settings. studies should alsoemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchfocus on the effects of technological aids on both individuals and organizations. there is a need to determine the extent to which changes in individual productivity translate into similar changes at organizational levels,and there is a need too to ensure that productivity gains at an organizationallevel are not realized at the cost of individual job satisfaction. acquiringreliable information on the longterm effects of the use of specific technological aids to intellectual tasks in the workplace, especially those intendedto facilitate group work, is likely to require studies of considerably longerduration than those that are typically conducted (cool et al., 1992).when a work activity that has been performed one way is suddenlyperformed in a very different way because new technology was introduced,this can have important but quite subtle effects. malone (1983), for example, has shown that the arrangement of papers on peopleõs desks canserve to remind them of what has to be done and in what priority. when thedesktop is replaced by an electronic file and a video monitor, the traditionalcues are lost, and if the system has not been designed to provide an effective substitute for them, work may suffer. one human factors challengeassociated with the design of intellectual work aids is to identify nonobviousbut important aspects of current ways of performing tasks for which someprovision should be made in an electronic aid.for some time, there has been compelling evidence that diagnostic judgmentsbased on actuarial data are, in many contexts, typically more accurate thanjudgments made by human diagnosticians without the aid of the actuarialdata (dawes et al., 1989). a number of decision aiding systems have beendeveloped that exploit this fact, but the diagnosticians have generally resisted using them. although many reasons have been hypothesized for thereluctance of experts to use these aids, the situation is still not well understood, and the question of how to get diagnosticians and decision makers toavail themselves of aids that would improve their performance is a continuing challenge.successful development and use of new tools to help people performintellectually demanding work will require collaboration among scientistsand engineers from several disciplines. human factors researchers have acritical role to play in this effort. we believe that they can and should takethe initiative in identifying tasks whose performance could be enhancedthrough appropriately designed aids and that human factors researchers havemuch to contribute to both the design and the evaluation of these aids. theneed for interdisciplinary collaboration is itself a challenge, however, to allthe disciplines involved and may require the human factors community tobroaden its conceptualization of what constitutes legitimate research. inparticular, human factors researchers must be willing, at least in some instances, to take responsibility for initiating and successfully completinginterdisciplinary projects to produce significant aids, with all the burdensemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report57and longterm commitment this entails. iterative design with constant ongoing evaluation involving intended users of an aid is an approach that thehuman factors community has advocated and with which it has had somesuccess.conclusionthis summary report identifies important areas of need and opportunityfor human factors research during the next few decades. it is the committeeõshope that this volume will be of use both to sponsors of human factorsresearch and to people who do human factors research.the committee has not attempted to lay out a research agenda. itrecognizes that the priorities of different researchsponsoring agencies willdiffer depending on the agenciesõ specific missions and goals and that individual scientists and scientistsintraining will be drawn to different problem areas depending both on funding opportunities and on personal interests, knowledge, and expertise. we believe, however, that there are manyopportunities for human factors research to address important national andglobal problems, some of which have not been the focus of such research inthe past. this report and the papers in part ii indicate what, in the committeeõsview, some of those opportunities are.referencesallred, k.d., and t.w. smith1989the hardy personality: cognitive and physiological responses to evaluative threat.journal of personality and social psychology 56:257266.attewell, p.1994information technology and the productivity paradox. pp. 1353 in d.h. harris,ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel onorganizational linkages, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.baddeley, a.d.1972selective attention and performance in dangerous environments. british journalof psychology 63:537546.baker, l.a., a.t. herlihy, p.r. kaufmann, and j.m. eilers1991acidic lakes and streams in the united states: the role of acidic deposition.science 252:11511154.ball, k., and c. owsley1992the useful field of view: a new technique for evaluating agerelated declines invisual function. journal of the american optometric association 63:7179.baron, s., d.s. kruser, and b.m. huey, eds.1990quantitative modeling of human performance in complex, dynamic systems. panelon human performance modeling, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchbaum, a., and j.e. singer, eds.1981conservation: psychological perspectives, vol. 3. advances in environmentalpsychology series. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.belkin, n.j., and w.b. croft1987retrieval techniques. annual review of information science and technology 22:109145.bell, d.1973the coming of the postindustrial society. new york: basic books.blair, d.c.1984the management of information: basic distinctions. sloan management review26(1):1323.bogner, s.1991human factors and medicine. p. 682 in proceedings of the human factors society35th annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: human factors society.bowe, f.g.1984personal computers and special needs. berkeley, calif.: sybex computer books.brodner, p.1986skillbased manufacturing vs òunmanned factoryó: which is superior? international journal of industrial ergonomics 1:145153.brooks, h.m., p.j. daniels, and n.j. belkin1986research on information interaction and intelligent information provision mechanisms. journal of information science: principles and practice 12(1):3744.bureau of the census1987statistical abstract of the united states. bureau of the census. washington,d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1989statistical abstract of the united states. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.bureau of labor statistics1988acomparative real gross domestic product, real gdp per capita, and real gdpper employed person, thirteen countries, 19501987. washington, d.c.: u.s.department of labor.1988binternational comparisons of manufacturing productivity and labor cost trends.washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.burg, a.1967the relationship between vision test scores and driving record: general findings. department of engineering report no. 6724. los angeles, calif.: university of california.1968the relationship between vision test scores and driving record: additionalfindings. department of engineering report no. 6827. los angeles, calif.:university of california.1971vision and driving: a report on research. human factors 13(1):7987.card, s.k.1982user perceptual mechanisms in search of computer command menus. pp. 190196in chi õ82 conference on human factors in computer science. new york:association for computing machinery.card, s.k., j.m. robert, and l.n. keenan1984online composition of text. pp. 231236 in proceedings of interactõ84, firstifip conference on humancomputer interaction, vol. 1. london, england: elseviernorth holland.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report59card, s.k., j.d. mackinlay, and g.g. robertson1990the design space of input devices. pp. 117124 in chi proceedings. new york:association for computing machinery.carlisle, j.h.1975a tutorial for use of the tenex electronic notebookconference (tenc) system on the arpanet. report no. isi/rr7538. arlington, va.: defenseadvanced research projects agency.chen, h., and v. dhar1991cognitive process as a basic for intelligent retrieval systems design. informationprocessing and management 27(5):405432.clarkson, m.a.1991an easier interface. byte february:277282.coach, j.v., t. garber, and l. karpus1979response maintenance and paper recycling. journal of environmental systems8:127137.cohen, s.1978environmental load and the allocation of attention. pp. 129 in a. baum, j.e.singer, and s. vallins, eds., advances in environmental psychology. hillsdale,n.j.: erlbaum.1980aftereffects of stress on human performance and social behavior: a review ofresearch and theory. psychological bulletin 88:82108.cohen, s., and s. spacapan1978the aftereffects of stress: an attentional interpretation. environmental psychology and nonverbal behavior 3:4357.commission on the skills of the american workforce1990americaõs choice: high skills or low wages. rochester, n.y.: national centeron education and the economy.commission on workforce quality and labor market efficiency1989investing in people: a strategy to address americaõs workforce quality. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.committee on human factors1983research needs for human factors. national research council. washington,d.c.: national academy press.cone, j.d., and s.c. hayes1980environmental problems/behavioral solutions. monterey, calif.: brooks/colepublishing.cool, c., r.s. fish, r.e. kraut, and c.m. lowery1992iterative design of video communication systems. pp. 2532 in j. turner and r.kraut, eds., proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperativework. new york: acm press.croft, w.b., and r.h. thompson1987i3r: a new approach to the design of document retrieval systems. journal of theamerican society for information science 36(6):389404.crossen, p.r., and n.j. rosenberg1989strategies for agriculture. scientific american 261(3):128135.davis, j.h., t. kameda, and m.f. stasson1992group risk taking: selected topics. pp. 163199 in j.f. yates, ed., risktakingbehavior. chichester, england: wiley.dawes, r.m., d. faust, and p.e. meehl1989clinical versus actuarial judgment. science 243:16681673.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchde greene, k.b.1991emergent complexity and personmachine systems. international journal of manmachine studies 35(2):219234.druckman, d., and r. bjork, eds.1991in the mindõs eye: enhancing human performance. committee on techniquesfor the enhancement of human performance, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.druckman, d., and j.a. swets, eds.1988enhancing human performance: issues, theories, and techniques. committeeon techniques for the enhancement of human performance, national researchcouncil. washington, d.c.: national academy press.durding, b.m., c.a. becker, and j.d. gould1977data organization. human factors 19:114.durlach, n.i., and a.s. mavor, eds.1995virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges. committee on virtualreality research and development, national research council. washington, d.c.:national academy press.elkind, j.i.1990the incidence of disabilities in the united states. human factors 32:397405.fisher, d.l., e.j. yungkurth, and s.m. moss1990optimal menu hierarchy design: syntax and semantics. human factors 32:665683.gagnon, m., c. sicard, and j.p. sirois1986evaluation of forces on the lumbosacral joint and assessment of work and energytransfers in nursing aides lifting patients. ergonomics 29:407421.geller, e.s.1986prevention of environmental problems. pp. 361383 in handbook of prevention.new york: plenum.geller, e.s., r.r. winett, and p.b. everett1982preserving the environment: new strategies for behavior change. elmsford,n.y.: pergamon press.giroux, l., and r. belleau1986whatõs on the menu? the influence of menu content on the selection process.behavior and information technology 5:169172.goldstein, i.l.1988tomorrowõs workforce today. industry week 4143.1992training in organizations: needs assessment, development, and evaluation, 3rded. pacific grove, calif.: brooks/cole.goodman, p.s.1979assessing organizational change: the rushton quality of work experiment.new york: john wiley & sons.goodman, p.s., and t.l. griffith1991process approach to implementation of new technology. journal of engineeringand technology management 8:161185.goodman, p.s., r. devadas, and t.l. griffith1988groups and productivity: analyzing the effectiveness of selfmanaging teams. pp.295327 in j.p. campbell and r.j. campbell, eds., productivity in organizations.san francisco: josseybass.gould, j.d.1980experiments on composing letters: some facts, some myths, and some observations. pp. 97118 in l. gregg and e.r. steinberg, eds., cognitive processes inwriting. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum and associates.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report611982writing and speaking letters and messages. international journal of manmachine studies 16:147171.gould, j.d., and s.j. boies1983human factors challenges in creating a principal support office system: the speechfiling system approach. acm transactions of office information systems 4(1):273298.gould, j.d., j.p. ukelson, and s.j. boies1993improving application development productivity by using its. international journalof manmachine studies 39:113146. also available as ibm research report,1991, rc17496.gray, c.l., jr., and j.a. alson1989the case for methonal. scientific american 261(5):108114.guzzo, r.a.1988productivity research: reviewing psychological and economic perspectives. pp.6382 in j.p. campbell and r.j. campbell, eds., productivity in organizations.san francisco: josseybass.hackman, j.r., ed.1990groups that work (and those that donõt): creating conditions for teamwork.san francisco: josseybass.hamilton, p., and d. warburton, eds.1979human stress and cognition. chichester, england: wiley.harris, d.h.1980visual detection of driving while intoxicated. human factors 22(6):725732.harter, s.p., and a.r. peters1985heuristics for online information retrieval: a typology and preliminary listing.online review 9(5):407424.hawkins, f.1988human factors in flight. brookfield, vt.: gower.heart, f.1975the arpanet network. in r.l. grimsdale and f.f. kuo, eds., computer communication networks: 1973 proceedings of the nato advanced study institute.leyden, netherlands: noordhoff international publishing.heart, f., a. mckenzie, j. mcquillan, and d. walden1978arpanet completion report. cambridge, mass.: bolt beranek and newmaninc.helmreich, r.l.1992human factors aspects of the air ontario crash at dryden, ontario. in v.p.moshansky, ed., commission of inquiry into the air ontario accident at dryden,ontario: final report. ottawa, canada: minister of supply and services.hockey, g.r.j., ed.1983stress and fatigue in human performance. chichester, england: wiley.1986changes in operator efficiency. in k. boff, l. kaufman, and j. thomas, eds.,handbook of perception and performance, vol. ii. new york: wiley.hockey, r., and p. hamilton1983the cognitive patterning of stress states. pp. 331362 in g.r.j. hockey, ed.,stress and fatigue in human performance. chichester, england: wiley.hockey, g.r.j., a.w.k. gaillard, and m.g.h. coles, eds.1986energetics and human information processing. dordrecht, netherlands: martinusnijhoff.holahan, c.1986environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 37:381407.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhoughton, r.a., and g.m. woodwell1989global climatic change. scientific american 260(4):3644.humancomputer interaction, special 1992 issue.interacting with computers, special 1992 issue.jensen, c.r., and l.a. anderson1987comparing three dimensional representation of data to scatterplots. pp. 11741178 in proceedings of the 31st annual meeting of the human factors society.santa monica, calif.: human factors society.johnson, c.a., and j.l. keltner1983incidence of visual field loss and its relation to driving performance. archives ofophthalmology 101:371375.johnston, w., and a. packer1987workforce 2000: work and workers for the 21st century. indianapolis, ind.:hudson institute.jones, s.g.1993human factors in incident reporting. pp. 567572 in proceedings of the seventhinternational symposium on aviation psychology. columbus: ohio state university.keinan, g.1987decision making under stress: scanning of alternatives under controllable anduncontrollable threats. journal of personality and social psychology 52:639644.kellso, j.r.1989cim in action: microelectronics, manufacturer charts course towards true systemsintegration. industrial engineering 21:1822.kelly, r.t., j.r. callan, t.a. kozlowski, and e. menngola1990human factors in selfmonitoring of blood glucose. task 4 final report. fda/cdrh90/60. springfield, va.: ntis.kerr, e.b., and s.r. hiltz1982computermediated communication systems: status and evaluation. new york:academic press.khalil, t.m., e. abdelmoty, and t.m. asfour1990ergonomics in the management of occupational injuries. pp. 4153 in b.m. pulatand d.c. alexander, eds., industrial ergonomics: case studies. norcross, ga.:industrial engineering and management press.kiger, j.l.1984the depth/breadth tradeoff in the design of menudriven user interfaces. international journal of manmachine studies 20:201213.klemmer, e.t., and f.w. snyder1972measurement of time spent communicating. journal of communication 22:148158.knights, d., h. wilmott, and d. collinson1985job redesign: critical perspectives on the labor process. brookfield, vt.: gowerpublishers.kobasa, s.c.1979stressful life events, personality, and health: an inquiry into hardiness. journal ofpersonality and social psychology 37:111.koenig, m.e.d.1990information services and downstream productivity. annual review of informationscience and technology 25:5586.kornhauser, a.1965the mental health of the industrial worker. new york: wiley.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report63kraus, l.e., and s. stoddard1989chart book on disability in the united states: an infouse report. nationalinstitute on disability and rehabilitation research. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of education.kraut, r.e.1987technology and the transformation of white collar work. hillsdale, n.j.: lawrenceerlbaum associates.kraut, r.e., s. dumais, and s. koch1989computerization, productivity, and quality of worklife. communications of theacm 32(2):220238.kraut, r.e., and l.a. streeter1995coordination in software development. communications of the acm 38(3):6981.kuo w., and j.p. hsu1990update: simultaneous engineering design in japan. industrial engineering 22:2328.landauer, t., d. egan, j. remde, m. lesk, c. lochbaum, and d. ketchum1993enhancing the usability of text through computer delivery and formative evaluation: the superbook project. in c.m. mcknight, a. dillon, and j. richardson,eds., hypertext: a psychological perspective. new york: horwood.la riviere, j.w.m.1989threats to the worldõs water. scientific american 261(3):8094.latham, g.1988human resource training and development. annual review of psychology 39:545582.levi, l.1990occupational stress: spice of life or kiss of death? american psychologist 45:11421145.liu, y., and c.d. wickens1992visual scanning with or without spatial uncertainty and divided and selective attention. acta psychologica 79:131153.locke, e.a., and g.p. latham1990a task theory of goal setting and task performance, englewood cliffs, n.j.:prentice hall.macduffie, j.p., and j.f. krafcik1990integrating technology and human resources for high performance manufacturing: evidence from the international auto industry. paper presented at the transforming organizations conference, massachusetts institute of technology, boston.mackinlay, j.d., g.g. robertson, and s.k. card1991the perspective wall: detail and context smoothly integrated. pp. 173179 in s.p.robertson, g.m. olson, and j.s. olson, eds., human factors in computing systems: reaching through technology. chi õ91. new york: association forcomputing machinery.makhoul, j., f. jelinek, l. rabiner, c. weinstein, and v. zue1990spoken language systems. annual review of computer science 4:481501.malone, t.w.1983how do people organize their desks: implications for designing office automationsystems. acm transactions on office automation systems 1:99112.manuso, j.1983the equitable life assurance society program. preventive medicine 12:658662.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmcdonald, w.i.1984quality control of home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations. british medicaljournal 288:1915.merwin, d.h., and c.d. wickens1991comparison of 2d planar and 3d perspective display formats in multidimensionaldata visualization. proceedings of the international society for optical engineering. bellingham, wash.: spie.miller, d.p.1981the depth/breadth tradeoff in hierarchical computer menus. pp. 296300 in proceedings of the 25th annual meeting of the human factors society. santa monica,calif.: human factors society.mintzberg, h.1973the nature of managerial work. new york: harper and row.mohnen, v.a.1988the challenge of acid rain. scientific american 259(2):3038.moss, j.p., and d.e. delawter1986selfmonitoring of blood glucose. american family physician 33:225228.muckler, f.a.1987the humancomputer interface: the past 35 years and the next 35 years. in g.salvendy, ed., cognitive engineering in the design of humancomputer interaction and expert systems, proceedings of the second international conference onhumancomputer interaction, honolulu, hawaii. amsterdam, netherlands: elsevier.myers, n.1989deforestation rates in tropical forests and their climatic implications. london,england: friends of the earth.national academy of engineering/national research council1991people and technology in the workplace. washington, d.c.: national academypress.national commission on employment policy1986computers in the workplace: selected issues. washington, d.c.: national commission on employment policy.national commission on excellence in education1983a nation at risk: the imperative for educational reform. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office.national council on education standards and testing1992raising standards for american education. washington, d.c.: u.s. governmentprinting office.national research council1977drinking water and health. safe drinking water committee, commission onlife sciences. washington, d.c.: national academy of sciences.1983changing climate: report of the carbon dioxide assessment committee. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1986human resource practices for implementing advanced manufacturing technology. manufacturing studies board. washington d.c.: national academy press.1990the improvement of tropical and subtropical rangelands. board on science andtechnology for international development, office of international affairs. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1991rethinking the ozone problem in urban and regional air pollution. committeeon tropospheric ozone formation and measurement, board on environmentalsciences and toxicology. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1993national collaboratories: applying information technology for scientific reemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report65search. committee on a national collaboratory: establishing the userdeveloperpartnership, computer science and telecommunications board. washington, d.c.:national academy press.newby, g.b.1992an investigation of the role of navigation for information retrieval. asis meeting.newell, g.r., and v.g. vogel1988personal risk factors: what do they mean? cancer 62:16951701.norman, k.1991the psychology of menu selection. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.office of technology assessment1988urban ozone and the clean air act: problems and proposals for change. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.1990worker training: competing in the new international economy. washington,d.c.: u.s. government printing office.olson, j.s., g.m. olson, m. storrosten, and m. carter1992how a groupeditor changes the character of a design meeting as well as itsoutcome. pp. 9198 in j. turner and r. kraut, eds., proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperative work. new york: acm press.oõmalley, k.g., and k.g. ricca1990optimization of a pacs display workstation for diagnostic reading. pp. 940946in medical imaging iv: pacs system design and evaluation. proceedings ofspie, the international society for optical engineering in cooperation with theamerican association of physicists in medicine, vol. 1234. bellingham, wash.:spie.panko, r.r.1992managerial communication patterns. journal of organizational computing 2(1):95122.parkes, k.r.1986coping in stressful episodes: the role of individual differences, environmentalfactors, and situational characteristics. journal of personality and social psychology 51:12771292.pickett, r.m., and t.j. triggs, eds.1974human factors in health care. lexington, mass.: d.c. heath.piore, m., and c. sabel1984the second industrial divide. new york: basic books.pool, r.1993beyond databases and email. science 261(august 13):841843.postel, s.1985thirsty in a waterrich world. international wildlife 15(6):3237.reason, j.1990human error. new york: cambridge university press.repetto, r.1990deforestation in the tropics. scientific american 262(4):3642.roskehofstrand, r.j., and k.r. paap1986cognitive networks as a guide to menu organization: an application in the automated cockpit. ergonomics 29(11):13011311.rosomoff, h.l., c. green, m. silbert, and r. steele1981pain and low back rehabilitation program at the university of miami school ofmedicine. in k.y. lorenzo, ed., new approaches to treatment of chronic pain.nida research monograph 36. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of healthand human services.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchrussell, j.a., and l.m. ward1982environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 33:651688.saegert, s., and g.h. winkel1990environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 41:441477.salvaggio, j.l.1989the information society: economic, social, and structural issues. hillsdale,n.j.: lawrence erlbaum.sanderson, p.m.1989the human planning and scheduling role in advanced manufacturing systems: anemerging human factors domain. human factors 31(6):635666.schlesinger, w.h., j.f. reynolds, g.l. cunningham, l.f. huenneke, w.m. gerrell, r.a. virginia, and w.g. whitford1990biological feedbacks in global desertification. science 247:10431048.schwartz, s.e.1989acid deposition: unraveling a regional phenomenon. science 243:753763.seidler, k.s., and c.d. wickens1992distance and organization in multifunction displays. human factors 34:555569.selye, h.1956the stress of life. new york: mcgrawhill.senders, j., and n. moray, eds.1991human error: cause, prediction, and reduction. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.shneiderman, b.1987designing the user interface: strategies for effective humancomputer interaction. reading, mass.: addisonwesley.smith, m.j.1987occupational stress. pp. 844860 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of human factors. new york: wiley.snowberry, k., s.r. parkinson, and n. sisson1983computer display menus. ergonomics 26(7):699712.soule, m.e.1991conservation: tactics for a constant crisis. science 253:744750.sproull, l., and s. kiesler1991computers, networks and work. scientific american 265(3):116123.steinhart, p.1990no net loss. audubon july:1821.stern, p.c.1992psychological dimensions of global environmental change. annual review of psychology 43:269302.stern, p.c., o.r. young, and d. druckman, eds.1992global environmental change: understanding the human dimensions. committee on the human dimensions of global change, national research council.washington, d.c.: national academy press.stolarski, r.s.1988the antarctic ozone hole. scientific american 258(1):3036.stolarski, r.s., r. bojkov, l. bishop, c. zerefos, j. staehelin, and j. zawodny1992measured trends in stratospheric ozone. science 256:342349.strassman, p.a.1985information payoff: the transformation of workers in the electronic age. newyork: free press.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary report67stubbs, d.a., p.w. buckle, m.p. hudson, and p.m. rivers1983back pain in the nursing profession, ii. the effectiveness of training. ergonomics26:767779.swanson, g.m.1988cancer prevention in the workplace and natural environment: a review of etiology, research design, and methods of risk reduction. cancer 62:17251746.swets, j.a.1988measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems. science 240:12851293.swets, j.a., r.m. pickett, s.f. whitehead, d.j. getty, j.b. schnur, j.b. swets, and b.a.freeman1979assessment of diagnostic technologies. science 205:753759.tannenbaum, s., and g. yukl1991training and development in work organizations. annual review of psychology41:399441.turner, j., and r. kraut, eds.1992proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperative work. newyork: acm press.vachon, r.a.1990employing the disabled. issues in science and technology 6(2):4450.vanderheiden, g.c.1990thirtysomething million: should they be exceptions? human factors 32:383396.vigil, p.1985computer literacy and the two cultures revisited. pp. 240242 in c.a. parkhurst,ed., proceedings of the american society for information science (asis) 48thannual meeting. white plains, n.y.: knowledge industry publications inc.vincente, k.j., and r.c. williges1988accommodating individual differences in searching a hierarchical file system. international journal of manmachine studies 29:647668.walker, c., and r. guest1952man on the assembly line. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.wallace, d.r.1985wetlands in america: labyrinth and temple. wilderness 49:1227.weischedel, r., j. carbonell, b. grosz, w. lehnert, m. marcus, r. perrault, and r. wilensky1990natural language processing. annual review of computer science 4:435452.wexley, k.1984personnel training. annual review of psychology 31:519551.wickens, c.d.1992engineering psychology and human performance, 2nd. ed. new york: harpercollins.william t. grant foundation1988the forgotten half, pathways to success for americaõs youth and young families. commission on work, family, and citizenship. washington, d.c.: williamt. grant foundation.williams, g.m.1991causes and prevention of cancer. statistical bulletin of metropolitan insurancecompanies 72:610.wilson, e.o.1989threats to biodiversity. scientific american 261(3):108116.wulf, w.1993the collaboratory opportunity. science 261(august 13):854855.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchyates, j.f.1990judgment and decision making. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prentice hall.zuboff, s.1988in the age of the smart machine: the future of work and power. new york:basic books.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69part iibackground papersemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.711productivity in organizationspaul s. goodman and douglas h. harrisintroductionthis chapter identifies specific opportunities for research on productivity in organizations in the following four areas: implementation of effectivechange within the organization; integration of individual productivity intoorganizational productivity; congruence of technology, people, and organizations; and integration of the enterprise. our focus is on new research tobe conducted by human factors specialists. we also recognize the need forcoordination and cooperation with researchers in other disciplines who areinvolved in addressing issues in organizational productivity. consequently,this chapter is for all researchers interested in gaining a better understanding of productivity in organizations. we believe it is also relevant to policymakers and research planners with needs and interests in this area.the problem areaan enterprise consists of technology and people organized to accomplish some purpose. the success of an enterprise can be assessed on thebasis of its output and/or the processes and inputs that produce this output.productivity, in general terms, is the ratio of the output of the enterprise tothe inputs. we consider both total factor productivity and labor productivity (see mahoney, 1988, for a more intensive discussion of productivity).in some of the research we review in this chapter, the criterion variable isemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchperformance, not productivity. other measures, such as quality, timeliness,and profitability, will also be considered in this analysis. to simplify theexposition, however, we will focus primarily on productivity.the important questions we must now answer are the following: howdo we identify the major conditions and processes that cause variation inorganizational productivity? how do we address these factors to increaseorganizational productivity?the main focus of human factors research has been on improving individual task performance. researchers have obtained measures of individualperformance, such as speed, accuracy, and time needed to learn, and haveused these to estimate individual productivity. in some cases they havemeasured productivity directly. the implicit or explicit assumption underlying these efforts has been that increased individual productivity will increase organizational productivity. however, very little research evidenceis available to support this assumption. improvements in individual productivity may not add up to improvements in organizational productivity because a variety of variables may moderate the effects of the individualimprovements and because the various productivity increases that occur onan individual level can interact in a complex way.we need to understand the factors that drive organizational productivity. if the human factors researcher intervenes at the individual or grouplevel to increase productivity, we need to learn whether these changes affectproductivity at the organizational level. if researchers intervene at the organizational level with new technology, decisionmaking aids, training, andso on, we still must identify the conditions under which these changes leadto improvements in organizational productivity.the importance of research on productivitywe live in an increasingly competitive global economy. the ability ofcompanies and countries to enhance the productivity of their resources iscritical for remaining competitive in this environment and, on a nationallevel, for enhancing the standard of living.the united states has been introducing advanced technologies to enhance productivity and, hence, our competitive position (national academyof engineering and national research council, 1991; national researchcouncil, 1986). the returns from some of these investments, however,appear to be relatively small. for example, the dataprocessing budgets forcorporations in the united states have reportedly been increasing about 12percent per year. productivity increases, however, have been averaging nomore than 2 percent per year (weiner and brown, 1989). other investigations of the impact of information technology on productivity have failed toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations73find any increase at all from the more than $100 billion per year that isspent on hardware, software, and computer services (attewell, 1994).enhancing productivity is clearly a major national challenge. as competition increases in the global economy, we need to find new ways toimprove organizational productivity. the role of researchers is to understand more about the inhibitors and facilitators of organizational productivity. as we develop new knowledge in this area, we will be better able tolink new innovations, technologies, organizational structures, and capital toenhance organizational productivity.we begin our discussion with a review of past research on organizational productivity. we then describe the 4 areas that need further researchand identify 15 research opportunities within these areas.a strategy for identifyingresearch opportunitiesthe purpose of this section is to give the reader a selective review ofproductivity research in organizations. we draw primarily from the behavioral science literatures (e.g., human factors, industrial psychology, organizational psychology). research that has been generated from the fields ofeconomics and technology are outside this review. we have also omittedthe methodological issues of productivity measurement and analysis (seemahoney, 1988, for a discussion of these issues).studies of individuals and groupsthe bulk of the research completed by industrial/organizational psychologists and human factors specialists has focused on interventions designed to increase individual performance or productivity (campbell et al.,1988; pritchard, 1991). examples of interventions include training, measurement and feedback of performance, goal setting, work design, and humanequipment interface design. guzzo (1988) assessed what we knowfrom psychological research about productivity and its improvement andidentified training as the most powerful way to increase individual productivity. he further stated that the effect of training was strongest on outputmeasures of productivity. locke and latham (1990) have provided someconvincing evidence of the positive effects of goal setting on individualperformance. research (guzzo, 1988) has indicated that changes in workdesign have improved individual productivity. what we do not know, however, is whether or not these individual increases are linked to productivityincreases of the organization.human factors specialists and industrial engineers have reported numerous instances in which the application of appropriate behavioral prinemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchciples to the design of workplaces and humanequipment interfaces resultedin increases in individual productivity. for example, harris (1984), in hispresidential address to the human factors and ergonomics society, described 30 human factors projects, many of which involved increases inindividual productivity in organizations. examples included production ofmicroelectronic devices, maintenance of army tanks, investigation of criminal activity, purification of water, ontheroad detection of drunk drivers,and military mission planning. in most cases, however, there was no attempt to study whether the positive effects of these increases in individualproductivity affected group or organizational productivity.over the last decade, there has been a renewed research interest ingroups. particular attention has been paid to the role of autonomous or selfmanaging groups. the findings emerging from this research (goodman etal., 1988; hackman, 1990) are that selfmanaging teams can increase productivity, quality, and worker satisfaction. however, most of this researchhas not conceptually or empirically considered whether increases in groupor team productivity produce increases in organizational productivity.studies of systems and organizationsanother source of studies on productivity in organizations comes fromresearchers interested in how the interaction of environment, technology,organization, and people variables affects organizational productivity (lawrenceand lorsch, 1969; scott, 1987; thompson, 1967). sociotechnical analysis(trist et al., 1963) provided the early intellectual underpinnings of thiswork.one study (macduffie and krafcik, 1990) sought to explain productivity differences in a worldwide sample of automobile assembly plants. thecritical findings of this study were that the plants with the highest level ofautomation were not the most productive. the most productive plants introduced congruent organizational changes as well as technological changes.in general, congruency refers to the fit between the type of technology,specified in this case by levels of interdependence, and the nature of theorganizational arrangements, specified by the flexibility in organizationalarrangements. better fit means higher scores in productivity or effectiveness.studies in the shipping industry (walton, 1987) and coal industry (goodman,1979) also show that high organizational productivity is associated withcongruency among innovation in technology, organizational arrangements,and people factors.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations75the gaps in what we knowwe know something about how to increase individual and group productivity. however, there is no compelling research evidence that thesechanges lead to changes in organizational productivity. we also know thatcongruency among technological, organizational, and people factors cancontribute to organizational productivity.yet we do not know how changes at the organizational level are relatedto changes in individual or group productivity. also, the systems perspective does not inform us ahead of time how conditions of congruency will bedetermined. there are many gaps in our knowledge of how new forms oftechnology, new organizational forms, and changes in a competitive environment will impact on rates of changes in a organizational productivity.although we have made progress in understanding organizational productivity, we need to address some of these gaps with new theories and newmethods.four research opportunity areaswe will outline the research that is needed to define the processes andconditions that will facilitate this transformation. our focus, then, is not onproductivity per se, but on how human factors and other organizationalresearchers can develop theories and methodologies to understand the linkbetween changes in individual, group, and organizational productivity.we organize our discussion of research in terms of four opportunityareas. we describe the problem and rationale for each of these areas, alongwith specific research needs. throughout this analysis we consider productivity a multilevel and multidimensional concept.implementation of effective change within the organizationbillions of dollars have been spent introducing new forms of organizational and technological change in organizations (bikson et al., 1987; leonardbarton, 1988; national academy of engineering/national research council, 1991). implementation deals with the process of effectively introducingchanges in organization. there is a growing body of evidence (goodmanand griffith, 1991) to show that many organizational and technologicalinterventions, which should inherently improve organizational productivity,are not successfully implemented. this means the interventions are rejected, resisted, only partially accepted, or only temporarily adopted andthen rejected.if technological and organizational interventions have clear objectivesor inherent benefits but cannot be successfully implemented, then they willemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchnot improve individual or organizational productivity. indeed, successfulimplementation is key to our analysis of organizational productivity. forexample, we recently studied the introduction of a vision system into asophisticated computerintegrated manufacturing environment (goodman etal., 1990). the purpose of this vision system was to enhance quality throughnew forms of monitoring. by most objective measures, the new technologydominated current technology for monitoring and improving quality. however, the vision systems remained basically unused two years after theirintroduction.if we cannot establish improvements through successful implementation at the individual, group, or organizational level we cannot expect to seeproductivity gains at the organizational level. understanding the process ofsuccessful implementation is therefore the starting point in our analysis ofresearch opportunities.new research topicsover the last decade there has been an increasing body of research onthe process of implementation. in much of that work, researchers haveexamined how technological, organizational, and individuallevel variablesaffect the implementation of new technologies. they have paid less attention to identifying underlying explanatory mechanisms. thus, there areframeworks but no welldefined theories. despite the large number of possible predictor variables, there have been few multivariate studies and fewlongitudinal designs to capture implementation over time.research needs include the following:¥developing better conceptualizations and measures of implementation success. many studies focus on user satisfaction and frequency of use.there has been little attempt to link individual and organizational dimensions of implementation success.¥developing more parsimonious theory. much of the research hasused a contingency theory approach. that is, researchers have tried toidentify a contingent set of variables or conditions (e.g., top managementsupport or participation) under which technologies will be more effectivelyimplemented and conditions under which implementations will be less effective. because of the large number of variables that might affect implementation success, such an approach has great limitations. recently, therehas been movement toward a processoriented theory (goodman and griffith,1991). the key idea is to develop a better understanding of the mechanismsthat lead to successful implementation.¥assessing the value of alternative forms of training and learning.training is an important part of the implementation process. it is clear thatemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations77formal classroom training plays an important role in the successful implementation of new technology. it is also true that other forms of learning,such as observation, modeling, and apprenticeship, bear on successful implementation of new technology or organizational arrangements. we havelittle systematic knowledge of how and under what conditions these alternative forms of learning affect implementation success.¥studying the effects of alternative forms of commitment. participation is a common prescription in implementing new changes successfully.however, the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of participation isquite mixed (goodman and griffith, 1991). perhaps we should exploreother ways to enhance commitment: for example, fostering recognition ofthe inherent benefits of the new technology or a normative consensus aboutthe new technology. alternatively, we could explore the specific mechanisms evoked by different forms of participation and how they bear onchanging levels of commitment.¥studying adaptation and redesign. a significant finding (leonardbarton, 1987) in recent implementation studies is the importance of a redesign function. that is, as a piece of technology is introduced into an organization, one needs a mechanism to adapt the technology to changing userneeds and organizational contexts. we know little about how to designalternative forms of adaptation mechanisms or the effectiveness of thesemechanisms in different contexts. this is important if we are going tounderstand the successful implementation of new technology and organizational arrangement.integration of individual productivityinto organizational productivityalthough there has been considerable research on productivity at theindividual, group, and organizational levels, we know little about how changesin productivity at one level affect changes in productivity at another level.new research topicsresearch opportunities for examining the linkages between individualand organizational productivity are relatively unlimited, given the paucityof studies in this area. we recommend examining the different types oflinkages to discover whether increases in individual productivity inhibit orfacilitate increases in organizational productivity.research needs include the following:¥studying productivity linkages within jobs. jobs are bundles oflinked activities. most interventions to improve productivity focus on speemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcific sets of activities. there is some evidence that increasing the productivity of certain sets of activities within a job can reduce the productivity ofother job activities. for example, kraut et al. (1989) examined the impactof a new computerized information system on the productivity of customerservice representatives. they learned that productivity increased for routine tasks, but dropped for nonroutine tasks. so the net increase in productivity of that job may be close to zero. similarly, increases in productivityin certain job activities can simply create additional slack, which does notenhance productivity for the total job or for the organization. furthermore,some job activities are central to core production activities, while others(e.g., recordkeeping) are more peripheral. improving productivity in peripheral activities is less likely to affect organizational productivity. we donot understand the linkages between different activities within a job. whenwill productivity changes in certain activities stimulate positive changes inother activities? when will the opposite occur? we also do not understandwhen slack will be generated, when slack can have a positive effect onproductivity, and when slack will mitigate any greater effects of productivity, given increases in certain job activities.¥studying productivity linkages between jobs or units. jobs in organizations are interdependent in varying degrees. most research has focusedon increasing productivity in individual jobs, but not on the consequencesof this productivity for jobs horizontally or vertically linked to them. thereis some evidence that productivity increases in a particular job may (1)reduce productivity in other jobs, (2) simply create slack that does not leadto productivity in other jobs, or (3) encounter constraints in interdependentjobs that prevent the productivity increases from having an impact on anyother part of the organization. the situation is analogous to what occursamong activities within a job. thus, increases in productivity in one jobmay decrease productivity in other jobs, leading to a net productivity gainof zero. the basic research question is, how do changes in one job positively or negatively affect other linked jobs? there is a need for a welldeveloped theory or research paradigm to help us predict when increases inproductivity in one job would enhance the productivity in a horizontally, orvertically, linked job.¥studying linkages and organizational type. organizations differ inthe interdependence and complexity of their linkages. some organizations,for example, have pooled interdependence: different departments are fairlyindependent, but the products of all these departments need to be pooledtogether to achieve an organizational product. a department store is anexample of pooled interdependence. some organizations have other formsof interdependence: an assembly line is a form of serial interdependence; ahospital might illustrate reciprocal interdependence. even organizationswith the same type of interdependence may vary in complexity or simply inemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations79the number of different linkages. linkages between individual, department,and organizational productivity in pooled interdependence differ from thelinkages in serial or reciprocal interdependence. for example, because department store units are relatively independent, increasing productivity inone unit should contribute fairly directly to increases in organizational productivity. in contrast, the effect of productivity increases in any unit of anassembly line depends, to a large extent, on what happens in the otherinterdependent units and, hence, will condition the impact of that unit onorganizational productivity (see national research council, 1994). weneed to understand how the mechanisms that translate changes in individuallevel productivity to organizationallevel productivity differ by organizational type. these comparative organizational analyses should providenew ideas about and new insights into the relationship between individualand organizational changes in productivity. although we have defined organizational type in terms of the form of interdependence, other measuressuch as size may be relevant.congruency of technology, people, and organizationsa growing body of literature indicates that the fit or congruency amongtechnological, organizational, and people factors is the key to understandingdifferences in organizational productivity (goodman, 1979; walton, 1987).for example, in a study of auto assembly plants, macduffie and krafcik(1990) observe that the most productive plants, identified as òlean production systems,ó have (1) a technological system characterized by highly interdependent technology, no buffers, a mechanism that immediately stopsthe system when downtime occurs, and no repair areas and (2) an organizational system characterized by fewer job classifications, workers with multijob skills, intensive training in problem solving, teams, fewer status barriers, and contingent reward systems.the critical research question is, why does this configuration of technological and organizational arrangements lead to high productivity? whatdoes congruency or fit mean? an increasing number of studies indicate thatfit makes a difference. however, we need some beforethefact explanations for what fit among technology, organization, and people factors means.this becomes particularly important as new technologies proliferate andnew organizational arrangements evolve.the importance of this research area should be clear. the future willbring rapid changes in both technology and organizational arrangements, aswell as new demographic characteristics. we need to develop theories andbodies of research findings that will help us understand and predict howdifferent combinations of these factors will affect organizational productivity.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchnew research topicsthere are important, exciting research opportunities concerning the congruency among technological, people, and organizational factors as driversof organizational productivity.research needs include the following:¥identifying the critical processes or mechanisms that explain whycertain configurations among technology, organizations, and people lead tohigher organizational productivity. goodman et al. (1994) identify fivecritical processes underlying the congruency question: coordination, problem solving, focus of attention, organizational evolution or redesign, andmotivation. are there other processes? should some of these be combined?to what extent are the processes independent explanations and to whatextent do the processes reinforce one another? reward systems at theorganizational level both improve motivation and focus attention on organizationallevel outcomes. how do these processes function under differenttechnological and organizational arrangements?¥connecting the issues of linkage and congruency. a central question in this chapter is, how do changes in individuallevel productivity leadto changes in organizational productivity? this is an important and relatively unresearched area. although, as noted above, there is a body ofliterature supporting the importance of congruency among technology, organizations, and people to enhance productivity, there is little theory orevidence to explain when, how, and why this congruency functions. research is needed to integrate the theoretical work on linkages and congruency in some empirical context. are there common processes that enhanceboth linkages and congruency among technological and organizational systems? how do they function? where is the synergy? research in this areamight, for example, focus on redesign. the implementation literature pointsout that redesign is necessary to adapt new technology to changing organizational factors and user needs over time. if a successful redesign processis in place, there is a higher probability that individual productivity can besustained and, therefore, a greater opportunity to contribute to organizational productivity. without a redesign process, there is a much lowerprobability that individual productivity will affect organizational productivity. the redesign process also appears in the literature about highly productive, congruent systems. in the highproductivity, lean production systemsdiscussed above, there was a continuous process of redesigning the organizational and technological systems to ensure better fits and higher productivity. it is important to note that the redesign process is central to bothexplanations (linkage and congruency) for higher productivity.¥studying the effects on productivity of dramatic changes in techemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations81nology, organization, and the workforce. over the next decade, we expectto see rapid and dramatic changes in all three areas. new forms of technology will proliferate as tools are created for decision making, communication, and working across space and time. on an organizational level, therewill probably be a continuation of the movement toward smaller and moreautonomous units, the structuring of organizations around processes ratherthan functions, and increased interest in such processes as organizationallearning. the characteristics of the workforce will also continue to change,possibly altering the òcontractó between the employees and the organization. we need research on how changes in each of three areasñtechnology,organization, and the workforceñaffect productivity in the other two. itmay be helpful to do some of this research in different national contexts.integration of the enterprisedevelopments since the late 1980s point to the need to integrate organizational processes better, for example, by computerintegrated manufacturing. at the same time, there has been a push to integrate external constituencies such as customers and suppliers. one important question in the1990s is how to integrate these external activities to improve organizationalproductivity. the broader question is how to integrate internal and externalactivities into a total enterprise to improve overall productivity and effectiveness.the design process is a good exemplar of this issue. traditionally, thedesign process was a serial activity with primarily an internal focus. itwent from product conception to the design, manufacturing, and marketingof the product. now, the importance of integrating customer needs into thedesign process is well understood, and the necessity of moving away fromserial interdependence to a more simultaneous consideration of customer,designer, and manufacturing needs is becoming more apparent (clark, 1991).integration, both internally and externally, is what makes simultaneous consideration of these multiple needs possible. the consequences of gooddesign processes are readily apparent. producers with better externally andinternally integrated design processes get goods to the market faster, aremore responsive to customer needs, and produce goods with higher qualityand productivity.another example of enterprise integration concerns the relationship between an organization and its suppliers and vendors. traditionally, this wasan armõs length relationship. now, there are major forces to integratesuppliers and customers into the daily operation of the organization. òjustintimeó environments demand a close association between the suppliersand the focal organization.if our ultimate objective is to better understand organizational producemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtivity, we must pay attention to integrating the enterprise. this is not awellresearched area. in the past, much of the work in this area has focusedon specific levels of analysis and on interventions to increase productivityat specific levels within the organization. the challenge in the 1990s is tounderstand the process of integrating external demands into the internalprocesses of the organization.new research topicsincreasing our understanding of the process of integration should increase our knowledge of productivity in organizations. however, this problem is challenging simply because of the scope of the problem statement.enterprise integration focuses on the totality of the organization and all therelevant constituencies of its environment. given the paucity of research inthis area, we have identified research areas that would inform us about theenterprise integration process.research needs include the following:¥investigating the role and consequences of technology. with thecosts of buying and using computers declining and with the levels of computer power and networking capability increasing, technology will be amajor factor in the integration process. much of the early work in enterprise integration focused on internal integration of machines. the newchallenges are using technologies to integrate operational planning and strategic decision making into a total operating system. some of the researchon electronic data interchange shows how certain types of external integration can improve organizational performance indicators (kekre andmukhopadhyay, 1992; srinivasan et al., 1991). an important research endeavor will be to document the functional and dysfunctional consequencesof this and other technologies in achieving internal and external integration.what types of information and transactions are necessary in this integratedenterprise, and how will electronic communication (versus other forms ofcommunication) contribute to the productivity and quality of these information exchanges?¥studying the process of coordination. implicit in the concept ofintegration is the need to coordinate activities across varied constituencies.the design example, discussed above, involved different groups (customers,designer, manufacturer) who had different goals and interests. the taskswere to identify critical forms of information and to coordinate this information so as to optimize all the relevant processes (design, manufacturing,marketing). new theory and research on negotiation and coordination seemto be critical for understanding the broader question of enterprise integration (malone and crowston, 1994).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations83¥studying the process of developing new partnerships. the conceptof enterprise integration is not grounded solely in technological solutions.customers, suppliers, and firms all have different interests. entering acollaborative arrangement requires some form of organizational change. thesenew organizational forms require new forms of reward, commitment, andstructural relationship. how to define effective collaboration is an important research question that bears on our broader question of enhancing productivity in organizations (kanter, 1991).¥studying the effects of linking external and internal productivity.we have focused on the need for research on how productivity increases atthe individual level lead to productivity increases at the organizational level.our analysis, however, has been within the organization. another approachwould be to examine how productivity increases in the customerõs or supplierõsorganization leads to productivity increases in the focal organization. if thefocal organization intervenes in the customer organization to increase productivity, how do these productivity increases link back into the focal organization?conclusionwe have identified four broad research opportunity areas, describingeach problem area and possible research topics. we believe that understanding these four areas is critical to understanding the general question ofproductivity in organizations. we think there is important and challengingresearch to be done in each area. we derived 15 research needs from these4 opportunity areas. each research need can be a point of departure forunderstanding organizational productivity.although we have focused primarily on productivity, we could haveswitched our focus to other criterion variables, such as quality. we alsothink the research issues generated in this chapter bear equally on manydifferent organizational forms. the research questions are relevant to bothmanufacturing and service organizations, and to both profit and nonprofitorganizations.referencesattewell, p.1994information technology and the productivity paradox. pp. 1353 in d.h. harris,ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel onorganizational linkages, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.bikson, t.k., b. gutek, and d.a. mankin1987implementing computerized procedures in office settings. santa monica, calif.:rand corporation.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcampbell, j.p., r.j. campbell, and associates1988productivity in organizations. san francisco: josseybass.clark, k.b.1991product development performance: strategy, organization and management inthe world auto industry. boston: harvard business school press.goodman, p.s.1979assessing organizational change: the rushton quality of work experiment.new york: john wiley & sons.goodman, p.s., and t.l. griffith1991process approach to implementation of new technology. journal of engineeringand technology management 8:161185.goodman, p.s., r. devadas, and t.l. griffith1988groups and productivity: analyzing the effectiveness of selfmanaging teams. pp.295327 in j.p. campbell, r.j. campbell, and associates, productivity in organizations. san francisco: josseybass.goodman, p.s., t.l. griffith, and d.b. fenner1990understanding technology and the individual in an organizational context. pp. 4586 in p.s. goodman and l.s. sproull, eds., technology and organizations. sanfrancisco: josseybass.goodman, p.s., f.j. lerch, and t. mukhopadhyay1994individual and organizational productivity: linkages and processes. pp. 5480 ind.h. harris, ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel on organizational linkages, committee on human factors, nationalresearch council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.guzzo, r.a.1988productivity research: reviewing psychological and economic perspectives. pp.6382 in j.p. campbell, r.j. campbell, and associates, productivity in organizations. san francisco: josseybass.hackman, j.r., ed.1990groups that work (and those that donõt): creating conditions for teamwork.san francisco: josseybass.harris, d.h.1984human factors success stories. pp. 15 in proceedings of the human factorssociety 28th annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: human factors society.1994organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel onorganizational linkages, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.kanter, r.m.1991improving the development, acceptance, and use of new technology: organizational and interorganizational challenges. pp. 1556 in national academy of engineering and national research council, people and technology in the workplace. washington, d.c.: national academy press.kekre, s., and t. mukhopadhyay1992impact of electronic data interchange technology on quality improvement and inventory reduction programs: a field study. international journal of productioneconomics 28:265282.kraut, r.s., s. dumais, and s. koch1989computerization, productivity, and quality of worklife. communications of theacm 32(2):220238.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.productivity in organizations85lawrence, p.r., and j.w. lorsch1969organization and environment: managing differentiation and integration. homewood,ill.: irwin.leonardbarton, d.1987the case for integrative innovation: an expert system at digital. sloan management review fall:719.1988implementation as mutual adaptation of technology and organization. researchpolicy 17:251267.locke, e.a., and g.p. latham1990a task theory of goal setting and task performance. englewood cliffs, n.j.:prentice hall.macduffie, j.p., and j.f. krafcik1990integrating technology and human resources for high performance manufacturing: evidence from the international auto industry. paper presented at the transforming organizations conference, massachusetts institute of technology, boston.mahoney, t.a.1988productivity defined: the relativity of efficiency, effectiveness, and change. pp.1339 in j.p. campbell, r.j. campbell, and associates, productivity in organizations. san francisco: josseybass.malone, t.w., and k. crowston1994the interdisciplinary study of coordination. acm computing surveys 26(1):87119.national academy of engineering and national research council1991people and technology in the workplace. washington, d.c.: national academypress.national research council1986human resource practices for implementing advanced manufacturing technology. manufacturing studies board. washington, d.c.: national academy press.pritchard, r.d.1991organizational productivity. in m.d. dunnette and l.m. hough, eds., the handbook of industrial and organizational psychology, 2nd ed. palo alto, calif.:consulting psychologists press.scott, w.r.1987organizations: rational, natural, and open systems. englewood cliffs, n.j.:prenticehall.srinivasan, k., s. kekre, and t. mukhopadhyay1991impact of electronic data interchange technology on jit. management science40(10):12911304.thompson, j.d.1967organizations in action. new york: mcgrawhill.trist, e., g. higgins, h. murray, and a. pollock1963organizational choice. london, england: tavistock.walton, r.e.1987innovating to compete: lessons for diffusing and managing change in the workplace. san francisco: josseybass.weiner, e., and a. brown1989human factors: the gap between humans and machines. the futurist mayjune:911.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research862training and educationjoyce l. shields, joseph b. cavallaro, beverly m. huey, andharold p. van cottintroductionthis chapter focuses on the relationship between joboriented trainingand human factors research. the underlying premise is that human factorsresearch can help solve some of the difficult problems confronted by thepeople who design, develop, and manage training programs and who delivertraining services to trainees.education is included as a topic because there are strong links betweengeneral education and training for the workplace. education prepares forjoboriented training and influences it. to a large extent, the educationalattainment of prospective trainees determines what the training provider cando and how the training can or should be presented. in this sense, the levelof educational attainment of the trainee is a parameter in the assembly ofany given training program.in joboriented training, training and human factors are to some extentreciprocal. when a new system is being created, the goal is to design thesystem so that training requirements are as light as possible. if there aredesign deficiencies, the operators of the system must be trained to overcome or compensate for them. thus, the absence of effective human factorsinputs into the system design process generates technical problems for thepeople responsible for the training of operator and maintenance personnel.humancentered systems design and development also come into theprocess of providing the tools used for training. the complete ensemble ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education87such tools is itself a system and is, therefore, a reasonable domain for thekinds of systems research carried out by human factors scientists.there are many ways in which human factors research is and continuesto be useful in addressing some of the problems that now are being confronted by the people engaged in providing joboriented training. in therest of this chapter, we will explore these problems and the current andpotential contribution of human factors to them.notable problemschanging conditions of workthe very nature of work is changing. instead of the physical manipulations that formerly characterized most industrial jobs, more and more jobsare based on the manipulation of symbolsñwords and numbers. new technologies and work processes are shifting skill requirements in some types ofjobs from manual and jobspecific to generic, from concrete to abstract.for example, in many modern factories, the production process is so computerized that many workers no longer physically execute tasks but are nowresponsible mainly for monitoring automated processes. whereas previously a machinist adjusted and maintained machinery by handson manipulation, today a technician works through a keyboard and crt display andconsequently has a more distant relationship to both process and product.a direct consequence of computerization is that tangible work outcomes are less evident. there is some evidence suggesting that spontaneous learning and skill transfer do not work as well in highly computerizedenvironments as in more traditional workplaces. for example, the difference in performance between the best and the average appears to be greaterin computerized work than in traditional jobs. this finding leads to theconjecture that less incidental or informal learning takes place in work thatinvolves symbol manipulation. this conjecture is supported by the fact thatmuch about symbol manipulation is invisible, unlike the visible actionsinvolved in object manipulation. the findings also suggest that john seelybrown (1988) and others are correct when they call for new forms of training such as a òcognitive apprenticeship,ó which would somehow make themental procedures and decision processes of exemplary performers òvisibleó so that others might learn from them.changing workforce demographics andchanging national patternssimilar concerns are expressed about the changing demographics of theworkforce. in this era of vigorous global competition, rapid technologicalemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchchange, and shifting economic conditions, trainers must be able to adjust tosuch changes. in workforce 2000 (johnston and packer, 1987), the followingòdemographic factsó are identified as shaping the workforce of the future:¥there will soon be a slowdown in the growth of the population andthe workforceñthe greatest since the 1930s.¥the average age of the workforce will rise and the pool of youngworkers will decline.¥more women will enter the workforce, although the rate of increasewill be smaller than in the past.¥minorities will be a larger share of new labor force entrants.¥immigrants will represent the largest share of the increase in thepopulation and the workforce since the first world war.thus, the ònext decade will usher in a workforce unlike anything corporateamerica has ever seenñteeming with women, minorities, and the elderly,the antithesis of the workforce present at many companies todayó (goldstein,1988). employers will soon have to utilize these nontraditional sources oflabor supply in order to sustain outputñeven if equal opportunity regulations are abolished.human resource implications of demographic shifts are numerous. forexample, taylor (1989) lists several training and development issues thatwill arise from the òage waveó of older workers, including the need torecognize and emphasize the contributions that older employees can makeat all levels of the organization. it will be incumbent on the employerorganization to provide effective training and retraining programs for theseolder workers.because people will remain in the workforce longer, there will be anincreasing need to retrain people who have already reached positions ofsome seniority and authority. some of these people will be the victims ofthe buggywhip scenarioñtheir jobs will just become obsolete. for others,the job will still be there to be done, but it will be done by a robot or acomputer.older workers might need to be retrained through substantially different techniques than those used to train true novices. in some instances, ahighly proficient worker may be required to unlearn some of the skills thatgave status in the original job. such skills may actually be counterproductive in the latest version of some jobs.discussing the greater numbers of women in the workforce, johnstonand packer (1987) predict that the distinctions between males and femalesin wage rates and in terms of concentrations in particular jobs will declinein response to market pressures. they also predict that the proportion ofòparttime, flexible, and stayathome jobs will increase, and [that] totalemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education89work hours per employee are likely to drop in response to the needs ofwomen to integrate work and child rearing.ó on the plus side, trainingrequirements may become more uniform if both men and women are doingthe same work. negatives in terms of increased costs could result fromhaving more people to train if more jobs are shared by two individuals.the office of technology assessment (1990) discusses the number ofnew workforce entrants who will be coming from minority groups and whoare often disadvantaged because of inadequate basic educational opportunities. furthermore, many young workforce entrants, regardless of their ethnic heritage, will confront a daunting challenge if the predicted shift tomore highly skilled jobs within the manufacturing sector takes place (personick,1989). if, as seems likely, a similar shift is taking place in the servicesector as it continues to expand, the country might find itself in the ironiccondition of having large numbers of workers unemployed while there arelabor shortages in relatively wellpaying job categories.at the national level, the growing service sector is expected to accountfor over 90 percent of the 18 million new jobs forecasted for the next 10years. much of the growth is expected to occur in the health, education,business, and food services. in both the service and manufacturing sectors,systems analyst and computer programmer jobs will be among the fastestgrowing occupations, and workers in other occupations will need to beincreasingly computer literate. improved office technology will continue tolimit the growth of administrative support occupations, which will be amongthe slowergrowing groups of occupations (bureau of labor statistics, 1991).changing organizational arrangementsnumerous changes are also occurring in the nature and structure ofwork at the organizational level. changes instituted by organizations include decentralizing and flattening organizational structures, establishingwork teams, pushing decisionmaking responsibilities downward throughout the organization, and streamlining the management ranks through theelimination of middle and lowerlevel managers.flattened organizational structures reduce the hierarchical flow of information and should accelerate decision making. job classifications arebroadening as work teams assume some or all of the responsibilities of thefirstline supervisor such as inspection, quality control, production scheduling, work allocation, and coordination with other departments (office oftechnology assessment, 1990).decentralizing the organizational structure and establishing work teamsincrease the workerõs autonomy and responsibility. in a decentralized organizational structure, fewer layers of management result in managersõ supervising greater numbers of workers. managers are unable to manage at theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchsame level of detail as before, and some of the responsibility and authoritypreviously held by middle managers is delegated to workers in lower levelsof the organization (kravitz, 1988).the development of crossfunctional work teams has also increased theresponsibilities of workers. employees no longer perform fragmented tasks,but have broad responsibility for knowing how to perform all aspects of ajob, a situation that draws greater initiative from workers and increasestheir involvement in decision making (bailey, 1990). consequently, socialskills will also become more important as organizational structures changeand as more service jobs are created. interpersonal skills, teamwork, andcommunication skills will become critical for every employee, from thechief executive to the line worker (carnevale et al., 1988).the nature of work is also likely to change owing to developments inareas such as telecommunications (e.g., teleconferencing, voice mail, picture phones, and facsimile machines) and personal computers (e.g., widearea networks, modems, communications software, laptop and notebook computers). these technologies are making it possible for more and moreworkers to work out of the home. as more people work at home, a varietyof management and organizational questions are raised, including how tostructure teamwork, how to train, and how to measure performance.human factors challengesconceptual frameworkit seems wise to have some sort of conceptual model to guide theprocess of laying out a research program at the strategic level. humanfactors researchers are fortunate to have several such models from which tochoose. one was generated in the 1980s when the army developed thepolicies, procedures, and tools to more fully integrate the inclusion of manpower, personnel, training, systems safety, health hazards, and human factors engineering tradeoffs into the design of systems (booher, 1990). thisprogram, referred to as manprint (manpower and personnel integration),successfully refocused the design process on the performance of the totalsystem in the hands of the user. the program has led to the design andredesign of weapon systems with greatly reduced training demands andenhanced performance capabilities. lessons learned in this program havepotential application to the acquisition and design of a wide range of complex systems.another approach was introduced by rouse (1991), who provided asystematic framework for ensuring that the concerns, values, and perceptions of all participants in a design effort, as well as the ultimate users, areconsidered and balanced. this approach seeks to enhance human abilities,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education91overcome human limitations, and foster user acceptance throughout the design process. rouseõs method recommends asking the following questionsin the design and evaluation of systems:¥viabilityñare the benefits of using a system sufficiently greaterthan its costs?¥acceptanceñdo organizations/individuals use the system?¥validationñdoes the system solve the problem?¥evaluationñdoes the system meet the requirements?¥demonstrationñhow do observers react to the system?¥verificationñis the system put together as planned?¥testingñdoes the system run, compute, and so forth?from a designerõs perspective, the process begins with measures of effectiveness and then addresses understandability and, finally, compatibility.from a userõs perspective, the evaluation begins with compatibility, andgoes on to understandability and then effectiveness (topdown design vs.bottomup evaluation).both of these macroergonomic approaches can be applied to the designand development of training systems. however, the field would benefitfrom additional competition. researchers should be encouraged to developadditional concepts for this area of discourse.building bridges between theory and practicea major research issue related to designing and implementing effectivetraining is closing the gap between (1) theory and research and (2) applications. in an article in human factors, cannonbowers et al. (1991) addressed the challenge of linking the theory and practice of training. this isparticularly difficult because research and practitioner communities existseparately and are not well coordinated. the authors highlight linkagesbetween trainingrelated theory and trainingrelated techniques in the areasof training analysis, design, and evaluation. this represents a good start inillustrating the possibilities; however, as the authors note, the current bodyof training research does not provide the practitioner with a full complement of training techniques that are fully grounded in logical principles.further, there remains the question of how to enhance the acceptance andtranslation of research into practice.boff and rouse (1987) emphasized the issue of ensuring an adequatesupply of useful and usable data resources in formats that are specificallyintelligible to design engineers. although there is a substantial volume ofresearch information that has potential value and relevance to systems design, boff and lincoln (1988) found that the data had low usability in termsemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchof accessibility, interpretability, and applicability. if these data were moreusable, they could greatly enhance the effectiveness of new training systems; therefore, ways to exploit the existing investment in research findingsneed to be developed.this theme is also present in a report by the office of technologyassessment (1990). the report indicates that research that could lead toimprovement in the efficiency and quality of training often fails to be integrated into training practices. the report recommends that federal agencies(1) develop and disseminate information about bestpractice approaches andtechnologies and (2) work with industry to develop and implement operating standards for training technologies and related software.an example of such an approach in the human factors area is the crewsystem ergonomics information analysis center (cseriac). the objective of cseriac is to acquire, analyze, and disseminate timely informationon crew system ergonomics. cseriacõs principal products and servicesinclude technical advice and assistance; customized bibliographies; writtenreviews, analyses, and assessments; workshops, conferences, symposia, andshort courses; and special studies.the challenge to the human factors community is to devise, evaluate,and perfect ways to transfer the methods, data, and principles of humancentered design into the procedures used by training system designers andmanagers. human factors scientists should also ensure that feedback fromapplications experiences closes the loop between research and practice.strategic methodologiesa central methodological problem is the lack of a comprehensive arrayof performance measures that are acceptable to both researchers and practitioners. the basic premise is that one cannot know whether a trainingsystem or training practice is better than an alternative unless one can (1)measure system performance reliably and accurately and (2) link such bottomline measures with specific attributes of the training system.one cause of the problem is that there are so many different tasks in theworld of work, and each task has its own mix of desired outcomes. consequently, research that is intended to provide general findings is often notconvincing to the practitioner, who sees a distinction between the supposedly generic laboratory task and the task for which his or her students arebeing trained.a closely related methodological problem is the lack of criteria fordoing an overall evaluation of training programs. therefore, comprehensive evaluations are rarely conducted, even though their importance is recognized. when evaluations are done, about half of all companies and thevast majority of large, successful corporations use crude measures such asemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education93student ratings or inferences drawn from informal followup interviews.this may be due in part to the difficulty and expense of specifying bettermeasures as well as to the concerns of trainers and educators that negativeresults may jeopardize future efforts (goldstein, 1992). the human factorscommunity can contribute to the resolution of these issues.an example of such a contribution comes from the work of kraiger etal. (1992), who presented a theoretically based model of training evaluationin an attempt to link evaluation to learning objectives and provide a moreconceptual framework for evaluation. the authors conceive of learning as amultidimensional process of cognitive, behavioral, and affective change andbelieve it is important to move away from the influence of behaviorism inevaluating training. they argue that the emphasis on behaviorism has stifledthe development of training as a scientific discipline. the framework theypresent leads to a large number of suggested measures and provides a stimulusfor further research on the development and testing of measures that couldlead to a better understanding of training effectiveness.toward a similar end, goldstein (1992) points out that training can becharacterized as attempting to achieve one of four types of validity: (1)training validity, (2) transfer validity, (3) intraorganizational validity, and(4) interorganizational validity. the first two validities are measured by theperformance of the individual trainee at the time of training or on the job.both training and transfer validity begin with needs assessment. but transfer validity is greatly affected by the organizational environment of thetrainee on the job. therefore, special consideration has to be given to thecollection and interpretation of the results.the last two types of validity refer to the effectiveness of the trainingprogram for a new group of employees in the same organization or indifferent organizations. in both cases, data should be collected from newpopulations of trainees to determine the effectiveness of the training program for different trainees and organizations. validities can change because of (1) changes in tasks, people, or the organization; (2) the rigor ofthe data collection/evaluation; and (3) changes in the training program.carefully planned and executed evaluation programs are clearly required toassess and demonstrate the value of training.a significant development in evaluation has been the estimation of thedollar value or utility of training interventions (clegg, 1987). a variety ofequations have been derived for a variety of situations, from estimations ofreturn on investment to costbenefit analyses using organizational levels ofmeasures of performance (wexley and baldwin, 1986; paquet et al., 1987).however, only a third of the large, successful companies evaluate bottomline improvement to assess training or educational success.it is clear that conducting evaluations of the relevance and effectivenessof education and training programs has been complex and expensive. theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchquestions remain: how can information be collected in an affordable manner to aid decision makers in determining the value of training? and howcan organizations be encouraged to employ òbottomlineó methods for assessing their training programs?evaluation studies would be more logical and convincing if they weretied to a formal assessment of the real needs of the worker and the requirements of the job. a common complaint about existing training programs isthat they are not responsive to these areas.tannenbaum and yukl (1991) tend to confirm this allegation. theyreport that comprehensive needs analyses are rarely done in organizations.therefore, training program content is not always linked to organizationalstrategy or job performance requirements.when needs analysis is attempted, the predominant approach is likelyto be to use the procedures outlined by mcgehee and thayer (1961). theselink organization, task, and personal attributes in a basic stimulusresponsetype of logic structure. given the major changes in workplace training inthe last 30 years and the requirements of the modern workplace, the validityof this needs assessment framework is now problematic.the starting point for specifying the requirements of a job is often atask analysis in which a human factors practitioner focuses on the technicaland procedural portion of the task. task analysis is a generalpurpose methodfor describing how tasks are performed. devised by robert b. miller in1954, it was first used to specify the characteristics of the displays andcontrols needed to enable good operator performance. the method waslater expanded to identify and document the skills, knowledge, and abilities(skas) that a person must have to perform a task and job effectively.these skas formed a database called qualitative and quantitative personnelrequirements information, which was used to forecast manpower, humanfactors engineering, and training needs for new systems. task analysis wassubsequently adopted by educators and test construction specialists.the methods of task analysis in general use today assume that thecontent of jobs can be defined by their stimulus and response components.this assumption is understandable considering that task analysis had itsorigin in behavioristic psychology. although the stimulusresponse approach may be acceptable for characterizing the psychomotor tasks thathave historically been dominant components of most jobs, it cannot be usedto identify the cognitive content of jobs. our ability to analyze the growing cognitive elements in everyday tasks has not kept up with events in thereal world. consequently, we need methods to handle tasks that may involve more complex cognitive and social skills. such forwardlooking analysisprocedures have been recommended (tannenbaum and yukl, 1991) but havenot been tested.one way to broaden the scope of task analysis is to view cognitiveemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education95functions as similar to computer programs. a computer cannot functionwithout a protocol, a program that tells the computer how to perform agiven application. similarly, a protocol is needed to describe the overt andcognitive tasks that make up a particular job. without such a protocol, norational basis, other than tradition or intuition, exists for systematicallydefining and describing the content of a job training program or the procedures to be followed in performing job tasks.this approach has yet to be fully implemented, and alternative approaches do not exist. although several attempts have been made to overcome the limitations of conventional task analysis (glaser, 1992), no onehas yet devised a method that is easily learned and acceptable to practitioners as well as researchers. to be most useful, such a method should allowfor the description of the cognitive, sensory, and motor components of atask as part of a comprehensive systems and functions analysis.specific research projects and programstwo major studies conducted recently document the increasing importance accorded to fundamental workplace skills. one comprehensive studywas a joint twoyear project of the american society for training anddevelopment and the u.s. department of labor. their report, workplacebasics: the essential skills employers want (carnevale et al., 1990), identified 16 basic skills within 7 broad skill groups:¥the foundation: learning to learn;¥competence: reading, writing, and computation;¥communication: listening and oral communication;¥adaptability: creative thinking and problem solving;¥personal management: selfesteem, goalsetting/motivation, and personal/career development;¥group effectiveness: interpersonal skills, negotiation, and teamwork; and¥influence: organizational effectiveness and leadership.another widely cited study, by the department of labor (secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skills, 1991), proposed a set of 14 fundamental skills within 3 categories that they regard as the foundation foreffective job performance:¥basic skillsñreading, writing, arithmetic/mathematics, listening, andspeaking;¥thinking skillsñcreative thinking, decision making, problem solving, knowing how to learn, and reasoning; andemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research¥personal qualitiesñindividual responsibility, selfesteem and selfmanagement, sociability, and integrity.this study is part of a major effort by the u.s. department of labor toexamine worker skill requirements and other issues related to workbasedtraining and the transition from school to work. the challenge for thehuman factors research community is to understand how fundamental skillsrelate to the performance of technical tasks, how to design comprehensivetraining programs incorporating knowledge of worker skills, and how toevaluate these skills in the workplace.training individuals to perform effectively as teams is another area ofincreasing importance and requires greater research attention (salas et al.,1992). work teams are increasing in frequency in american organizationsas òtotal quality managementó programs are introduced. the performanceof these teams is critical to organizational success. research is needed inorder to develop a greater understanding of work teams and of when andhow they are likely to be most effective. in addition to training, otherinterventions to improve team effectiveness include team building, job redesign, and group incentive programs. in designing training programs,teambuilding interventions, and other programs for complex systems, human factors researchers are in a unique position to assist in developinginformation on the relationship between team processes and team performance over time and on the relationship between task type, stage of teamdevelopment, and team performance.the design of educational and training programs to meet these newdemands offers special challenges. researchers who have focused on themore traditional areas of how to design, deliver, and evaluate training andeducational programs will have to integrate research from a number offields in order to give trainees the resources they need to develop the skillsrequired by the changing work environment. furthermore, technical training must increasingly be integrated with a broader set of skills. bringing allthis material together in the design and development of training systems isdifficult. the typical human factors specialist may not be very well versedin such subjects as group dynamics, which are rarely taught in system design curricula. as indicated in a recent publication by the national research council (van cott and huey, 1992), although human factors practitioners may learn much about training design and development, they receivelittle formal education in these òsofteró areas. therefore, the human factorsresearch community faces the challenge of developing the research base toadequately educate and prepare practitioners to develop training systems forthe workplace that meet the demands of improving group rather than individual performance.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education97flexible, individualized trainingthomas bailey (1990), working with the national center for researchin vocational education, reports that the approximately half of u.s. youthwho do not go on to college receive little help in making the transition fromschool to work. the challenge is how to design educational and trainingprograms to create an active learning environment that can ease this transition. research is demonstrating that individuals have different learningstyles and that the effectiveness of alternative teaching and training methods corresponds to how well it matches an individualõs preferred learningstyle (martel, 1991). the importance of individual differences in learningstyles also has implications for education and training design. for example,snow and lohman (1984) found that students of low ability benefited morefrom highstructure/lowcomplexity programs and that for students of highability the reverse was true. much of this research is for grades k12; moreresearch is needed to determine the full parameters of aptitude treatmentinteractions and also to determine how to train/educate students so they cancontinue to learn in natural settings (goldstein, 1992). goldstein believesthat òthe processes involved in designing instructional systems and the revolutionfirst described by both gagne and brenner in the 1960s has only begun tobe understood.ó research is needed on methodologies to support the designprocess, so that training developers can effectively incorporate what is to belearned with who the learners are and what characteristics they possess.research in cognitive psychology has also highlighted shortcomings intraditional approaches to teaching. cognitive psychology focuses on howlearning occurs by addressing ways the human mind processes and usesinformation. it has shifted the emphasis in learning to the mental operations and attributes of the learner/trainee and has provided a new theoreticalbasis for training and instructional technology. cognitive research suggeststhat teaching/training should emphasize the development of thinking andproblemsolving skills rather than the learning of facts through expositorylectures (molnar, 1989). in addition, much current research is addressingthe effect of context on training and the transfer of information obtainedduring training to the situation in which it must be used. (see druckmanand bjork, 1994, for a full discussion of the effect of the training context oneffective transfer to other situations and systems.) these lines of researchhave significant implications for the design of programs that enhance learning and retention of knowledge and skills, that increase the probability oftransfer of learning from one situation to another, and that support lifelonglearning as well as the roles of teachers and trainers.cognitive science research has also now embraced the mental modelsconcept (stevens and gentner, 1983; johnsonlaird, 1983), which focusesemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchon the ways in which humans understand systems. according to rouse andmorris (1986), mental models allow a person to understand and to anticipate the behavior of a system, which implies that mental models must becapable of prediction. these models are domain, context, and situationspecific. òwith respect to training, a number of theorists have hypothesizedthat training that fosters development of accurate mental models of a systemwill improve performanceó (cannonbowers and salas, 1990:4). however,training in only general principles of system design and function is of limited utility (e.g., kieras and bovair, 1984; morris and rouse, 1985). toobtain optimal training, guidance is required in how to apply the knowledgein order to accomplish the task (rouse and morris, 1986).changing roles of teachers and trainersjust as new jobspecific and managerial skills are required to meettodayõs demands, the roles of the teacher and trainer are changing. ratherthan functioning strictly as lecturers, teachers and trainers will increasinglyneed to become facilitators. the major reason for this change is the exponential growth in information resources. teachers can no longer be viewedas allknowing sources of information. because of the huge and expandingbody of knowledge, teachers cannot possibly remain abreast of informationin all areas (molnar, 1989).the focus of teachers and trainers is also changing. they must helpothers learn how to access information as needed and be able to do thisthemselves. research is required on learning to learn and on how to teachpeople both how to determine what information is required for specifictasks and how to access it quickly. at the same time, research is needed onthe design of job aids to assist teachers and workers in acquiring information on demand, as needed.instructor aids form another area in which technological advances shouldbe promoted and in which potential innovations should be evaluated from ahuman factors perspective. for example, some progress has been madeover the past 15 years or so in the construction of software packages fordesktop computers that aid instructors in composing lesson plans, exercises,simulation scenarios, and examinations. these systems appear to vary markedlyin their utility. consistently high quality in such aids for training programmanagers might be obtained if a properly authorized organization were tosponsor rigorous evaluations of new products before these products werereleased to the market.engineering applicationsa key human factors research issue concerning the use of simulationtechnology in training programs is fidelity. technology is available toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education99make simulators realistic, comprehensive representations of a system; however, there is limited knowledge on the relationship of physical and functional fidelity and training effectiveness. in 1985, a national researchcouncil working group on simulation commented (jones et al., 1985):a comprehensive body of behavioral principles and methods relevant tosimulation does not exist. integrative assessments of the research andoperating experience are almost completely lacking for important topicssuch as fidelity . . . . a result is that there is no history of simulationresearch and utilization technology in a readily accessible form that servesas a guide for the future.that need was partially addressed by hays and singer (1989), who providedan extensive review of the literature on simulation fidelity. however, theneed for a comprehensive body of data on the behavioral principles andmethods for determining the effectiveness of fidelity persists.despite assertions by human factors specialists that physical fidelityand psychological fidelity may not be equivalentñand in the absence ofany empirical data to support their viewñsimulator manufacturers haveincreased simulation fidelity as fast as they were paid to do it and thedeveloping new technology allowed. this practice will continue until studies test this assumption empirically.there is a need for laboratory and field research to address the issue ofhow much and what kind of fidelity is required for costeffective simulatortraining. this research will become increasingly important as simulationtechnology begins to provide some form of augmented reality that can beused to create training environments. the relationship between fidelity andtraining effectiveness remains unknown. in truth, the attributes of psychological fidelity need to be defined first. a metric is needed that can then beused to measure and compare psychological fidelity with physical fidelity.these areas all need attention from human factors research.on a more practical level, studies have compared the costeffectivenessof alternative training techniques and technologies (orlansky and string,1977). the results showed that simple, lowcost, parttask, and proceduraltrainers can be more effective for certain types of training than more costlyfullscale, highfidelity simulators. in the 1960s, task analysis and thesystems approach to trainingñtwo methods for the qualitative definition oftraining objectives and the skill, knowledge, and abilities required for anyjob training course to be validñwere developed. in the 1970s, new research on team training was initiated.in the 1980s, researchers built on that knowledge to develop crew resource management training; this technique is now used throughout theairline industry to train crews in team skills and has recently been extendedto other systems as well. also in the 1980s, human factors researchers,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchfaced with the high costs of conventional training devices and classroominstruction, devised the concept of òembedded training.óembedded training, a training capability built into or added onto operational systems, presents an opportunity to practice tasks and skills, especially those that should be performed automatically under highstress conditions. it uses the computer and display capabilities of operational equipmentto provide opportunities for task training, practice, and performance feedback on the same equipment that is used in operations. this approach isbetter suited for refresher training than for training in new skills (oberlin,1988) and can provide highquality, standardized, individualized training.today, the technique is used to train army tank gunners, the control roomcrews of commercial process control facilities, and people in many otheroccupations.computer networking and telecommunications will also continue to openup new methods of team training. simulation networking (simnet), thesimulator network developed under the sponsorship of the defense advanced research projects agency for training teams in tank warfare, usesworkstations that simulate army tank workstations to train soldiers in different geographic locations in battle tactics (thorpe, 1993). the workstations are interactive so that the responses of one tank or tank unit alterthe engagement environment for training participants, allowing trainees topractice a range of communication and decisionmaking tasks and roles in arealistic environment. the simnet concept appears to be generalizable toother education and training domains that have geographically dispersedworkers.virtual reality, sometimes called cyberspace or augmented reality, isthe experience of perceiving and interacting through sensors and effectorsin a computermodeled and computergenerated environment. a personwho experiences a virtual world is immersed in and surrounded by simulated sight, sound, touch, and feedback of force from simulated objects.eventually, as the technology develops, the experience of virtual realitywill become increasingly similar to experience of the real world. thistechnology was recently addressed by the national research councilõs committeeon virtual reality research and development (durlach and mavor, 1995).the proper use and exploitation of the potential of virtual reality isfundamentally a psychological rather than an engineering or computer science problem. engineering and computer science provide the basic tools,but psychology and human factors will be essential in shaping and usingthese tools in productive ways.since virtual reality is still in its infancy, it is impossible to predict allof the research that will be needed to make proper use of it. however, someneeds are apparent. two of the most basic are (1) the need to study thetransfer of training from a virtual to a realworld environment and (2) theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education101need to understand the psychological as well as the physical basis for transfer of training. the high costs of modeling virtual environments makesresearch on transfer of training and fidelity especially important.other research on virtual reality in training will be required to betterunderstand such questions as the following:¥do individual differences affect the ability to adapt to and usevirtual reality?¥what methods will be needed to identify the instructional elementsthat will be sufficient to meet stated learning objectives in a learning environment and at the same time exclude òvirtual noiseó?¥can virtual reality systems be used to train teams?¥does having been immersed in and having adapted to a virtualtraining environment have any negative effects on cognitive or psychomotorperformance in the real world?conclusionstraining is sometimes regarded as an alternative to human factors andvice versa. the role of the human factors specialist has been to designsystems that minimize the need for training. success from either perspective is measured by improved performance, productivity, and efficiency ofindividuals and organizations. the human factors/systems perspective shouldnot replace or usurp the perspective of the training specialist but can beconstructively supplemental.among the issues that could benefit from human factors research, thehighest priorities should be given to the design and evaluation of complextraining systems and the design and application of learning technologies.human factors scientists can add to the understanding of these issues byanalyzing existing data, synthesizing such data across multiple studies, andconducting new empirical studies. examples of the type of research that isrequired include the development of systematic design principles for training systems, empirical tests of alternative delivery practices, developmentand tests of theories to support the understanding and evaluation of trainingeffectiveness from the systems perspective to the perspective of the individual learner, and development and validation of costeffective means andtechnologies to provide training on demand.the issue of performance measurement runs through every portion ofthe literature on training, from basic or scholarly articles to articles for theteachers in the trenches of vocational education (fitzenz, 1994). the problem of developing good measurement methods and evaluating these methods exists on at least two levels. the easier of the two levels is the measurement of performance gains in a specific task setting. in such a situation,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe job provides its own criteria. the main problem with these ratherobvious criteria is that variances between individuals and within the sameperson during the learning sequence tend to be small unless the trainee isput under serious task stresses. in other words, these obvious measures ofperformance are relatively insensitive and may not differentiate betweenalternative training procedures that are otherwise very unlike one another.the second level of measurement is at the far end of the outcomesequenceñthat is, indices of the net impact of a training program on systemor organizational effectiveness. the obvious difficulty with such measuresis that the connection back to particular manipulations of the training regimen are tenuous at best. the realworld systems tend to be too noisy; toomany factors other than variations in training techniques change during thecourse of the training process. furthermore, the usual cure for such a noisyresearch environment, multiple trials, is out of bounds in the realworldsettings in which impact research must be conducted.a closely related problem that must be pursued at a basic level ofresearch is how to specify skill requirements for specific jobs. one needonly to contemplate how useful it would be to be able to list a set ofmeasurable skills for each occupational specialty in the military jobs systemor for each occupational description in the list of occupations used by theu.s. department of labor. we already have most of the tools for this in theskill taxonomies developed by human factors specialists.we should also be able to match trainees with training strategies. inspite of such programs as manprint, there are still significant gaps in ourability to fit the training to the learner (clark and taylor, 1994). individualvariability in learning styles may be a relatively fragile construct, but individuals do differ in their capabilities and limitations. research is badlyneeded on how to develop descriptive profiles that can in turn be used forprescriptive actions in the delivery of the training service to the learner.referencesbailey, t.1990changes in the nature and structure of work: implications for skill requirementsand skill formation. berkeley, calif.: national center for research in vocational education.boff, k., and w.b. rouse1987system design: behavioral perspectives on designers, tools, and organizations.new york: north holland.boff, k.r., and j.e. lincoln, eds.1988engineering data compendium. armstrong medical research laboratory. dayton, ohio: wrightpatterson air force base.booher, h., ed.1990manprint: an approach to systems integration. new york: van nostrandreinhold.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education103brown, j.s., a. collins, and p. duguid1988situated cognition and the culture of learning. technical report no. irl880008. palo alto, calif.: institute for research on learning.bureau of labor statistics1991occupational outlook quarterly fall. washington, d.c.: u.s. department oflabor.cannonbowers, j.a., and e. salas1990cognitive psychology and team training: shared mental models in complexsystems. paper presented at the annual meeting of the society for industrial andorganizational psychology, miami, fla.cannonbowers, j.a., s. tannenbaum, e. salas, and s. converse1991toward an integration of training theory and technique. human factors 33(3):281292.carnevale, a.p., l.j. gainer, a.s. meltzer, and s.l. holland1988skills employers want. training and development journal 42(10/october):2230.carnevale, a.p., l.j. gainer, and a.s. meltzer1990workplace basics: the essential skills employers want. american society fortraining and development/the u.s. department of labor. san francisco: josseybass.clark, r.c., and taylor, d.1994the causes and cures of learner overload. training 31(7):4043.clegg, w.1987management training evaluation: an update. training and development journalfebruary:6571.druckman, d., and r.a. bjork, eds.1994learning, remembering, believing: enhancing human performance. committeeon techniques for the enhancement of human performance, national researchcouncil. washington, d.c.: national academy press.durlach, n.i., and a.s. mavor, eds.1995virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges.committee on virtualreality research and development, national research council. washington, d.c.:national academy press.fitzenz, j.1994yes . . . . you can weigh trainingõs value. training 31(7):5458.glaser, r.1992learning, cognition, and education: then and now. pp. 239265 in h.l. pick,p.w. van den broek, and d.c. knill, eds., cognition: conceptual and methodological issues. washington, d.c.: american psychological association.goldstein, i.1988tomorrowõs workforce today. industry week 4143.1992training in organizations: needs assessment, development, and evaluation, 3rded. pacific grove, calif.: brooks/cole.hays, r., and m. singer1989simulation fidelity in training system design: bridging the gap between realityand training. new york: springerverlag.johnsonlaird, p.n.1983mental models: towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.johnston, w., and a. packer1987workforce 2000: work and workers for the 21st century. indianapolis, ind.:hudson institute.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchjones, e., r. hennessy, and s. deutsch, eds.1985human factors aspects of simulation. working group on simulation, committeeon human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.kieras, d.e., and s. bovair1984the role of a mental model in learning to control a device. cognitive science8:255273.kraiger, k., j. ford, and e. salas1992integration of cognitive, behavioral, and affective theories of learning into newmethods of training evaluation. unpublished paper. u.s. naval warfare center,orlando, fla.kravitz, d.1988the human resources revolution: implementing progressive management practices for bottom line success. san francisco: josseybass.martel, l.1991the integrative learning system: a review of theoretical foundations. hiltonhead island, s.c.: national academy of integrated learning.mcgehee, w., and p.w. thayer, eds.1961training in business and industry. new york: wiley.molnar, a.1989information and communications technology: today and in the future. in lifelongengineering education, proceedings from a symposium of the royal swedishacademy of engineering sciences, iva rapport 365, stockholm, sweden.morris, n.m., and w.b. rouse1985the effects of type of knowledge upon human problem solving in a process control task. ieee transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics smc15:698707.oberlin, m.1988some considerations in implementing embedded training. human factors societybulletin 31(4):14.office of technology assessment1990worker training: competing in the new international economy. washington,d.c.: u.s. government printing office.orlansky, j., and j. string1977costeffectiveness of flight simulators for military training. paper no. 1275,august 1977. arlington, va.: the institute for defense analyses.paquet, b., e. kasl, l. weinstein, and w. waite1987the bottom line: hereõs how one company proved the business impact of management training. training and development journal may:2733.personick, v.1989industry output and employment: a slower trend for the nineties. monthly laborreview 11(november 2):2441.rouse, w.1991designing for success: a human centered approach to designing successfulproducts and systems. new york: wiley.rouse, w.b., and n.m. morris1986on looking into the black box: prospects and limits in the search for mentalmodels. psychological bulletin 100(3):349363.salas, e., t. dickinson, s. converse, and s. tannenbaum1992toward an understanding of team performance and training. in r. swezey and e.salas, eds., teams: their training and performance. norwood, n.j.: ablex.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.training and education105secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skills1991what work requires of schools: a scans report for america 2000. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.snow, r., and d. lohman1984toward a theory of cognitive aptitude for teaming from instruction. journal ofeducational psychology 71:347376.stevens, a.l., and d. gentner, eds.1983mental models. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.tannenbaum, s., and g. yukl1991training and development in work organizations. annual review of psychology41:399441.taylor, s.1989the aging of america. training and development journal october:4450.thorpe, j.1993synthetic environments strategic plan. draft 3b. defense advanced researchprojects agency, alexandria, va.van cott, h.p., and b.m. huey, eds.1992human factors specialistsõ education and utilization: results of a survey. committeeon human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.wexley, k.n., and p.t. baldwin1986management development. journal of management 12(2):277294.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research1063employment and disabilitiesjerome i. elkind, raymond s. nickerson, harold p. van cott, androbert c. willigesintroductionin all aspects of daily life, people with disabilities encounter a multitude of problems that limit their ability to live independently, to travel, touse recreation facilities, and to obtain and perform jobs. the effect of theselimitations on the individual and their cost to society are great; government,through various legislative initiatives, has made it possible for people withdisabilities to participate more fully in the activities and opportunities enjoyed by the population at large. in addition to prohibiting discriminationagainst people with disabilities in the workplace and educational institutions, these initiatives require that equipment, facilities, and even jobs bedesigned to be reasonably accessible to disabled people. the human factorscommunity can make important contributions to these designs and therebyenhance the ability of disabled people to fulfill their potential. this chapterdiscusses the nature of these contributions and the research that is needed toenable them.the disabled population is very large. according to census bureaudata, approximately 30 percent of the u.s. population, about 75 millionpeople, report having sensory, physical, or cognitive disabilities (bureau ofthe census, 1987, 1989). these figures do not correct for the incidence ofmultiple disabilities in individuals, but, even with such correction, the numbers would be very large. table 3.1 shows the incidence of the differenttypes of disability. the number of people whose disabilities are sufficientlyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities107table 3.1 incidence of major types of disability (1990 estimates)percentagedisabilitypersons (000s)of populationsensoryvisually handicapped8,6003.4hearing handicapped22,0008.8motororthopedic impairments23,4009.6cognitivespecific learning disabilities18,7007.5speech impaired2,0000.9mentally retarded3,0001.2total77,70031.4severe to interfere with work and other activities is, of course, substantiallyless, but still very large. approximately 30 million people have severedisabilities; their distribution is shown in table 3.2 (elkind, 1990).people with disabilities find it much more difficult to be gainfully employed than do people who are ablebodied, and their earning power isthereby much diminished. the rate of unemployment among disabled peoplewho would like to work is several times higher than the national average(kraus and stoddard, 1989). the percentage of people who live below thepoverty line in the united states is between two and three times greater forpeople with a disability that interferes with their ability to work than for thetotal workingage population (vachon, 1990). as a result, 50 percent of thedisabled population have an annual household income at or below $15,000,principally derived from social security, public assistance, and other transfer programs. almost half of the disabled population live at or near thepoverty level. maintenance support programs cost approximately $100 billion per year, and this has doubled in the last 10 years (vanderheiden,1990). other economic costs of disability, such as lost productivity, areeven greater.the population of people with disabilities can, however, also be viewedas an underutilized resource for the country. although nationwide employment is relatively high, the workforce is growing much more slowly than ithas in the past (rauch, 1989; vaughan and berryman, 1989). some economists are concerned that, as a consequence of the slowdown in the numberof people entering the workforce and the alarming statistics on school dropout rates and academic achievement, the countryõs workforce could be inademerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtable 3.2 summary of severe impairments (1990 estimates)percentagedisabilitypersons (000s)of populationsensory visual impairment legally blind5800.2 severely impaired vision1,5000.6 hearing impairments severe to profound bilateral hearing loss2,4001.0motor disability interfering with work13,3005.3 orthopedic impairments back or spine3,3001.3 hips and lower limbs4,1001.6 severed spinal cord5800.2cognitive specific learning disabilities6,2002.5 impaired speech interfering with work2000.1 mental retardation3,0001.2total33,16014.0equate to meet the demands that are likely to be placed on it over the nextdecade or so. the disabled population, if better utilized, could help makeup for the expected shortfall.thus, the need to increase employment opportunities for people withdisabilities can be compellingly argued on both equity and economic grounds.these concerns are responsible for the legislation on accommodations forthe disabled.the great advances made in recent years in computer and communications technologies are making it possible for disabled people to perform theessential functions of an increasing number of jobs. personal computershave been especially important in making these technologies affordable byindividuals and are fostering a flowering of assistive devices and systemsfor people with disabilities (bowe, 1984). the combination of computerand communications technologiesñtelenetworkingñmakes it possible totake jobs to people who find it difficult or impossible to take themselves tojobs (see chapter 6). it has great potential for enhancing the possibility ofemployment for disabled people and for generally increasing their access toother people and resources (nickerson, 1986).related technologies that have considerable potential for enhancing theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities109employment opportunities of people with disabilities are robotics and teleoperator systems. these should be especially germane to the design andoperation of prosthetic and orthotic devices (sheridan, 1980).problem definitionthe term disability encompasses a wide range of conditions that canaffect individuals as a result of a birth defect, an accident, a disease, or asan accompaniment of aging. the americans with disabilities act of 1990(ada) indicates the scope of the term as it is now being used by thoseconcerned with public policy. the act defines a person with a disability assomeone with a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits oneor more major life activities (or a person with a record of such an impairment, or a person regarded as having such an impairment). a physicalimpairment is defined as any physiological disorder or cosmetic disfigurement or an anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following bodysystems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory (includingspeech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemicand lymphatic, and skin and endocrine. mental impairment includes mentalretardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional and mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. major life activities include such things as walking, talking, seeing, hearing, caring for oneself, and working (texas younglawyers association, 1990).thus, the ada focuses attention on the interaction between activitiesand disability. we represent this interaction by the matrix in figure 3.1.one axis shows the different kinds of impairments grouped under the general categories of sensory, motor, and cognitive. the other axis shows themajor activities of living grouped under the general categories of work,functional abilitytask/activitysensorymotorcognitiveworkplacehometransportationrecreationsafety/securityfigure 3.1 task/activity: functional ability matrix.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhome, transportation, recreation, and safety/security. this structure is consistent with the definitions in the ada and is similar to the structure usedin a recent committee on human factors report on aging (czaja, 1990).the matrix of figure 3.1 defines a vast problem domain that coversvirtually all the activities and functions that people perform in daily livingand all sensory, motor, and cognitive systems (since any of them might beimpaired). as is apparent from the title of this chapter, we do not attemptto discuss human factors contributions to this entire domain. the committee decided that focusing on a single activity/function subdomain wouldmake the scope of the discussion more manageable. it chose to focus onemployment in recognition of the pivotal role of employment in an individualõsindependence, selfesteem, and access to a fuller and richer life. many ofthe techniques, data, and even designs that are used to enhance employmentpotential will also be appropriate for life activities in other areas, such asthe home and recreation. yet even the topic of employment is huge.increased employment for disabled people will have to come largely inthe informationoriented segment of our society. already more than 55percent of the workforce is engaged in informationoriented jobs; this percentage has been increasing annually (strassmann, 1985) and is expected tocontinue to increase for the foreseeable future (kraut, 1987). given that somany jobs and so much growth are in the information sector, an importantchallenge is to find ways to make information jobs more accessible to disabled people and to increase their ability to compete for these jobs. greateraccessibility can come from making the tools that information workers useand the environment in which they work less restrictive in terms of thecapabilities of the user. competitiveness can be enhanced through trainingand rehabilitation, but also through augmentationñoften computerbasedñof the capabilities of disabled persons in order to improve job performance.for these reasons, our discussion will focus on increasing access to computerbased equipment by disabled people and on the use of computer technology to improve access in general.let us now consider the problems that people with disabilities encounter in performing jobs for which they are qualified. the ada is alsohelpful here in providing us with some useful definitions. the ada prohibits discrimination against a qualified individual in matters relating toemployment. it defines a qualified individual as one who with or without areasonable accommodation is able to perform the essential functions of aparticular job. accommodation includes making existing facilities accessible, restructuring jobs, acquiring or modifying equipment or devices, andmodifying work policies. for the accommodation to be considered reasonable, it must not be unduly burdensome because of the difficulty or expenseinvolved. accommodation can be made by changing the nature of the jobor the equipment used to perform it or by providing individuals who have aemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities111disability with assistive devices so that they can perform their jobs adequately. the definition used in the ada allows for a growing set ofreasonable accommodations. as both technology and our knowledge ofdisabilities advance, it will be possible to provide more capable assistivedevices, a wider range of equipment modifications, and better access tofacilities as well as to restructure more jobs to fit individual capabilities atacceptable costs.the language of the ada leads us to think in terms of modifyingexisting work environments, equipment, and jobs. it would be far better ifmodification were not necessary because the needs of people with disabilities had been taken into account when the environments, equipment, andjobs were designed initially. given that it is probably not always possibleto accommodate every type of disability at the outset, a second objective ofinitial design should be to provide access facilities that allow assistive equipmentto be readily added so that disabled persons can work effectively. in fact,this kind of access was the objective of earlier federal legislation, the rehabilitation act of 1973 as amended in 1986 by public law 99506, whichrequired equal access for disabled people to office equipment, transportation, and buildings. newell (1995), vanderheiden (1990), and others arguethat the extraordinary needs of people with disabilities are often only theexaggerated needs of the ablebodied population, and that taking these extraordinary needs into account produces better and more widely useful design solutions for everyone. they argue for designs that both ablebodiedand disabled people can use effectively with no additional modification or,at worst, with augmentations that are easy to add.we encounter some especially challenging problems when we design tomeet the extraordinary requirements of people with disabilities. first, design data on the capabilities and performance of the disabled population areoften not available, and, when available, they are much more limited inscope than data on the ablebodied population. most research over theyears has focused on the ablebodied population and on establishing average performance characteristics. studies of individual differences in performance are the exception (egan and gomez, 1985). further, it is commonpractice to exclude disabled people from studies of population averages, sothat they are not even statistically represented in the results. since thecapabilities and performance of disabled people in the areas of their disabilities are, by definition, well outside the range exhibited by the ablebodied population, the data about the ablebodied and the design assumptions used for them do not provide much guidance on how to accommodatedisabilities in design. this makes designing for disabled people difficultand the outcome uncertain. clearly obtaining a better database about thecapabilities of the disabled population is an important need.second, the disabled population is not homogeneous but exhibits a wideemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchrange of individual differences, both within a disability subgroup and acrossdisability subgroups. the variability in performance among individualswith disabilities is great, and the needs for augmentative support are quitediverse. for example, a computer workstation for word processing that isto be used by people with different types of disabilities should be able toprovide displays in large type for people with visual impairments, speechoutput for those who are blind, somewhat differently designed speech output for people with dyslexia, and special keyboards and speech input forthose with motor impairments. and these are just some of possibilities.the wide range of individual capabilities has led to a tendency to design toindividual requirements. while individual design may lead to good resultsfor the individuals, it is expensive and its cost will constrain the number ofpeople who can be served. there is a need to develop generic approachesto design that are aimed at the major disability subgroups and that allowtailoring to individual needs.third, employment is a large and complex domain. there are manydifferent kinds of jobs requiring different combinations of skills. for mostjobs, we do not have either a good characterization of the component skillsrequired or a good specification of the level of competence required in eachskill area. thus, the design problem is not well specified from a requirements side. furthermore, each work situation must be considered as asystem that involves many different workrelated tasks, a set of personalcare and mobility activities, and a variety of interactions with other peopleinside and outside the firm. all of these must be taken into account at asatisfactory level for there to be a successful work situation.our discussion concentrates on the technology and on other tangibleaspects of enabling disabled people to obtain employment. technology byitself does not solve the problems of unemployment. one must also dealwith the sociology of the workplace and with the disincentives to goingback to work. for disabled people there can be many disincentives toworking, such as lack of social acceptance, difficulty in transportation, andeconomic penalties. ability to do the work is just one aspect of the problem, but it is the one to which the human factors community can contributemost directly, so it is the focus of this chapter.human factors contributionsthe unemployment and underemployment of disabled people is a complex problem with technical, psychological, sociological, political, and economic components. disabled people encounter many disincentives to seeking employment, but a key one is inability to function satisfactorily at theworkplace; that is, to perform the tasks required by the job and to take careof personal needs that arise. the human factors community is well equippedemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities113task analysisevaluation andusability testinghumanperformancedatadesigndesigns for jobs,systems, andassistiveequipmentfigure 3.2 human factors design process.to address this problem by designing accommodations that lower barriers towork and that enable disabled people to perform the jobs for which they arequalified. moreover, efforts by human factors specialists to accommodatethe needs of the disabled population in equipment design will advance human factors as a discipline by directing its attention to designs and methodsthat will be effective over a much wider range of individual capabilities(griffith et al., 1989).this is a classical human factors systems design problem of matchingtasks to human capabilities through analysis and redesign of tasks, design ofwork environments, design of equipment used for performing workrelatedtasks, and design of assistive devices that enhance individual performanceor that provide special interfaces to equipment. the design process proceeds iteratively through the stages illustrated in figure 3.2 until a satisfactory result is achieved. the stages of the design process are the following:¥gathering data about relevant human performance characteristics;¥conducting an analysis of tasks required for successful performanceof the job;¥design of the job, systems for performing work tasks, and assistiveequipment; and¥evaluation of the designs through the use of models, simulationtools, and user experiments.human performance design datahuman factors design proceeds from a base of knowledge about humancapabilities, capacities, and limitations that is relevant to the design problem. a large body of such information is available in databases, designguides, and models to inform human factors design for ablebodied users(see, e.g., boff and lincoln, 1988). however, very few data of this kind areemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchavailable for most disabled populations. not only does this make informeddesign for people with disabilities difficult, but it also gives the humanfactors community an opportunity to extend the knowledge base to includethe disabled population (see kelley and kroemer, 1990, on the extension ofthe anthropometric database to the elderly).task analysistask analysis is the appropriate starting point for human factors design.human factors designers draw upon a portfolio of techniques to develop anunderstanding of the tasks that people must perform in a system and of theperceptual, motor, and cognitive capabilities needed to perform them. thesetechniques include observations, video analyses, taxonomies, scenario generation, timeline, workload, and input/output analyses (elkind et al., 1990).in principle, these techniques are directly applicable to designing for peoplewith disabilities. typically, however, jobs and tasks from common worksituations have not often been subject to this kind of detailed examination.further, it is necessary to probe beneath the surface of how jobs are performed by their present incumbents, who are for the most part ablebodied,and extract the essential requirements for effective performance in thesejobs. disabled workers may have to perform jobs differently, and it isimportant to characterize the jobs at a level that allows restructuring toaccommodate people with specific limitations. these kinds of analyses areproperly within the domain of human factors.designwe are concerned with three types of design:¥design or redesign of jobs so that disabled people can perform theessential tasks and not be disqualified by inability to perform nonessentialtasks;¥design of equipment and systems so that they are accessible for useby disabled people; and¥design of assistive equipment to enhance the performance of peoplewith disabilities or to allow them to use systems and equipment designedfor the general ablebodied population.there are extensive opportunities and an enormous need for humanfactors contributions to these design efforts. in most cases, these designswill be carried out by teams in which human factors specialists work withspecialists from other engineering disciplines. as with other humanmachine systems design, human factors focuses on the functions users areasked to perform, userequipment interfaces, user performance, usabilityemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities115evaluation, and other activities related to the user and the impact of thesystem or device on the user. the human factors specialist would be expected to bring knowledge about the special characteristics and requirements of the disabled subgroups for whom the design is intended and abouthow to customize designs to the particular requirements of individuals withina subgroup.of the three types of design activities mentioned above, job design fordisabled people has probably received the least attention from human factors specialists. analysis of jobs often reveals opportunities for redistributing tasks among members of a team so that the disabled members are givenassignments they can perform or so that the job can be accomplished insome other way that does not require the use of capabilities that are impaired. an example of redistribution would be reassigning the task ofwriting status reports from a person with severe dyslexia to a team memberwho does not have this disability. an example of a different way of accomplishing a task would be allowing a mobilityimpaired worker to use electronic and computer technology to do office tasks from home (williges andwilliges, 1995).a key problem in design of accessible equipment and systems is tomake them usable by both ablebodied and disabled persons without imposing performance penalties on the ablebodied or excessive cost penalty onanyone. much of the attention in this area has been on interface designsthat are usable by people who do not have normal sensory, manipulative, orcommunication abilities. if accessibility by both disabled and ablebodiedpeople is not possible, then a backup position is to design so that interfacesare available that allow special assistive devices to be added to make theoriginal equipment or system accessible. this problem has received considerable attention (vanderheiden, 1988). an example of an accessible systemis one that provides both visual and auditory displays of all information thatis presented so that persons with either impaired vision or impaired hearingcan function as well as persons with normal sight and hearing.literally thousands of assistive devices have been designed to enhancethe performance of disabled people or to enable them to use systems designed for the ablebodied (able data, 1989; trace research and development center, 1988). increasingly, these devices are being implementedwith computer hardware and software that provide disabled users with capabilities that they are lacking. examples are speech generation devices forthose with severe speech impairments and eye tracking systems as a substitute for keyboard input for those with severe manipulatory impairments.many of these devices have had the benefit of human factors contributions,but many have not. this is a rich area given the range of disabilities thatmust be accommodated, as shown in figure 3.1, and the variety of tasks,equipment, and systems that are encountered in the workplace.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchevaluation models, tools, and experimentsevaluation of proposed designs and usability experiments are essentialto the design process. it is important to conduct user experiments to determine how well disabled individuals can use both existing and proposeddesigns. only by careful examination of the shortcomings of existing equipmentis it possible to know where to place the effort on making improvements.these studies must take a wide range of disabilities into consideration.such experimental studies are not easy to conduct and offer an opportunityfor a major contribution from the human factors community, which is skilledin this area.not all design evaluation studies need be done with human subjects. itis often very effective to use computer models and simulations of humanperformance to evaluate alternative designs. using such models for evaluation is less expensive and timeconsuming than using human subjects. selecting and using such models and tools is an area in which human factorsspecialists have expertise. for example, models and design evaluation toolshave become increasingly important to human factors aspects of the designof aircraft (elkind et al., 1990).however, most current models describe the normal population and donot encompass disabled populations. models need to be extended, and thiswill require using and adding to the body of relevant data about the performance of disabled populations. human factors specialists can assist inthese tasks and help develop models of human performance that representthe performance of people with specified disabilities.current state of the art andhuman factors needshuman performance design datahuman factorsñwith its focus on applying knowledge about humancharacteristics to the design of tasks, machines, machine systems, and environmentsñrequires a body of systematic and quantitative data about humancharacteristics. the design references and texts that compose the databasefor human factors contain little that directly addresses the characteristics ofdisabled segments of the population. this should not be a surprise since,until recently, the human factors literature has paid little attention to theproblems of the disabled. only a small percentage of the papers in thejournal human factors deals with disabilities. although this journal haspublished two special issues on disabilities, in 1978 and 1990, relativelylittle has appeared between the two issues. handbooks sometimes include achapter on disability (salvendy, 1987) and sometimes have data relevant toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities117the elderly (boff and lincoln, 1988), but for the most part these areas arenot covered with any degree of completeness. vanderheiden (1990) comments that disabilities and other functional limitations are only peripherallymentioned in textbooks. courses on disability in human factors curriculaare rare. little or no attention is paid in the standard curriculum to theneeds, characteristics, or design considerations required to accommodatepersons with reduced abilities.in the last few years, human factors researchers have become moreinterested in the problems that disabled people encounter in gaining employment and in being able to use the facilities that ablebodied people takefor granted. federal legislation has been directly responsible for the increased concern for the disabled population on the part of business and theirproduct designers, and this has influenced the human factors community. a1990 human factors special issue, assisting people with functional impairments, a similar human factors special issue on aging also in 1990,and a forthcoming book on disabilities and human computer interaction(edwards, 1995) are all indications of the growing interest in this area. sothere is hope that the body of human factors design data for the disabledwill grow more rapidly in the future, but it will take many years before itbecomes adequate.other disciplines, however, have been active over the years developinglarge bodies of data about different segments of the disabled population.there is an extensive literature from the medical, rehabilitation, occupational therapy, prosthesis, and other specialized communities on the characteristics of various disabled populations. not much of this information hasfound its way into the human factors literature, in part because it is not wellorganized for use in human factors design.the field of aging provides an interesting example of the problem, onethat is relevant to our purposes inasmuch as elderly people who are disabledcompose a major component of the disabled population. smith (1990) comments that, although 50 years of laboratory research have provided a largeamount of information about the physical and psychological changes thatoccur with aging, there has been little application of this information tohuman factors design. this is because much of the information is not in thereference works and because the information that is included is largelyprescriptive and not quantitative. smith points out that major effort isrequired to review the research data on aging, extrapolate from them, fill inimportant gaps, and structure the data so that they are useful for humanfactors design.the situation for the principal areas of disability is much the same.therefore, an important research need is to build a more adequate humanfactors database for the major disability subgroups and to get these dataincluded in the standard design references and texts. much of this databaseemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcan be obtained from the study of existing literature from other fields, butin many areas new laboratory research will almost certainly be required.given the number of different disabilities and the fact that they canaffect all areas of performance, it will take considerable effort to assemble asatisfactory body of data and considerable care to organize it into usefulform. it will be important to segment the disabled population into subgroups of individuals with reasonably common characteristics of impairment and to identify parameters of performance that allow representation ofindividual differences. the models and simulations of performance discussed above provide a directly usable and practical framework for organizing the data for many areas of disability. therefore, it should be kept inmind that the impaired functions of disabled people are usually not sharplysegmented from those of the ablebodied population. that is to say, thedistribution of performance is not bimodal. therefore it should be possibleto characterize the performance capabilities and limitations of people withdisabilities by performance parameters at the tail of the distribution.task analysisthe state of the art is much better in task analysis for disabilities thanin human factors design data. in designing for disabled people, humanfactors specialists can apply a collection of already welldeveloped andwidely used analysis techniques. the human factors designers do not needto develop or extend the techniques themselves but must merely apply themto jobs and tasks that disabled people are capable of performing. the lackof descriptive data may inhibit the use of these techniques, but that is aproblem with the data and needs to be addressed separately, as discussedabove, not a problem with the analysis techniques themselves.skill requirements for jobstask analysis at the job level is clearly important given our focus onincreasing the employment potential of people with disabilities. much workhas already been directed toward establishing the skill requirements of different types of jobs to provide a principled method for selecting personnelto perform these jobs (see chapter 2). much of this work has been in thecontext of personnel selection for jobs in the military; a recent example isthe army selection and classification project (campbell, 1990; peterson etal., 1990).in this approach, existing jobs are examined; the tasks currently composing them are identified; the skills of current incumbents are determined;a set of tests of knowledge, aptitude, and performance is administered toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities119ascertain skill levels of successful incumbents in these jobs; and the resultsare used to establish criteria for selecting job candidates. the same approach has been applied to jobs in the civilian sector, and in particular bycompanies that have a large number of people in a single job category, forexample, telephone information operators. there is a need to carry out thiskind of skills requirements analysis on more jobs in the civilian sector, andit would probably make sense to do so with a representative sample of jobsthat provides insight about the mismatch between the skills required and theskills possessed by disabled people in major segments of the economy.there are two problems with applying this approach to disabled people.the most important is that the method analyzes existing jobs and existingincumbents. thus, it assumes that the jobs, which have evolved with ablebodied workers, will be done in the same way by disabled workers. furthermore, it tends to require that disabled workers have the skill levels ofthe ablebodied. it will be necessary to separate the essential functions of ajob from the ancillary functions so that it can be determined whether or notpeople with a particular type and level of impairment are qualified for sucha job. (we deliberately use the language of the ada here.) the secondproblem is that the method takes for granted certain ancillary skills or capabilities, such as mobility, that may be impaired in disabled populations.thus, it will be necessary, when applying the method, to cast a somewhatwider net than is usual when identifying the tasks that compose a job.taxonomieswe would like to avoid having to analyze every job in detail and beable to work in terms of broader job types or categories. to do this, weneed to have taxonomies of functions that workers perform in various typesof jobs. the notion of taxonomy is simple; it takes effort to develop taxonomies for different types of jobs, and as a result coverage is spotty.office information work is a particularly important type of job becausemore than half the workforce is employed in such jobs, and the number isincreasing (kraut, 1987; strassmann, 1985). there has been some effort todevelop taxonomies of office information work activities, but no generallyaccepted, detailed taxonomy exists. williges and williges (1995) provide apreliminary taxonomy of information tasks and task activities performed inprofessional offices, as does czaja (1987), who identifies and analyzes taskssuch as document preparation, meeting, conferencing, filing and retrieving,communication, decision making, and transacting. taxonomies of meetingsalso have been developed (short et al., 1976). this is an area that requiresmore work.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtimeline analysistimeline analysis is a detailed unfolding in time of the tasks that aperson performs, the information required for the task, the decisions made,and the actions taken. the analysis can be done at increasing levels ofdetail and, at the limit, examines individual manipulative motions in thespirit of time and motion study. it should not be a surprise to find thatgilbreth and gilbreth ([1917] 1973) applied this kind of analysis to thestudy of disabled soldiers and how to return them to gainful employment.their work provides the intellectual origins for what human factors callstask analysis, and even for our special interest in the employment of peoplewith disabilities.timeline analysis provides a detailed look at job and task requirements,with an emphasis on speed of performance and on competition for cognitive, sensory, and motor resources (corker et al., 1986). slow performanceand competition for reduced resources are common problems encounteredby disabled people. timeline analysis is therefore a very useful tool indetermining what kinds of accommodations are required to make jobs accessible. detailed timeline analyses of office and other jobs, especiallywhen performed by disabled workers, are generally not available. it wouldbe valuable to have an analysis of a representative sample of jobs beingperformed by people with different kinds of impairments.designdesign and redesign of jobsan enormous amount of work has been directed toward design for disabled people, but almost all of it has focused on equipment and systemsdesign. many assistive devices are described in the technical literature, aswell as in catalogs and product brochures. there is little in the technicalliterature about design or redesign of jobs to accommodate disabled workers. as part of an interest in communications and computer alternatives totravel and commuting, williges and williges (1995) address this subject interms of office information jobs. it would be very useful to have a collection of case histories of jobs that have been designed or redesigned toaccommodate specific disabilities.as is pointed out in other chapters of this book (chapters 2 and 8), theprimary skill requirements of many jobs have been shifting from physical tocognitive. this is true not only in the service sector but also in manufacturing and industrial production. many jobs have been redesigned to accommodate this shift. to be sure, the redesign has been motivated, for the mostpart, by new requirements imposed by the introduction of new technologiesemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities121in the office or plant, and not by the desire to create new work possibilitiesfor people with disabilities. nonetheless, the fact that redesign is occurringon such an extensive scale provides opportunities for rethinking job requirements with disabled workers in mind.another major development is that technology is spawning a growingvariety of aids to the performance of intellectual work (see chapter 11).again, for the most part, these aids were not designed to increase job opportunities for disabled people. yet some of the aids have the potential fordoing that, and others could, with some adaptation, be used to that end.as a way of maximizing the effective use of limited resources, there ismuch to be said for the strategy of looking for ways to turn technologicaldevelopments to the advantage of people with disabilities. we believe thatmany of the technological developments around computer and communication technologies have the potential to enhance the job opportunities ofdisabled people greatly. realizing this potential will require some attentionto a variety of human factors issues relating to the adaptation of devices tospecial user needs.design for accessibilityit would be enormously beneficial to disabled populations if commondevices, systems, and environments were designed to be accessible to peoplewith disabilities as well as to ablebodied people. however, as vanderheiden(1990) points out, the disabled population, although large in total, is composed of many subgroups, many of which are small. it is clearly impossibleto design everything to be accessible to all subgroups, just as it is inefficient to have distinct product designs for each disability subgroup. thesensible path lies somewhere between these extremes. for most types ofimpairments there are economical ways of designing products so that theyare accessible, or at least more accessible, to major segments of the disabled population (newell, 1995).there are many examples of successful accessible design (mueller, 1990;sorensen, 1979). public facilities for physically disabled people are themost visible example. it is now routine to have cuts in sidewalks so thatwheelchair users and others with mobility impairment can handle streetcrossings, toilets in public buildings are routinely designed to accommodatewheelchairs, and ramps are now provided as an alternative to stairs. ingeneral, it is now known how to design buildings so that they accommodatepeople in wheelchairs. this is done in new construction at what is nowconsidered to be an acceptable cost and, in some areas, at negligible cost.electronic equipment is not so far along. some computer systems dooffer facilities for those with impaired hand control, for example, òstickyókeys, which allow a command that normally requires simultaneous activaemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtion of keys to be invoked by sequential activation. however, computershave not typically been designed with functionally impaired users in mindand are simply not accessible to many people with mobility, sensory, orcognitive limitations. many of the capabilities that computer systems needin order to be accessible to people with sensory and physical impairmentsare summarized in a design guide addressing this issue (vanderheiden, 1988).when it is not possible to include accessibility facilities in a design, itmay still be possible to provide standard interfaces that can be used tointegrate special equipment designed for particular disabilities groups. blindusers, for example, need a device that transforms visual images on a computer display into auditory or tactile displays. it is not economical to provide such facilities for all users when only a small number will use them.yet the data from which the visual display was constructed can be madeavailable to software and hardware makers, which can implement the alternative displays. this is not likely to be a burden on the design (if it is partof the initial specifications). enabling such special adaptations requirescareful design of the interfaces. such design, in turn, requires good understanding of the kinds of adaptive devices that disabled users will need.interface requirements and recommendations to enable the use of devices toassist blind and physically handicapped people in using computer systemshave also been developed (vanderheiden, 1988).clearly more can be done to improve the builtin accessibility of products and facilities. we need more specific data about how to assist peoplewith different kinds of impairment, and we need to develop new techniquesfor providing needed assistance. this is especially true for cognitive disabilities. making fuller provision for the disabled will certainly have animpact on system design.design of assistive devices and systemsmany adaptive hardware devices and specially designed software packages have been developed to enable disabled people to use computers (casaliand williges, 1990; able data, 1989; trace research and developmentcenter, 1988). the number of devices available to assist the disabled inusing other kinds of equipment (e.g., automobiles) and devices that replaceor improve upon an impaired function (e.g., eyeglasses, communicationdevices) is also large. new assistive devices and systems that performbetter, offer new functions, or are cheaper continue to be developed. inparticular, we can expect increased attention to and progress in the development of assistive aids to cognitive functions as a result of advances incomputer technology and cognitive science. this is important because peoplewith cognitive disabilities are a very large subgroup, one often bypassed inthe development of assistive devices because the impairments are difficultemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities123to address. the need for better assistive devices remains large and theopportunities for progress are great.the rich menu of assistive devices and systems raises the problem ofhow to locate and select a particular device that matches the needs of anindividual user. large databases catalog the devices that are available (abledata, 1989; trace research and development center, 1988), but these donot provide detailed information on the characteristics of the devices or thetypes of users for which they are best suited. obtaining detailed information about device or system characteristics is not easy, especially for complex software for which the demands on cognitive ability, and even motorand sensory abilities, are difficult to determine and even harder to describe.without detailed information, the only way to select a device from a set ofcandidates is by trial and error.there have been several attempts to provide a systematic method forselecting assistive devices and systems. for example, behrmann (1989)describes an expert system for the selection of a computer inputoutput aidthat uses subjective ratings by therapists of the suitability of each type ofequipment for persons in each of several disability subgroups. casali (1995)and rosen and goodenoughtrapagnier (1989) describe a more comprehensive and quantitative approach to this problem; their approach uses detailedinformation about particular types of devices together with a set of tests forevaluating the residual capabilities of the disabled user, a tool for elicitinginformation from the user regarding task needs, a method for integratingthis information to select the appropriate combination of device characteristics, and a test of usability. casali addresses computer cursor control devices; rosen and goodenoughtrapagnier address augmentative communication devices. theirs is a logical approach, but it requires a large body ofinformation and the development of efficient tests of capabilities and methods for integration. systematic selection remains a major problem for whichthere are only hints of a solution.evaluation models, tools, and experimentsdesign is iterative and requires repetitive evaluation of prospective designs that eventually converge on a final solution that satisfies the requirements. evaluation is facilitated by models of human performance and computer tools to run the models, so that it is not necessary to rely entirely onexperiments with human subjects for evaluation. models and tools coveringmany areas of human performance have been developed. there are manygaps in coverage, especially in cognitive functions, but this is an active areaand progress continues to be made. for example, anthropometric modelshave been developed to evaluate cockpit design and layout as well as maintenance operations (mcdaniel and askren, 1985; paquette, 1990). theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchnational aeronautics and space administration (nasa) and the u.s. armyare developing a human factors computeraided engineering facility for thedesign of helicopter cockpits (armynasa aircrew/aircraft integration program,hartzell et al., 1984) that includes models of workload (corker et al., 1986)and vision (larimer et al., 1989; see also elkind et al., 1990 for a summaryof vision models being considered). simple cognitive models have beendeveloped. very important and widely used are the model human processor and the goms model for evaluating human computer interface designsdeveloped by card et al. (1983). recently, a more comprehensive model ofcognitive function, soar cognitive architecture, has been proposed by newell(1990).these computerbased tools are potentially directly applicable to thedisabled population, but the models they use provide, at best, only a framework for representing the performance of this population. the problem isthat these models are derived from psychological research that attempts tobe rigorously grounded and relatively generalñcharacteristics that are achievedthrough experimental controls and statistical analysis and, thus, at the expense of richness and detail. the resulting models, paradoxically, describethe normal case even if there is not even a single exemplar of that case.individual differences dissolve into variance from the mean, or worse, areconsidered outside the scope of the model. thus, almost by definition, thecapabilities of people with disabilities often lie outside general models.a general model has heuristic value so long as we are willing to modifyit significantly when it fails to adequately describe a specific personõs conditionñin other words, when we are willing to bend the model to the person rather than the person to the model. the resulting new model can thenbe usefully studied to evaluate designs and to produce new designs that arelikely to better address the specific needs of persons with disabilities. elkindand shrager (1995) applied this method to computersupported compositionby dyslexic individuals. it is important to keep in mind that each personwith a disability has specific impairments from a complex class of impairments and must be understood individually. assistive devices and systemsmust be adjusted for these individual differences. to adapt general modelsso that they represent the characteristics of disabled populations and ofindividuals within these populations will require new data from these populations and probably some model extensions. this will take considerableeffort.summary of research needsin the preceding sections, we have mentioned several areas in whichresearch and technology development are needed. in this section we sumemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities125marize these needs to provide specific recommendations for a human factorsprogram to enhance employment opportunities for people with disabilities.human performance design dataan important research need is to build a more adequate human factorsdesign database for the major disability subgroups and to get these dataincluded in the standard design references and texts. much of the neededdatabase can be obtained from a study of existing literature from otherfields, but in some areas new laboratory research will be required. suchdata are a prerequisite for a principled methodology for design for disabledpeople.data are required for all major disability subgroups. a structure mustbe developed and key performance parameters identified so that the datacan be applied to disability subgroups that have distinctly different performance characteristics and still allow customization to individual performance, when required. an effort should be made to integrate the data intoexisting computer models and simulations of human performance in orderto guide the data collection process and to make these models useful fordesign for people with disabilities.task analysisa set of interesting representative jobs should be selected (a) as a focusfor efforts aimed at understanding job requirements and (b) to provide a setof useful case studies. given the importance of information work as asource of employment, this sector should be given priority in selection ofjobs. standard skills requirements methods should be applied to these jobsto establish their requirements, or a body of skill requirements data shouldbe obtained from the literature. for each job, essential functions should beextracted from the total set of requirements and used to identify the disability subgroups whose impairment does not disqualify them for that job.taxonomies of the functions that workers perform in each of the representative set of jobs should be developed. an effort should be made tostructure the taxonomies so that a core set of functions is identified thatapplies across many jobs.timeline analyses of the representative set of jobs should be performedwith workers from different disability subgroups. these analyses should beused to identify areas where specific disability groups encounter performance limitations and resource constraints in order to guide job redesignand design of assistive devices and systems.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchdesigna set of case histories of jobs that have been designed or redesigned toaccommodate specific disabilities should be developed from actual experience or collected from the literature. these will serve as examples todisabled people and employers.a concerted effort should be made to improve the accessibility of computer applications. the major computer systems used in work situationsshould be identified, their accessibility evaluated, and the changes requiredto make them accessible to the disabled workforce specified. principalsoftware vendors should be encouraged to implement these changes. design guides for achieving accessible designs should be extended to cover awider range of applications, systems, and disabilities.these guides should include specification of interfaces required to facilitate integration of assistive devices and software into computer operating systems. special attention should be given to making systems moreaccessible to users with cognitive disabilities. new technologies and improvements on existing technologies for assisting disabled users in performing cognitive functions should be investigated and developed.continued support should be provided for the development of new andimproved assistive device technology that will enable a larger fraction ofthe disabled population to perform a wider variety of jobs effectively. systematic methods for characterizing assistive devices and systems and matchingthem to particular users should be investigated and tested.evaluation models, tools, and experimentsperformance data for people with specific disabilities should be incorporated into existing computerbased performance models and simulationtools so that they can be applied to designing for people with disabilities.where necessary, these models should be extended so that they can represent the performance of disability subgroups. they should also be used tohelp distinguish between performance aspects of tasks that are essential togetting the tasks done and those that are not and to help identify ways inwhich tasks can be modified so they are more manageable by people withspecific disabilities. many of the necessary performance data do not nowexist and will have to be obtained through experimentation.another kind of tool that could be very useful for people with disabilities is an accessible and easytouse database that would provide information regarding jobrelated (and other) resources that they can tap into. consider the problem that people with specific disabilities currently have infinding out whether there exist assistive devices that could benefit them,and if so, where they are, whether they work as claimed, and how to goemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities127about acquiring them. the establishment of systems that could provide thiskind of information seems to us to be a worthwhile goal. clearly, there arehuman factors issues involved in ensuring the usefulness and usability ofsuch systems.one can even imagine a nationwide networkaccessible information exchange tailored to the needs of people with disabilities. this could provideuptodate information not only about assistive devices but also about employment opportunities, services, training programs, activities of specialinterest groups, recent legislation pertaining to disabilities, and who is doing what in disabilityrelated research and development, as well as suggestionsand advice on the use of specific devices. such an exchange would putdisabled people in twoway contact with other individuals and groups withcommon problems/interests. it would permit the asking of òdoes anybodyknow?ó questions of the type one commonly finds on electronic bulletinboards. and it could serve as a gateway to other networkaccessible resources.in our view, one of the attractions of modern telecommunications technology is its potential to enrich the lives of people with disabilities in avariety of ways. it is not safe to assume, however, that this potential willbe realized without explicit efforts by technologists, particularly those witha special interest in the human dimensions of technological change.referencesable data1989able data: the resource for disabilityrelated consumer products. newington,conn.: adaptive equipment center (181 e. cedar st.).behrmann, m.1989development of an expert system for assistive technology identification. presentation at closing the gap conference, minneapolis, minn.boff, k.b., and j.e. lincoln1988engineering data compendium, human perception and performance. wrightpatterson air force base, ohio: armstrong aerospace medical research laboratory.bowe, f.g.1984personal computers and special needs. berkeley, calif.: sybex computer books.bureau of the census1987statistical abstract of the united states. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.1989statistical abstract of the united states. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.campbell, j.p.1990an overview of the army selection and classification project (project a). personnel psychology 43:231239.card, s.k., t.p. moran, and a. newell1983the psychology of humancomputer interaction. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcasali, s.p.1995a physical skillsbased strategy for choosing an appropriate interface method. ina.d.n. edwards, ed., extraordinary humancomputer interaction. london, england: cambridge university press.casali, s.p., and r.c. williges1990data bases of accommodative aids for computer users with disabilities. humanfactors 32:407422.corker, k., l. davis, b. papazian, and r. pew1986development of an advanced task analysis methodology and demonstration forarmynasa aircrew/aircraft integration. report 6124. cambridge, mass.: boltberanek and newman.czaja, s.j.1987human factors in office automation. pp. 15871616 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of human factors. new york: wiley.czaja, s.j., ed.1990human factors research needs for an aging population. panel on human factors research issues for an aging population, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.edwards, a.d.n., ed.1995extraordinary humancomputer interaction. london, england: cambridge university press.egan, d.e., and l.m. gomez1985assaying, isolating, and accommodating individual differences in learning a complex skill. pp. 173217 in r.f. dillon, ed., individual differences in cognition,vol. 2. orlando, fla.: academic press.elkind, j.i.1990the incidence of disabilities in the united states. human factors 32:397405.elkind, j.i., and j. shrager1995modeling and analysis of dyslexic writing using speech and other modalities. ina.d.n. edwards, ed., extraordinary humancomputer interaction. london, england: cambridge university press.elkind, j.i., s.k. card, j. hochberg, and b.m. huey, eds.1990human performance models for computeraided engineering. committee onhuman factors, national research council. san diego, calif.: academic press.gilbreth, f.b., and l.m. gilbreth[1917] 1973 applied motion study. easton, pa.: hive publishing.griffith, d., d.j. garderbonneau, a.d.n. edwards, j.i. elkind, and r.c. williges, eds.1989human factors research with special populations will further advance the theoryand practice of the human factors discipline. pp. 565566 in proceedings of thehuman factors society 33rd annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: humanfactors society.hartzell, e.j., e.w. aiken, and j.w. vorhees1984aircrewaircraft integration issues in future u.s. army helicopters. in agardhuman factors considerations in high performance aircraft. moffett field,calif.: nasa ames research center.kelley, p.l., and k.h.e. kroemer1990anthropometry of the elderly: status and recommendations. human factors 32:571595.kraus, l.e., and s. stoddard1989chart book on disability in the united states: an infouse report. nationalinstitute on disability and rehabilitation research. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of education.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employment and disabilities129kraut, r.e.1987technology and the transformation of white collar work. hillsdale, n.j.: lawrenceerlbaum associates.larimer, j., a. arditi, j. bergen, and n. badler1989visibility modeling project. moffett field, calif.: national aeronautics and spaceadministration.mcdaniel, j.w., and w.b. askren1985computeraided design models to support ergonomics. wrightpatterson airforce base, ohio: harry g. armstrong aerospace medical research laboratory.mueller, j.1990the workplace workbook: an illustrated guide to job accommodation and assistivetechnology. washington, d.c.: dole foundation (available from resna press).newell, a.f.1990unified theories of cognition. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.1995extraordinary humancomputer interaction. in a.d.n. edwards, ed., extraordinary humancomputer interaction. london, england: cambridge university press.nickerson, r.s.1986using computers: human factors in information systems. cambridge, mass.:mit press.paquette, s.p.1990human analogue models for computeraided design and engineering applications. natick, mass.: army natick research and engineeering center.peterson, n.g., l.m. hough, m.d. dunnette, r.l. rosse, j.s. houston, and j.l. toquam1990project a: specification of the predictor domain and development of new selection/classification test. personnel psychology 43:247276.rauch, j.1989kids as capital. atlantic monthly august:5661.rosen, m.j., and c. goodenoughtrapagnier1989the tuftsmit prescription guide: assessment of users to predict the suitability ofaugmentative communication devices. applied technology 1(3):5161.salvendy, g., ed.1987handbook of human factors. new york: wiley.sheridan, t.b.1980computers and human alienation. technology review 83:6067, 7073.short, j., e. williams, and b. christie1976the social psychology of telecommunications. new york: wiley.smith, d.b.d.1990human factors and aging: an overview of research needs and applications opportunities. human factors 32:509526.sorensen, r.j.1979design for accessibility. new york: wiley.strassmann, p.a.1985information payoff: the transformation of workers in the electronic age. newyork: free press.texas young lawyers association1990the americans with disabilities act: an overview. austin: texas young lawyers association (p.o. box 12487).trace research and development center1988trace center resource book. trace research and development center on communication, control, and computer access for handicapped individuals. madison: university of wisconsin.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchvachon, r.a.1990employing the disabled. issues in science and technology 6(2):4450.vanderheiden, g.c.1988considerations in the design of computers and operating systems to increasetheir accessibility to persons with disabilities. design consideration task force,trace research and development center on communication, control, and computer access for handicapped individuals. madison: university of wisconsin.1990thirtysomething million: should they be exceptions? human factors 32:383396.vaughan, r.j., and s.e. berryman1989employersponsored training: current status, future possibilities. national centeron education and employment ncee brief 4:14.williges, r.c., and b.h. williges1995travel alternatives for the mobility impaired: the surrogate electronic traveler (set).in a.d.n. edwards, ed., extraordinary humancomputer interaction. london,england: cambridge university press.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1314health careroberta l. klatzky and m.m. ayoubintroductionin considering human factors research needs related to health care, weare particularly concerned with new research topics that are likely to reflectsocietal and technological developments in the coming decade. we alsoconsider more longstanding problems that previous research has failed toaddress. in keeping with the general goals of this volume, our goal is tohighlight problems in which human capabilities and processes play a critical role and thus to identify areas in which human factors researchers canmake a significant contribution. health care consumes a large and growingproportion of the u.s. gross national product; new developments have consequences for the quality and duration of many lives. even a small changein the effectiveness of workers, medical devices, or caregiving environments can translate into a large impact on costs and human comfort.health care has not been a traditional focus for human factors research.this was noted two decades ago in a report on an international natosymposium (pickett and triggs, 1974), whose goal was to provide examplesof how human factors techniques could be applied to medical issues. in anintroductory overview to that report, rappaport cited a variety of contributions that human factors specialists could make to the health care field (seealso rappaport, 1970). he foresaw the increased use of computers in medicine and suggested that human factors specialists might interact directlywith manufacturers of medical equipment to improve designs.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthese seminal efforts notwithstanding, human factors researchers havenot been greatly involved in the area of health care. for example, despitethe longstanding concern of human factors specialists with sources of error, a symposium on human error in medicine held at the 1991 meeting ofthe human factors society (bogner, 1991) appears to have been the first ofits kind (van cott, 1991). the dearth of attention to the potential contributions of human factors research is unfortunate; the field has much to offerwith respect to designing medical devices, humanmachine interfaces, andmedical environments such as operating rooms and laboratories. anotherarea of application is trainingñnot only of medical personnel but also ofpatients and home caregivers who use medical devices. further, because ofrapid technological change, the skills of medical personnel and of othersworking with medical devices may require frequent updating.while we emphasize new research needs in this chapter, we should notforget that the healthcare arena offers ample opportunities to apply alreadywellknown principles of human factors. medical errors point to the needfor such application; there is a huge number of contexts in which error canand does occur.operating rooms are one example. there the medical practitioner mightbe compared to a member of a flight crew, as many of the same humanfactors issues apply. there is a necessity for teamwork, often with criticaltiming constraints (helmreich and schaefer, 1994; regnier, 1993). goodcommunication among team members is imperative. there can be peaks ofhigh stress, which are likely to coincide with points when timing is particularly important. the workplace is complex, with multiple instruments giving independent readings that must be integrated by the user. and of course,errors resulting from these sources may have dire consequences. bogner(1991) has cited the substantial number of potentially preventable incidentsin which anesthesia has resulted in brain damage or death.the administration of drugs is another area in which errors frequentlyoccur. many medical errors within the home can be traced to inadequateinstruction in the use of medicines or devices or to the complexities oflabeling. although steps to reduce such errors could be taken on the basisof existing human factors principles, it is also important to evaluate thetarget context carefully; this may call for further research (cook, 1991).the plan of the chapter is as follows. we first discuss some generaltechnological and societal trends that are likely to have an impact on medical practices in the future and consider the human factors implications ofthese trends. we then describe, in more detail, several broad areas that arelikely to raise specific issues for human factors research: enhanced understanding of risk factors and its impact on programs for behavioral changeand disease prevention, advances in medical information technology, technological advances in medical instrumentation, and ergonomic issues thatemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care133arise in health care procedures. clearly, we cannot hope to introduce everypotential area of application for human factors research in medicine. thesample we do present is intended to demonstrate the importance of increased involvement in the medical field by human factors specialists. arecurring theme in this discussion is how technological advances in medicalcare create new needs for human factors research. although new healthcare needs may arise independently from technologyñfor example, throughdemographic or social trends or through new understanding of requirementsfor device designñresponses to these needs increasingly reflect todayõshighly computerized environment.new trends in health carea number of trends in medicine indicate ample opportunities for contributions from human factors research in the coming decade. some of thesetrends are related to the development of new health care needs, whereasothers are related to new tools, particularly tools made possible by advancesin electronics.demographic changeas the relatively numerous postworld war ii generation ages, it willinevitably place greater demands on the medical system, and the concomitant increase in demand for health care by that aging population is likely toraise a number of issues that human factors research can address. (humanfactors research needs for the aging have recently been reviewed in a publication of the committee on human factorsñczaja, 1990.)whereas the human factors industry has been extensively concernedwith the design of workplace environments, there is a need for research onthe design of appropriate domestic environments for the aged population.one goal should be to minimize the risk of accidents, which involve theelderly disproportionately (czaja, 1990). a broader question is how environmental design might promote good health, both physical and psychological. the answer should take account of the effects of communal living,which seems to be increasingly likely in the face of high housing and healthcosts. the goal of constructing a living space that encourages social interaction while maintaining individual privacy is a challenging one. anotherproblem is how dwelling designs might encourage exercise in an otherwisesedentary population without imposing undue physical stress.aging also introduces problems of compliance with health recommendations, for example, difficulty in adhering to an adequate diet or remembering to take pills. these problems may be significantly ameliorated bysimple external reminder systems that aid what has been called prospectiveemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmemory. the human factors area has contributed to research on sensory,biomechanical, and psychomotor effects of aging (see small, 1987). thereare also cognitive changes that can fruitfully be studied from a humanfactors perspective with the goal of improving the health practices of anaging population.it is also important to note that the current population of middleagedadults is different from its predecessors: it is healthier, better informed, andmore interested in health care. many patients today seek to play an activerole in prevention and medical treatment. the trend toward increasingpatient participation in medical decision making raises many important questions:how can we inform patients about risk factors, preventive measures, andtreatment options? how can we aid their decisions? we will consider theseissues in more detail below.societal changean event of substantial societal impact is the emergence of highly infectious and/or untreatable diseases. the prospect of disease transmissionin the workplace indicates an important problem for the human factors area,and medical personnel are particularly vulnerable. interactions betweenpatients and health care workers are coming under increasing scrutiny because of highly publicized cases of disease transmission. clearly, there is acall for measures to safeguard the welfare of both groups, and human factors research should be fully involved in the development of such safeguards.the increasing cost of health care is another trend, one outcome ofwhich is decreased hospitalization and, concomitantly, increased home care.more and more frequently, home care incorporates medical devices thatmay be quite complex to maintain and operate. human factors concernsshould include the design of these devices, the nature of instructions, howindividuals are trained to use them, and how stress might alter user competence.for a substantial number of individuals in the united states, neitherhome care nor hospitalization is an alternative. homeless people combine ahigh propensity for medical needs with a low ability to pay for treatment.they may be shut out of the medical system, and when those who findmedical help are given recommendations for treatment, they may be unableto purchase needed drugs or conform to medical regimens. what humanfactors research can contribute is less clear in this area than in others suchas workplace or instrument design. yet it is in keeping with the goals ofthis volume that we mention the need to create avenues for diagnosis andtreatment among those least able to seek help.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care135technological advancestechnologically advanced tools for health care include not only instruments for treatment of disease and trauma, but also systems for communication among medical researchers, practitioners, and supervisory agencies.computer technology has created such diverse phenomena as new methodsfor medical imaging, largescale databases related to patients and treatments, online bibliographies, automated decision aids, and computercontrolled surgical devices. as was noted above, new medical devices alsomake home treatment possible for patients who would once have requiredcare in a health facility. new technology for assisting and retraining thedisabled is discussed in chapter 3.as is generally the case, technological advances have produced newtools faster than research can be done on human factors related to their use.we need to understand how to make new techniques and devices as effective and accessible as possible.risk assessment and preventive practicesin both the united states and abroad, individuals are increasingly seeking control of health care practices. this reflects a growing knowledge ofrisk factors and greater interest in taking preventive steps. the computerhas had significant impact on peopleõs knowledge of health risks, a development that is in keeping with our general theme of research needs basedon technological advances.risk assessmentone role of the computer in medicine has been to provide data aboutpatient populations, giving rise to assessments of risk factors and prognosticfactors in disease. for example, a very large database has been compiled bythe surveillance, epidemiology, and end results (seer) program of thenational cancer institute. combined with data from the national centerfor health statistics, which provides mortality rates, the seer data providedirect assessment of cancer incidence and mortality over time. these datahave been used to study a variety of issues related to etiological factors incancer. another example of a significant data source is the breast cancerdetection demonstration project (bcddp), with over a quarter of a millionparticipants. data from the bcddp have led to a technique for absoluterisk assessment in breast cancer (gail et al., 1989). numerous databasesare available from epidemiological surveys and experimental studies in theunited states and abroad.it is increasingly clear that behavioral, demographic, and familial charemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchacteristics are predictors of the risk of incurring disease. among the mostsignificant risk factors that have been identified are behavioral characteristics, including whether an individual smokes and how much dietary fat heor she consumes. for example, it has been estimated that approximately 75percent of deaths from cancer are attributable to lifestyle (williams, 1991).cessation of smoking could reduce lung cancer deaths by over 75 percent;modification of diet could reduce cancer deaths by over 25 percent (newelland vogel, 1988).health risks arise not only from personal behaviors and attributes; risksdue to substances found in the workplace and natural environment are beingidentified by both experimental and epidemiological techniques (see swanson,1988). onthejob exposure to radiation is a health risk. vibration maycause damage to the circulatory and nervous systems and to bones andjoints. increasingly, occupational stress is being considered a risk factor(levi, 1990; smith, 1987).some newly encountered risk factors pose formidable challenges. theseinclude the risk of aids transmission to health care workers from needlesticks or handling of bodily fluids. in communities with particularly highrates of hiv infection, it has been estimated that dental workers may haverisk levels equivalent to those of homosexuals (morris and turgut, 1990).in one survey of medical residents in training during 1989, more than halfthose surveyed had hiv patients under their care, and 9 percent reportedhaving been exposed to hiv from a needle stick (hayward and shapiro,1991). hepatitis b virus is an even greater occupational risk for the medical community, whose members have a risk of infection up to 10 times thatof the public (hadler, 1990).communication of risk factorsan approach known as òhealth risk appraisaló began some two decadesago in an effort to make use of risk information (for a general review, seehealth services research, 1987). the general idea behind the approach isthat risk factors can be measured for a person (objectively or by selfreport), and an estimate of that personõs risk of disease can then be derived. ahealth professional would then communicate this personalized estimate tothe patient, along with information about what factors are contributing torisk and what possible lifestyle changes he or she can adopt in response. ifthe person decides to make the suggested changes, the risk factors should bealtered and risk should accordingly be reduced.each of the basic assumptions underlying health risk appraisal has beencriticized. the adequacy of riskfactor assessment has been questioned,relying as it does on the patientõs ability to retrieve personal data and his orher inclination to report them accurately. the models used to derive riskemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care137have also been criticized for making statistical assumptions that may besimplified or inaccurate. in addition, there is still not a great deal of evidence for the effectiveness of risk assessment in inducing riskreductionbehaviors.these criticisms have not, however, prevented the public from beingintensely interested in risk factors and disease prevention. public interest inreducing cholesterol, for example, has considerably altered dietary habits inthe united states. national agencies have used known risk factors such asfamilial incidence and age to adjust recommended regimens of screeningtests for diseases. it seems clear that risk assessment (population and personalized), along with attendant recommendations for behavioral change,will increasingly be part of the american health scene.prevention programs in the workplace and communityonce people are informed of risk factors, preventive practices may takevarious forms, including controlling toxic substances, designing environments that reduce local exposure, and promoting riskreducing behaviors.of these interventions, design of the physical workplace has been a traditional focus of human factors and will continue to be important in reducingexposure to risk factors and occupational hazards. a less obvious contribution to be made by human factors is in helping to change the behaviors ofindividuals. in particular, an important vehicle for behavioral change is theinstitution of educational and motivational programs for groups.group prevention programs have taken place in educational, community, and work environments. for example, the pawtucket heart healthprogram attempted to treat obesity in an entire community (lasater et al.,1991; carleton et al., 1991). components of the program included a monthlycitywide òweigh in,ó labeling of items in grocery stores and on menus,bloodcholesterol screening, a student cookoff, and church programs, allfacilitated by enlisting a large number of community volunteers. substantial reductions in serum cholesterol were observed in the initial pilot study.another example is the òknow your bodyó project, funded by the nationalheart, lung, and blood institute and the national cancer institute. thisattempted to modify riskinducing behaviors in schoolchildren and was foundto be successful in reducing the rate of cigarette smoking several years later(walter, 1989). community screening for breast cancer is another successstory (paryani et al., 1990). the movement toward riskprevention andscreening programs in the workplace is growing (breslow et al., 1990).one scenario for the creation of a community or workplace preventionprogram is to begin with controlled trials that demonstrate the effectivenessof a preventive behavior, followed by extensive dissemination of results toenhance public awareness. this has been done in the case of the linkemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchbetween reduced blood cholesterol and decreased incidence of heart disease. following one wellpublicized prevention study, there was a substantial increase in public acceptance of the beneficial effects of cholesterolreduction (schucker et al., 1987). this undoubtedly created a receptiveaudience for community interventions like the pawtucket program.human factors challenges related to risk assessmentand preventive practicesthere is a clear need for further human factors research on how information about risk and its reduction should be communicated and how thesecommunications are interpreted. risk communication is complex, as a recent national research council publication attests (national research council,1989). even when the effects of a risk factor can be reasonably estimated,the nature of the risk may be communicated in different ways. should webe told that a risk is 5 percent for a year or (equivalently) 0.4 percent for amonth? is it more meaningful to know the risk of death or the expectedreduction in years of life expectancy? does it help to have a standard ofcomparison, for example, to know that the risk of hiv to surgeons performing 25 operations on infected patients is about the same as that of death on alouisiana oil rig over the course of a year (orient, 1990)? once communicated, risk statistics are subject to cognitive reasoning processes that mayintroduce other sources of error or distortion. for example, whether a riskis framed in terms of the probability of positive or negative outcomes willaffect an individualõs response (tversky and kahneman, 1981). anotherproblem is that the small probabilities associated with many medical risksmay be difficult for people to interpret. perhaps that is why having personal knowledge about someone who contracts a disease has such a potenteffect. for example, the national incidence of tests for breast and coloncancer increased dramatically after nancy and ronald reagan incurred thesediseases.becker and janz (1987) have provided a theoretical analysis of healthrisk appraisal that points to some other relevant issues. one is whetherpersonalized risk estimates are more effective than population estimates,and if so, why. another is how to motivate riskreducing behavior, forexample, by promoting belief in the alterability of risk factors or by increasing the awareness of risky behavior. the introduction of warnings oncigarette packages is an example of public policy intended to increase riskawareness.the design of group programs to increase positive health practices isanother area in which human factors research can make important and widespread contributions. programs aimed at reducing smoking, decreasing fatintake and increasing fiber, reducing recreational sun exposure, and inducemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care139ing compliance with screening programs for such diseases as breast andcolon cancer are among those that promise to have very beneficial results(fink, 1987). research to increase the effectiveness of such programs wouldbe of considerable societal value.information technologythe computer can not only store data but also deliver data directly tomedical practitioners and patients. the general area concerned with information encoding, representation, and communication in medicine is calledmedical informatics. chapter 7 discusses medical informatics in the broadercontext of information systems. in this section we consider a number ofmedical contexts in which information delivery is critical and the implications of these contexts for human factors research needs.online information retrievalseveral databases are directly available to medical workers and, in somecases, patients as well. examples are medline, which provides titles andabstracts of recently published articles in the medical literature and wasdeveloped by the national library of medicine, and cancerlit, a similar bibliographic system with a narrower range of citations. medline isavailable on cdrom from several companies and can be accessed bymodem.the national cancer institute has developed physician data query (pdq),a computer database for information about advances in cancer treatment andclinical trials (see hubbard et al., 1987). protocols of currently activeclinical trials are entered into pdq and are indexed by disease and eligibility criteria. in addition, pdq provides stateoftheart information aboutdisease characteristics and prognosis. there has been considerable effort tomake pdq available to the medical community. the system can be accessed at thousands of medical libraries and centers, and several commercial vendors have been licensed to distribute pdq via networks and cdrom.decision aids and expert systemsinformation delivery can be extremely helpful in medical decision making. computer programs variously known as knowledgebased systems,decision aids, and expert systems are meant to facilitate the many medicaldecisions that must be made by both medical workers and patients. whetherthese programs succeed depends in part on how well they are tailored to thehumans who use them.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchautomated decision systems emerged at least three decades prior to the1990s (ledley and lusted, 1961). these systems generally have two componentsña knowledge base of facts, often in the form of rules, and procedures for using the facts, sometimes called the inference engine. whenapplied to a specific problem, the system also requires data about its characteristics. expert systems are so called because the underlying knowledge isderived from experts. the term decision aid suggests a program that provides some of the information that is useful in decision making, often quantified or structured data, but that leaves other elements to the user. inpractice, an expert system generally functions as a decision aid in that itcontributes to decision making rather than governing it.one of the bestknown expert systems is mycin (shortliffe, 1976),which is designed to identify the source of a bacterial infection and torecommend treatment. mycin has been augmented by instructional programs that train potential users. recently the national library of medicinehas developed ai/rheum, a diagnostic system for rheumatologic diseases(kingsland et al., 1986). this program features an extensive help systemthat incorporates video images as well as text.the range of application of knowledgebased systems is now very wide,including, for example, diagnosis, prescription, causal interpretation of data,medical consulting, and selection of adjuvant therapies. when one considers that each of these areas can be appled to many specific diseases orproblem areas, it is clear that the number of potential programs is immense.commercially available shells, which specify a format for the knowledgebase and provide an inference engine, are intended to simplify the development of new systems.computerized decision aids are attractive in part because of evidencethat human decision making is far from ideal. people have been characterized as subject to heuristics and biases that introduce error (for review in amedical context, see dowie and elstein, 1988). peopleõs decisions differdepending on the way problems are presented (framing effects), how muchhas been expended on a solution in the past (sunk costs), what samplesolutions are provided (anchoring and adjustment), and the extent to whichthey can retrieve past solutions from memory (availability). medical decisions are complex; the computer can facilitate decision making by providing as much relevant data as possible, along with a contentfree objectivedecision process.human factors challenges related to information technologypast human factors research in several areas has intersected with needsin medical informatics. relevant research topics include modeling of decision making and design of usable interfaces for expert systems. we suggestemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care141here, then, not so much new substantive topics as specific applications thatpresent new research needs.a traditional goal of human factors research has been to improve theaccessibility of tools. this goal is critical to the successful application ofsystems for information delivery, as chapter 7 discusses at length. a needfor increased accessibility of medical information systems is clear in thatthe explosion of information available to medical practitioners has not necessarily resulted in widespread use. the national cancer institute recentlyconducted a formal evaluation of the pdq system (czaja et al., 1989).despite intensive publicity about the system and efforts to make it maximally available to health care workers, fewer than 50 percent of physiciansin cancer specialties were aware of it, and only about half these physiciansreported using it. use by community physicians who were not in oncologicalspecialties was termed òvery low.ó the greatest use was by employees ofthe cancer information service, who provide information to the public.the low level of pdq use was attributed in part to physiciansõ discomfort with computers. the primary use of computers in a clinical practicetends to be for administration and word processing rather than for access toinformation or for automated decision facilitation. there are also problemswith negative attitudes about computers. for example, only 5 percent ofnononcologists in the pdq review indicated that computerized data retrieval was very important.it seems clear that there is a yawning gap between the availability oftechnological toolsñwhich provide data about disease risk, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment as well as automated aids for decision makingñandthe use of these tools. human factors research can play an important role inbridging this gap. some of the problems that must be considered are thefollowing:¥the user interface. it is by now a given that the success of acomputer program designed for general use depends on its òuser friendliness.ó because the designers of pdq were aware that medical practitionersmight be unfamiliar with computers, pdq software offers menus as well asdirect commands; some instructions are also given online. the evaluationsuggests, however, that these measures are insufficient to promote widespread use.¥medical training. medical schools do not currently include extensive training in medical informatics in their curricula, although efforts toincrease such training are under way (ball and douglas, 1990). the national library of medicine has created an elective medical informatics coursefor advanced medical students, which is intended to create a òseed cropó ofresearchers in this area (national institutes of health, 1991). given thedemands of the medical curriculum, any such training must be highly effiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcient; it is unlikely to receive a substantial portion of overall educationtime. postgraduate training in the use of specific programsñconducted, forexample, in connection with professional meetingsñmay be a way to increase computer fluency.medical schools also do not currently provide extensive training inepidemiology and statistics (klatzky et al., 1994); again, it is unclear thatsuch training can be justified in the general curriculum. yet the evaluationof retrieved information is critical, and this may depend on an understanding of the statistical measures and models that were used to derive it. klatzkyet al. suggested that one approach to this problem is to provide onlineintroductions to basic statistical concepts as part of a database retrievalprogram or decision aid.¥attitudes about technological aids. negative attitudes about theusefulness of computerized data retrieval were cited as a potential barrier tothe use of pdq by practicing physicians. more generally, discomfort withdecision aids such as computerguided diagnoses or treatment plans maypreclude their use. efforts to bring technological aids to the practicingclinician should include attitude change as a goal. it should be made clearthat computer programs can greatly assist the physician in acquiring relevant data and putting them to use.it should not be forgotten that patients, too, play a role in decisionmaking. there has been relatively little effort to provide data to patients orto assist them in making decisions about treatment. research is needed toascertain the extent to which patients wish to play a decisionmaking role aswell as to determine what resources might aid them. a straightforwardapproach is to construct patientoriented databases of general informationabout diseases and appropriate references. the question then becomes howto maximize the accessibility of the information.patients often make decisions under considerable stress. research needsrelated to the effects of stress on cognition are reviewed in chapter 10, butit is important to note here that there has been little research on the stressinduced by diagnosis of disease. in some diseases, for example, breastcancer, a range of treatment options are available. typically, patients makedecisions about treatment shortly after diagnosis, when stress is likely to begreatest. meyerowitz (1980) suggests that the psychological impact of breastcancer diagnosis and treatment may be as threatening as the disease itself.human factors researchers could address such questions as the effects ofstress on decision making in this context and the potential role of automateddata retrieval and decision aids. the prevalence of breast cancer suggeststhat it could provide a useful paradigm for research on stress among medical patients.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care143medical instrumentationthe continued presence of the familiar bloodpressure cuff notwithstanding, the computer has virtually revolutionized medical instrumentation. bioinstrumentation is a term that has been applied to the combinationof electronic and biological technology (wise, 1990). bioinstruments include, for example, biomedical imaging systems that take advantage of thecomputer for gathering, enhancing, and displaying data; electrochemicalsensors that incorporate whole living cells in their construction; artificialsensing devices such as tactile sensors based on forcesensitive polymers;and transducers such as cochlear implants.as is the case with any technological change, advances in medicalinstrumentation lead to problems in mastering the new technology and create needs for human factors research. the pace of advance means thatresearchers must òenter the loopó quickly. this has frequently not been thecase. here we briefly describe examples of new developments in instrumentation and consider related human factors needs.medical imagingmedical imaging is a century old; the xray was discovered in 1895.the fundamental requirements for an imaging system remain the same. whatis needed is some means of acquiring information about the imaged site andsome means of displaying that information. however, technological advances have greatly expanded the ways to meet both of these requirementsand have added other capabilities, particularly new means of analyzing,enhancing, and interpreting the data.a variety of techniques for acquiring information about a targeted siteare in widespread use today. twodimensional images like that provided bythe xray are the basis for computed tomography, in which a contiguoussequence of crosssectional images is used to synthesize a threedimensional representation. magnetic resonance imaging relies on the activity ofatoms when placed in a magnetic field to construct a twodimensional image. positron emission tomography uses the distribution of radioactivity toproduce twodimensional slices that can then be used to construct a threedimensional model. still other methods are thermography, which measuresthe distribution of temperature, and ultrasound.the resulting data are often subjected to a number of preprocessingalgorithms that, for example, detect edges, compute regions, reduce noise,and extract and enhance critical features. the data are then displayed invarious ways. multiple slices from different planes and at different depthsare often displayed simultaneously. a threedimensional surface description can be displayed as a highquality twodimensional projection onto aemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchviewing screen. there is also the possibility of fully threedimensionaldisplay techniques such as holograms or a display through stereoscopicviewers. color can be used to differentiate regions, especially when thereis no direct counterpart between acquired data and a visual feature (e.g.,oxygen consumption or temperature).new techniques are increasingly expanding the ways medical imagesare displayed as well as how they are intepreted with the aid of knowledgebased systems. the potential usefulness of automated interpretation is substantial, given the density of the imaged information and the complexity ofthe mapping between diagnostically relevant attributes of the body and visually apparent aspects of the image. swets et al. (1991) have described atwopart interactive decision aid that first prompts the user to rate a givenimage according to a series of scales and then uses the obtained scale valuesto estimate the probability of malignancy, which is then communicated tothe user. an analysis of breastcancer diagnoses with and without thedecision aid revealed a clear advantage for using the aid, an advantage thatincreased with the difficulty of the diagnosis.the use of filmbased radiological images is expected to decrease, owing to the advent of digital environments (arenson et al., 1990). a rapidlydeveloping tool is the picture archiving and communication system (pacs),a digital workstation that will allow physicians to call up and display storedimages. the 1990 meeting on medical imaging of the international societyfor optical engineering had 15 paper sessions and a poster session devotedto pacs (dwyer and jost, 1990). among its many positive aspects, pacsoffers the possibility for online image enhancement and interpretation aids;however, a negative aspect is the potential degradation in image quality dueto digital display.techniques derived from perception and decision science have beenwidely used to evaluate the relative merits of imaging methods, as well asto assess the effectiveness of enhancement techniques and the degradationunder systems like pacs. in particular, an analysis using the area underthe relative operating characteristic (roc; in the context of signal detectiontheory, this is also called the receiver operating characteristic) has provenhighly effective. the roc plots the proportion of true positive responsesas a function of the proportion of false positives in a diagnostic test. theroc measure is independent of the decision criterion and the frequency ofdiagnosed events (metz, 1989; swets, 1988). for example, swets et al.(1979), using this measure, found computed tomography to be more accurate than radionuclide scanning in diagnosing brain lesions.much attention has already been given to human factors considerationsin the design of medical imaging workstations (oõmalley and ricca, 1990).a key to physician acceptance of these systems seems to be perceivedsavings in time and effort. in one survey study of factors influencing theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care145acceptance of pacs systems by radiologists (saarinen et al., 1989), speedof information delivery was found to be the primary concern. thus, aparticularly positive aspect was the time that might be saved in traveling toand from the site where radiological files were stored. physicians alsofavored a system that would eliminate the need for multiple trips to retrievefilms that had been misplaced or temporarily checked out by others. on thenegative side, physicians were concerned with the possibility of significantdowntime for the system. somewhat surprisingly, interest in pacs was notaffected by the age of the physician and was only slightly affected by priorexperience with computers.biosensorsa biosensor is a device that places a transducer in close contact withmolecules of a biological substance in order to produce an output that iscorrelated with concentration of the substance. the general sequence bywhich the sensor operates is that the measured substance interacts with aòbiological mediatoró (e.g., one or more enzymes, antibodies, or bacteria),leading to an output (e.g., electrochemical, optical, or calorimetric) that canbe transformed into an electrical signal (mascini et al., 1990). reviews ofbiosensor technology can be found in claremont (1987), higgins and lowe(1987), and wilkins (1989). schultz (1991) traces the modern biosensor totwo antecedents: information technology, particularly the development ofminiaturized components, and molecular biology, which identifies biomoleculesthat can serve as the mediators for recognizing the target substance.the field of biosensor technology is now burgeoning at both basic andapplied levels. attractive features of this technique include its speed, theneed for lowvolume samples, and the possibility of in situ measurementand longterm implantation. the potential variety of biosensors is verylarge; sensors have been developed to measure such substances as urea,cholesterol, proteins, alcohol, and penicillin. these devices have widespread application beyond health care; for example, they are used in thefood industry to measure contaminants.one of the first areas of health care application of biosensors, andprobably the most developed, is sensing of glucose concentrations (e.g.,ross et al., 1990; schaffar and wolfbeis, 1990). this has obvious important benefits to diabetics. for decades, diabetics have done home glucosemonitoring by using visual assessment of color changes on reagent stripsdipped in urine or blood. these methods have a high potential for error,and, particularly with urine testing, there is considerable temporal lag between a change in blood glucose and the ability to detect it. subjectivevisual monitoring and urine tests for diabetes have given way to bloodglucose monitors, pocketsized electronic devices that assess the level ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchglucose from a blood sample by sensing results of its interaction with anenzyme. by performing periodic measurements and adjusting insulin injections or diet accordingly, diabetic patients can maintain acceptable glucoselevels with minimal fluctuation.biosensors not only make possible more direct and accurate evaluationbut also provide the possibility of longterm implantation. an implantedglucose sensor is critical to the development of an artificial pancreas thatwould monitor glucose levels and adjust insulin injections automatically;most of the components for such a system now exist. expertsystem technology can also be combined with glucose sensing to regulate glucose levels (lougheed et al., 1987).medical devices for home careas was mentioned above, a clear trend in health care is to dischargepatients after shorter hospitalizations, necessitating increased home care.often, this is made possible by sending the patient home with a medicaldevice. for example, ventilators may be placed in the home for patientswith respiratory problems (bach et al., 1992; thompson and richmond,1990). patients may receive medication at home with infusion pumps, electronically controlled devices used to regulate the flow of drugs along linesimplanted in the body, for example subcutaneous catheters or venous accessports. these devices are used to supply antibiotics, drugs to reduce pain,and chemotherapy (new et al., 1991; reville and almadrones, 1989; storeyet al., 1990). some patients receive òtotal parenteral nutrition,ó their entiredaily calorie requirement, intravenously at home (bisset et al., 1992; viall,1990). home dialysis machines now enable kidney patients to undergodialysis even while they sleep (delano and friedman, 1990; health devices, 1991). although these devices have considerable benefits, not onlyeconomically but also in terms of patient welfare and satisfaction, they alsoput responsibility on home caregivers and patients alike.human factors challenges related to medical instrumentationthe contributions that human factors researchers can make to the development and use of medical imaging seem enormous. new techniques foracquiring, displaying, and evaluating images call for increased interactionbetween the human user and the computer. user options for image enhancement and display adjustment increase the complexity of these systems. the same points apply as those that emerged in the evaluation of thepdq system. the effectiveness of these systems will substantially dependon the extent to which the interface renders technology accessible, given theattitudes and training of physicians and technical staff.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care147human factors researchers can also play a role in developing and evaluating systems for image enhancement and knowledgebased interpretation.each new modality creates anew such questions as, which imaged featuresare most useful for diagnosis? currently, the discovery of relevant featuresmay be a piecemeal process taking several years; systematization of thisprocess is badly needed (swets, personal communication).advances in medical instruments to be used in hospitals and homes alsocreate a substantial need for human factors research. of course, any newinstrumentation calls for training of operators and appropriate design ofmachine interfaces. the increased use of medical devices at home carrieswith it additional problems.one is the adequacy of training. written instructions and warningsshould obviously be very clear, and handson training is likely to be necessary for all but the simplest devices. lack of education and language skillsby home users may hamper training efforts, as may advanced age. anotherconsideration is that stress from an incident such as machine malfunctioncould undermine the effects of training. although the effects of longtermstress imposed on home caregivers and patients have received some attention (e.g., smith et al., 1991; wegener and aday, 1989), the cognitiveeffects of acute stress merit more study. clearly, patients and caregiversshould have access to support personnel outside the home. often, pharmacists are the ones responsible for advising patients about a device when theythemselves have inadequate training (kwan and anderson, 1991).training is but one concern. another is that the home environmentmay not be well suited for the device in, for example, the type and reliability of its power supply, the proximity of water and electrical connections,and the space available for the equipment and appendages like oxygen tanks.ambient temperature may affect device function, and the home may not beadequately equipped to control it. home use often demands that patientsfollow a regular schedule, indicating a need to provide records of pastadministration and to signal the next application. as was mentioned previously, the elderly may in particular need reminder systems to trigger selfcare.glucose measurement devices have been closely evaluated from a human factors perspective (e.g., kelly et al., 1990; mcdonald, 1984; mossand delawter, 1986) and hence provide a test bed with which to evaluatehome care more generally. kelly et al. found a number of problems witheven such a relatively simple device. in evaluating the instructional materials provided with blood glucose monitors, most diabetes educators judgedthem inadequate and believed that additional instruction was necessary. usererror was identified in nearly threefourths of reported problems. patientsoften failed to clean the device or to calibrate it properly, possibly in orderto reduce the time spent in operating it, and errors occurred at virtuallyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchevery stage of operation. in efforts to cut costs, some patients split teststrips so they could be used twice, with potentially adverse effects on sensing accuracy.the case of the blood glucose monitor serves to emphasize the need forhuman factors research related to home use of medical devices. whereasblood glucose monitors are simple devices and have been designed for patient use, other devices that are sent to the home may be far more complexand may have been designed for hospital use only (e.g., for ventilators, seehealth devices, 1988). these devices are even more likely to have inadequate written documentation for home caregivers and it is likely that anyinhospital training prior to discharge will be devised on an ad hoc basis.ergonomics issues inhealth care delivery systemsin this section we discuss some of the biomechanical problems encountered in health care, the magnitude of these problems, and the researchtopics they raise. traditional concerns of human factors research, includingdesign of the workplace, design and implementation of devices, and performance modeling, have substantial potential for application in medical contexts.physical stress to nursing personnelin any work system, including the health care delivery system, stressesare imposed on the body. these stresses can be (a) mechanical, involvingthe musculoskeletal system; (b) physiological, involving the cardiopulmonary system; or (c) psychological. physically demanding tasks often produce mechanical stress for the musculoskeletal system, particularly the spine,resulting in low back injury. in health care delivery systems, handling ofmaterialsñparticularly the handling of patientsñresults in high spinal stresses.back injuries account for approximately one of every five injuries andillnesses in the workplace (bureau of labor statistics, 1982). nursing aidesand licensed practical nurses ranked fifth and ninth, respectively, in compensation claims for back injuries (klein et al., 1984). available statisticsindicate that nursing personnel are as likely to suffer from a compensableback injury as are workers in occupations with heavy loadhandling tasks(jensen, 1987). back injuries are the result of large stresses imposed on thespine. high levels of biomechanical stress imposed on the musculoskeletalsystem, particularly the spine, have been reported in tasks performed bynursing personnel (gagnon et al., 1986; stubbs et al., 1983; tormakrajewski,1986). according to lloyd et al. (1987), efficient and safe patient transferpractices should be based on sound biomechanical considerations. nursing personnelñand nursing aides in particularñoften lift, move,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care149and transfer patients whose weights range from 37 kg to over 100 kg.these weights are higher than the capacity of most females (national institute for occupational safety and health, 1981). gagnon et al. (1986) reported that the compressive forces on the l5/s1 disc ranged from 5.74 to7.95 kilonewtons (kn) for a single person handling a 72 kg mannequin.these values and the estimated compressive forces for handling a patientusing two persons are approximately 4.44 kn; the values are significantlyhigher than the recommended national institute for occupational safetyand health safe compression limits of 3.4 kn.physical rehabilitationthe management of chronic pain and disability after an injury has always been considered the exclusive domain of medical professionals. ergonomic involvement in the preinjury (prevention) and postinjury (rehabilitation and returntowork) stages has been shown to contribute significantlyto the successful control and management of overall prevention and rehabilitation and the avoidance of disability recurrence (khalil et al., 1985,1988; rosomoff, 1987; rosomoff et al., 1981). important issues in therehabilitation of individuals with certain disabilities are measurement oftheir functional performance, accurate and objective examination and assessment of their capabilities and limitations, and quantitative descriptionsof them in terms of human performance profiles (hpp) (abdelmoty, 1991).in the evaluation of hpp, specific areas of interest are the following:(a) physical characteristics of the patient such as strength, flexibility, endurance, and posture; (b) functional capacity of the patient in performing certain activities such as lifting and walking; and (c) workrelated capacitiessuch as the ability to perform specific job tasks under prescribed conditions.in evaluating patients with chronic pain or certain physical disabilities, it isvery important to use objective measurement of specific abilities (khalil etal., 1990). the hpp can then be compared with that of healthy persons ofequivalent age, sex, and work category in order to determine functionalcapacity.biomechanical modelingto enhance biomechanical research in health care delivery systemsñparticularly for back disordersñbiomechanical modeling research can beinvaluable. as representations of the real system, models can be useful inexamining the behavior of the system under consideration (in this case, thehuman body) without exposing the body to a variety of hazardous conditions. ergonomic models are discussed in another publication of the committee on human factors (kroemer et al., 1988).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhuman factors challenges related to ergonomic issuesin health care delivery systemsin order to reduce and control back injuries in health care deliverysystems, a major research effort is needed to evaluate handling of patientsto reduce stress on the spine. the research must focus on several areas: (a)the training of personnel in methods of handling patients to reduce spinalstresses; (b) the evaluation of facility designsñwhich include beds, wheelchairs, and other devices to facilitate patient handlingñfor all systems,whether they use manual methods, assistive devices, or both; and (c) theevaluation of existing design and the ultimate redesign of assistive devicesused in patient handling to reduce spinal stresses. the research should alsoconsider several other variables related to spinal stress. these are (a) thetime it takes to perform the handling activity, (b) patient comfort and safety,and (c) patient characteristics (garg et al., 1991). furthermore, it is important that the research pay careful attention to the differences between laboratory environments and the actual work site; laboratory results must becarefully evaluated (garg et al., 1991) prior to field application.the evaluation of the functional capacity of patients in need of physicalrehabilitation is another area in which human factors research can play arole. currently several techniques are being used to assess functional capacity. some of these are quite subjective and rely heavily on data obtainedthrough observation; others are more objective and gather data through quantitativemeasurement of such factors as mobility and strength. even when the moreobjective measures are employed, there is a need to integrate and translatethese measurements into functional capacity values. therefore, research inthe development and use of objective measures for the evaluation of functional capacity is sorely needed. this will make it possible to determinemore accurately the level of individual abilities, which in turn can helpdetermine the optimal program of rehabilitation (abdelmoty and khalil,1988; abdelmoty et al., 1989, 1990).research in biomechanical modeling is also needed. the current biomechanical models are quite basic at best and cannot adequately deal withthe complicated structures of the musculoskeletal system. threedimensional biomechanical models that include, for instance, the effects of softtissue and the individual muscle tension generated in performing typicalpatient handling could provide important insights into handling methodsand design of work areas and equipment to minimize the stresses on thespine. in addition, good biomechanical models can be helpful in developing manual handling methods that minimize stresses on the body, particularly the spine.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care151concluding remarksthe primary aim of this chapter has been to call attention to the substantial contributions that could be made by human factors researchers inthe area of medical care. this will be at least an initial step toward redressing the underutilization of human factors researchers in medical contexts.the topics that we have described include some traditional concerns butalso point to a broad spectrum of relatively novel research needs that ariseas a result of our changing societal and technological environment. manyof these problems will require that human factors personnel work with experts in other disciplines. we have identified a large number of researchopportunities in the hope that their diversity will attract a larger number ofresearchers to the area. we suspect that many of these problems, unfortunately, will not be dealt with in the next decade.particularly important research goals noted in this chapter are the following:¥to identify and eliminate sources of error arising from the medicalworkplace and medical devices;¥to design healthpromoting environments for the aged;¥to identify health risks in the workplace;¥to determine techniques for effective risk communication;¥to develop health risk reduction and illness prevention programsfor groups;¥to design userappropriate interfaces for new medical devices, suchas decision aids, imaging systems, and biosensors;¥to identify ways to facilitate access to health information by medical personnel;¥to identify barriers to effective use of medical devices in the homeand to redesign devices and home environments so as to promote effectivehome care;¥to identify and eliminate sources of biomechanical stress on themusculoskeletal system from health care practices;¥to develop techniques for measuring functional capacity of candidates for rehabilitation; and¥to develop biomechanical models to assist in determining potentialhealth hazards.as we indicated at the outset, the research needs that are reviewed hereare far from exhaustive, and new technological developments are likely toexpand the list. additions will only reinforce the important role that humanfactors can play in fitting health care practices to those in need of care.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchacknowledgmentswe would like to acknowledge the help of john swets and sue bognerwith this chapter.referencesabdelmoty, e.1991ergonomics issues in low back pain: intervention strategies. proceedings of thehuman factors society 35th annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: humanfactors society.abdelmoty, e., and t.m. khalil1988ergonomic considerations for the reduction of physical task demands of low backpain patients. pp. 959967 in f. aghazadeh, ed., trends in ergonomics/humanfactors, vol. iv. amsterdam, netherlands: northholland, elsevier sciencepublishing.abdelmoty, e., t.m. khalil, s.s. asfour, m. howard, r.s. rosomoff, and h.l. rosomoff1989effects of pain on psychomotor abilities. pp. 465471 in a. mital, ed., advancesin industrial ergonomics and safety. new york: taylor and francis.abdelmoty, e., t. khalil, s. asfour, m. goldberg, r. rosomoff, and h. rosomoff1990on the relationship between age and responsiveness to rehabilitation. pp. 4956 inb. das, ed., advances in industrial ergonomics and safety, vol ii. new york:taylor and francis.arenson, r.l., d.p. chakraborty, s.b. seshadri, and h.l. kundel1990the digital imaging workstation. radiology 176:303315.bach, j.r., p. intintola, a.s. alba, and i.e. holland1992the ventilatorassisted individual: cost analysis of institutionalization vs. rehabilitation and inhome management. chest 101:2630.ball, m.j., and j.v. douglas1990informatics programs in the united states and abroad. md computing 7:172175.becker, m.h., and n.k. janz1987behavioral science perspectives on health hazard/health risk appraisal. healthservices research 22(4):537551.bisset, w.m., p. stapleford, s. long, a. chamberlain, b. sokel, and p.j. milla1992home parenteral nutrition in chronic intestinal failure. archives of disease inchildhood 67:109114.bogner, s.1991human factors and medicine. p. 682 in proceedings of the human factors society35th annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: human factors society.breslow, l., j. fielding, a.a. herrman, and c.s. wilbur1990worksite health promotion: its evolution and the johnson & johnson experience.preventive medicine 19:1321.bureau of labor statistics1982back injuries associated with lifting. work injury report, bulletin #2144:1.washington, d.c.: u.s. department of labor.carleton, r.a., l. sennett, k.m. gans, s. levin, c. lefebvre, and t.m. lasater1991the pawtucket heart health program: influencing adolescent eating patterns.annals of the new york academy of sciences 623:322326.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care153claremont, d.j.1987biosensors: clinical requirements and scientific promise. journal of medicalengineering and technology 11:5156.cook, r.i.1991how to do that voodoo that you do so well: medical human factors in the explicitcontext of use. p. 684 in proceedings of the human factors society 35th annualmeeting. santa monica, calif.: human factors society.czaja, s.j., ed.1990human factors research needs for an aging population. panel on human factors research issues for an aging population, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.czaja, r., c. manfredi, d. shaw, and g. nyden1989evaluation of the pdq system: overall executive summary. report to the national cancer institute under contract no. n01cn55459. survey research laboratory, university of illinois, may.delano, b.g., and e.a. friedman1990correlates of decadelong technique survival on home hemodialysis. asaio transactions36:337339.dowie, j., and a. elstein1988professional judgment: a reader in clinical decision making. cambridge, england: cambridge university press.dwyer, s.j., iii, and r.g. jost, eds.1990medical imaging iv: pacs system design and evaluation. proceedings of spie,the international society for optical engineering in cooperation with the american association of physicists in medicine, vol. 1234, parts 1 and 2. bellingham,wash.: spie.fink, d.j.1987preventive strategies for cancer in women. cancer 60:19341941.gagnon, m., c. sicard, and j.p. sirois1986evaluation of forces on the lumbosacral joint and assessment of work and energytransfers in nursing aides lifting patients. ergonomics 29:407421.gail, m.h., l.a. brinton, d.p. byar, d.k. corle, s.b. green, c. schairer, and j.j. mulvihill1989projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually. journal of the national cancer institute81:18791886.garg, a., b. owen, d. beller, and j. banaag1991a biomechanical and ergonomic evaluation of patient transferring tasks: bed towheelchair and wheelchair to bed. ergonomics 34:289312.hadler, s.c.1990hepatitis b virus infection and health care workers. vaccine 8(march supplement):s24s28; discussion:s41s43.hayward, r.a., and m.f. shapiro1991a national study of aids and residency training: experiences, concerns, andconsequences. annals of internal medicine 114:2332.health devices1988portable volume ventilators. health devices 17(4):107131.1991hemodialysis machines. health devices 20(6):187232.health services research1987october issue 22(4).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhelmreich, r.l., and h.g. schaefer1994team performance in the operating room. pp. 225254 in m.s. bogner, ed.,human error in medicine. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.higgins, i.j., and c.r. lowe1987introduction to the principles and applications of biosensors. philosophical transactionsof the royal society of london 316:311.hubbard, s., j.e. henney, and v.t. devita, jr.1987a computer data base for information on cancer treatment. new england journalof medicine 316:315318.jensen, r.1987disabling back injuries among nursing personnel: research needs and justifications. research in nursing and health 10:2938.kelly, r.t., j.r. callan, t.a. kozlowski, and e. menngola1990human factors in selfmonitoring of blood glucose. task 4 final report. fda/cdrh90/60. springfield, va.: ntis.khalil, t.m., s.s. asfour, e. abdelmoty, r.s. rosomoff, and h.l. rosomoff1985new horizons for ergonomics research in low back pain. pp. 591598 in r.e.eberts and c.g. eberts, eds., trends in ergonomics/human factors. amsterdam,netherlands: northholland, elsevier science publishing.1988quantitative assessment of outcome of a low back pain rehabilitation program.abstracts of the international conference on the study of the lumbar spine. miami, fla. april 1315.khalil, t.m., e. abdelmoty, and t.m. asfour1990ergonomics in the management of occupational injuries. pp. 4153 in b.m. pulatand d.c. alexander, eds., industrial ergonomics: case studies. norcross, ga.:industrial engineering and management press.kingsland, l.c., iii, d.a.b. lindberg, and g.c. sharp1986anatomy of a knowledgebased system. md computing 3:1826.klatzky, r.l., j. geiwitz, and s.c. fischer1994using statistics in clinical practice: a gap between training and application. pp.123140 in s. bogner, ed., human error in medicine. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.klein, b.p., r.c. jensen, and l.m. sanderson1984assessment of workersõ compensation claims for back strains/sprains. journal ofoccupational medicine 26:443448.kroemer, k.h.e., s.h. snook, s.k. meadows, and s. deutsch, eds.1988ergonomic models of anthropometry, human biomechanics and operatorequipment interfaces. committee on human factors, national research council. washington,d.c.: national academy press.kwan, j.w., and r.w. anderson1991pharmacistsõ knowledge of infusion devices. american journal of hospital pharmacy 48:10 suppl 1, s52s53.lasater, t.m., l.l. sennett, r.c. lefebvre, k.l. dehart, g. peterson, and r.a. carleton1991communitybased approach to weight loss: the pawtucket òweighin.ó addictivebehaviors 16:175181.ledley, r.s., and l.b. lusted1961medical diagnosis and modern decision making. pp. 117157 in proceedings ofsymposia in applied mathematics, vol. 14. providence, r.i.: american mathematical society.levi, l.1990occupational stress: spice of life or kiss of death? american psychologist 45:11421145.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care155lloyd, p., c. tarling, j.d.g. troup, and b. wright1987the handling of patients: a guide for nurses, 2nd ed. london, england: theroyal college of nursing.lougheed, w.d., a. schiffrin, and a.m. albisser1987stabilizing blood glucose with a novel medical expert system. biosensors 3:381389.mascini, m., d. moscone, and g. palleschi1990biosensor applications of continuous monitoring in clinical chemistry. pp. 14291460 in d.l. wise, ed., bioinstrumentation: research, developments and applications. stoneham, mass.: butterworth.mcdonald, w.i.1984quality control of home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations. british medicaljournal 288:1915.metz, c.e.1989some practical issues of experimental design and data analysis in radiologicalroc studies. investigative radiology 24:234245.meyerowitz, b.e.1980psychosocial correlates of breast cancer and its treatments. psychological bulletin87:108131.morris, r.e., and e. turgut1990human immunodeficiency virus: quantifying the risk of transmission of hiv todental health care workers. community dentistry and oral epidemiology 18:294298.moss, j.p., and d.e. delawter1986selfmonitoring of blood glucose. american family physician 33:225228.national institute for occupational safety and health1981work practices guide for manual lifting. niosh technical report no. 81122.washington, d.c.: national institute for occupational safety and health.national institutes of health1991clinical electives program for medical and dental students 19921993. nihpublication no. 91499. bethesda, md.: national institutes of health.national research council1989improving risk communication. committee on risk perception and communication. washington, d.c.: national academy press.new, p.b., g.f. swanson, r.g. bulich, and g.c. taplin1991ambulatory antibiotic infusion devices: extending the spectrum of outpatient therapies.american journal of medicine 91:455461.newell, g.r., and v.g. vogel1988personal risk factors: what do they mean? cancer 62:16951701.oõmalley, k.g., and k.g. ricca1990optimization of a pacs display workstation for diagnostic reading. pp. 940946in medical imaging iv: pacs system design and evaluation. proceedings ofspie, the international society for optical engineering in cooperation with theamerican association of physicists in medicine, vol. 1234. bellingham, wash.:spie.orient, j.m.1990assessing the risk of occupational acquisition of the human immunodeficiencyvirus: implications for hospital policy. southern medical journal 83(10):11211127.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchparyani, s.b., t.a. marsland, p. faucher, e. fontanelli, m. freeman, h. johnston, w. morrow,p. prabhu, m. stearman, and f. vines1990breast cancer screening project in northeast florida. journal of the florida medical association 77:2931.pickett, r.m., and t.j. triggs, eds.1974human factors in health care. lexington, mass.: d.c. heath.rappaport, m.1970human factors applications in medicine. human factors 12:2535.regnier, s.j.1993symposium underscores value of or teamwork. american college of surgeonsbulletin 78:7381.reville, b., and l. almadrones1989continuous infusion chemotherapy in the ambulatory setting: the nurseõs role inpatient selection and education. oncology nursing forum 16:529535.rosomoff, h.l.1987comprehensive pain center approach to the treatment of low back pain. pp. 7885in low back pain: report of a workshop. rehabilitation research and trainingcenter, department of orthopaedics and rehabilitation. charlottesville, va.: universityof virginia.rosomoff, h.l., c. green, m. silbert, and r. steele1981pain and low back rehabilitation program at the university of miami school ofmedicine. in k.y. lorenzo, ed., new approaches to treatment of chronic pain.nida research monograph 36. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of healthand human services.ross, d., l. heinemann, and e.a. chantelau1990shortterm evaluation of an electrochemical system (exactech) for blood glucosemonitoring. diabetes research and clinical practice 10:281285.saarinen, a.o., g.l. youngs, and j.w. loop1989the attitude of referring physicians towards pacs: a preinstallation assessment. report to the mitre corp. din/pacs evaluation project contract n55200. department of radiology, university of washington din/pacs evaluationproject, november 30.schaffar, b.p., and o.s. wolfbeis1990a fast responding fibre optic glucose biosensor based on an oxygen optrode. biosensorsand bioelectronics 5:137148.schucker, b., k. bailey, j.t. heimbach, m.e. mattson, j.t. wittes, c.m. haines, d.j. gordon,j.a. cutler, v.s. keating, and r.s. goor1987change in public perspective on cholesterol and heart disease: results from twonational surveys. journal of the american medical association 258:35173531.schultz, j.s.1991biosensors. scientific american 265(2)6469.shortliffe, e.h.1976computerbased medical consultations: mycin. new york: elsevier.small, a.m.1987design for older people. pp. 495504 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of humanfactors. new york: wiley.smith, c.e., c.k. giefer, and l. bieker1991technological dependency: a preliminary model and pilot of home total parenteralnutrition. journal of community health nursing 8:245254.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health care157smith, m.j.1987occupational stress. pp. 844860 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of human factors. new york: wiley.storey, p., h.j. hill, jr., r.h. st. louis, and e.e. tarver1990subcutaneous infusions for control of cancer symptoms. journal of pain andsymptom management 5:3341.stubbs, d.a., p.w. buckle, m.p. hudson, and p.m. rivers1983backpain in the nursing profession, ii: the effectiveness of training. ergonomics26:767779.swanson, g.m.1988cancer prevention in the workplace and natural environment: a review of etiology, research design, and methods of risk reduction. cancer 62:17251746.swets, j.a.1988measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems. science 240:12851293.swets, j.a., r.m. pickett, s.f. whitehead, d.j. getty, j.b. schnur, j.b. swets, and b.a.freeman1979assessment of diagnostic technologies. science 205:753759.swets, j.a., d.j. getty, r.m. pickett, c.j. dõorsi, s.e. seltzer, and b.j. mcneil1991enhancing and evaluating diagnostic accuracy. medical decision making 11:918.thompson, c.l., and m. richmond1990teaching home care for ventilatordependent patients: the patientsõ perception.heart and lung 19:7983.tormakrajewski, j.1986analysis of lifting tasks in the health care industry. paper presented at theuniversity of washington symposium on occupational hazards to health careworkers. seattle.tversky, a., and d. kahneman1981the framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. science 211:453458.van cott, h.p.1991human error in medical devices. paper presented at the symposium on humanfactors and medicine, 35th annual meeting of the human factors society. sanfrancisco, september.viall, c.d.1990daily access of implanted venous ports: implications for patient education. journal of intravenous nursing 13:294296.walter, h.j.1989primary prevention of chronic disease among children: the schoolbased òknowyour bodyó intervention trials. health education quarterly 16:201214.wegener, d.h., and l.a. aday1989home care for ventilatorassisted children: predicting family stress. pediatricnursing 15:371376.wilkins, e.s.1989towards implantable glucose sensors: a review. journal of biomedical engineering 11:354361.williams, g.m.1991causes and prevention of cancer. statistical bulletin of metropolitan insurancecompanies 72:610.wise, d.l., ed.1990bioinstrumentation: research, developments and applications. stoneham, mass.:butterworth.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research1585environmental changeraymond s. nickerson and neville p. moraythe problem of environmental changethe subject of detrimental environmental change has received muchattention in the news media for some time. scientists, policy makers, andthe public have become increasingly concerned about the threat that suchchange, if it continues unabated, poses for the future. growing numbers ofscientists from a variety of disciplines have been systematically studyingspecific aspects of this change and attempting to identify effective strategies for preventing or mitigating potentially catastrophic effects.human factors researchers have not focused much attention on this areain the past. perhaps it has been assumed that the discipline has little to offertoward the solution of environmental problems. we believe it does havesomething to offer. this chapter represents an effort to stimulate and contribute to a dialogue that will help identify what some of the possibilitiesare.dimensions of the problemsome earth and atmospheric scientists have been documenting an increased concentration of carbon dioxide and other ògreenhouse gasesó inthe atmosphere and have been attempting to better understand how a continuing accumulation will affect the future world climate (houghton andwoodwell, 1989; national research council, 1983). others have been studyingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change159such phenomena as òacid rainó and its effects on lakes and streams, forests,and materials (baker et al., 1991; mohnen, 1988; schwartz, 1989), air pollution and urban smog (gray and alson, 1989; national research council,1991; office of technology assessment, 1988), and the thinning of ozonein the stratosphere (stolarski et al., 1992; stolarski, 1988). studies havefocused on the contamination and depletion of freshwater supplies (la riviere,1989; national research council, 1977; postel, 1985), on the depletion ofthe worldõs forests (myers, 1989; repetto, 1990) and wetlands (steinhart,1990; wallace, 1985), and on the worldwide loss of arable land (crossenand rosenberg, 1989; national research council, 1990; schlesinger et al.,1990). biologists have been documenting the loss of wildlife habitat andthe accompanying decrease in biodiversity (soule, 1991; wilson, 1989).more detailed discussions of the many facets of the problem are readilyavailable (gore, 1992; nickerson, 1992; stern et al., 1992).behavioral causes of environmental changemany of the most readily identified causes of these changes are humanactivities. major contributors to the accumulation of greenhouse gases inthe atmosphere include the burning of fossil fuels for heating and energygeneration and the use of chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) as coolants and aerosols. the burning of fossil fuels is also a major cause of acid rain, which isformed when airborne sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides combine withwater vapor. air pollutants include ozone, carbon monoxide, lead, sulfurdioxide, nitrogen dioxide, and particulatesñall byproducts of industrialand energygeneration processes. stratospheric ozone thinning is believedto be a direct consequence of the accumulation of cfcs in the upper atmosphere.major threats to clean, freshwater supplies include contamination notonly from precipitation of chemical emissions that have accumulated in theatmosphere but also from agricultural runoff containing pesticides and fertilizers, from waste discharges into rivers, from salt used for highway deicing, from hazardous wastes disposed of improperly, and from leachatefrom municipal dumps. deforestation is the consequence both of converting forests to farmland and residential and business areas and of overharvesting timber. wetland loss results from the òreclamationó of wetlands forcommercial development. desertification, the transformation of arable landinto land on which crops will no longer grow, has a variety of causes,including overgrazing and the salinization of soil from excessive irrigation.since the human activities that are implicated in detrimental environmental change are aimed at satisfying human needs and desires, those activities can only be expected to increase as the population grows. andpopulation growth, worldwide, is expected to continue for the near future atemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchleast, at something like its current rate, which would yield a doubling of thecurrent number of about 6 billion before the middle of the twentyfirstcentury. moreover, if present trends continue, the pressures on the environment are likely to grow faster than the population. during the twentiethcentury, worldwide energy consumption has increased by a factor of about15 and the total population has increased by a factor of about 3.5, which isto say that, compared with 1900, there are about 3.5 times as many of usnow and each of us uses, on average, 4 times as much energy (gibbons etal., 1989). there is now an enormous disparity between the per capita useof energy in the industrialized world and in developing countries; we canexpect that the desire of the developing countries to close this gap willcreate a strong impetus to increase the average use worldwide.in short, there is much evidence that human behavior can adverselyaffect the natural environment in a variety of ways and that the forces thatmotivate environmentally detrimental behavior are likely to become evenstronger in the future. there is a need to better understand the coupling ofbehavior and environmental change and how to mitigate the undesirableeffects.possible approaches to the problemthe problem of detrimental environmental change is broad in scope andconsiderably beyond the ability of the human factors research community tosolve. but human factors researchers can contribute greatly by workingtoward the goal of finding effective ways to modify, or mitigate the effectsof, the human behavior that is a major cause of such change. it is useful tomake a distinction between attempting to modify behavior directly and attempting to modify it indirectly by changing technology so that its use willbe less detrimental to the environment.direct behavioral changepossible ways to directly induce behavioral change include the use ofcoercion (legislation and regulation, backed up with the threat of civil orcriminal sanctions), incentives (tax and other monetary incentives, publicrecognition, and awards), education (making people aware of problems andwhat can be done about them), and persuasion (appeals to moral responsibility or altruismñor the possibility of embarrassment or shame). all ofthese methods have been tried, many times in some cases, and in numerousvariations.psychologists have done a considerable amount of research to assessthe effectiveness of various strategies for behavior modification in the context of environmental concerns (holahan, 1986; russell and ward, 1982;emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change161saegert and winkel, 1990; stern, 1992). illustrative of this work are studies of the use of incentives, rewards, education and information campaigns,persuasion, and other techniques to motivate conservation in the use ofenergy or water, participation in recycling programs, decrease in waste generation and littering, and other behavior that would be desirable for environmental preservation (baum and singer, 1981; coach et al., 1979; coneand hayes, 1980; geller et al., 1982; geller, 1986). this work has demonstrated that behavior can be changed with the use of incentives and othertypes of inducements, but the changes that have been effected have beenmodest in magnitude and have tended not to persist much beyond the duration of the experimental intervention.without questioning the need to continue this line of research, we notethat behavior modification is not the only approach that can be taken to theproblem of detrimental environmental change. moreover, even assumingthat much more effective means of changing behavior in desired ways willbe discovered than have so far been found, it may be unrealistic to expectthe problem to be solved by this approach alone. effective and lastingbehavior modification has proven very difficult to achieve. efforts to effectbehavioral change are unlikely to be very successful so long as the technologies and the products of technology that we use make it easy to behavein environmentally harmful ways (crabb, 1992).changing technologyone may work on the goal of water conservation by trying to persuadepeople to use less water when taking showers by, say, taking shorter showers, keeping the tap less than wide open, or keeping the tap closed whileactually washing. alternatively, or in conjunction with efforts to changebehavior, one can attempt to design shower heads that automatically conserve water by limiting the flow when the tap is fully open but that stillprovide adequate water for showering. ideally, one would like a watermiser shower head whose spray is preferred by users, who then will bemotivated to use this head whether or not they are concerned about environmental change.finding ways to change the technology so that it is equally effective, ifnot more so, while doing less harm to the environment is a complementaryalternative to attempting to modify behavior directly. this is the motivation for the concerted efforts to develop environmentally benign alternatives to the burning of fossil fuels for energy generation and for many othercurrent research activities in the physical and biological sciences.we wish to argue that human factors research has much to contribute tothe goal of shaping technology so that the natural consequences of its usefor human ends will be more environmentally benign.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhuman factors and environmental changeto date, human factors, as a profession, has not focused much on theproblem of environmental change, at least as that problem is conceivedhere. what is sometimes referred to as òenvironmental ergonomicsó hastended to focus on how oneõs immediate environmentñtemperature, humidity, noisinessñaffects oneõs bodily and cognitive functions and performance. the interests of the human factors societyõs technical group onenvironmental design (human factors society, 1991:38), for example, òcenteron the human factors aspects of the constructed physical environment, including architectural and interior design aspects of home, office, and industrial settings.ó the applied experimental and engineering psychology issue of psycscan has òenvironmentó as one of six major topics under whichthe abstracts are organized. but each of the 12 subtopics in this sectiondeals with the effects of some environmental factor (altitude, heat, noise) onhuman beings (performance, safety, or comfort). in general, the subject ofthe implications of human behavior for environmental changeñas distinctfrom the effects of environmental variables on human behaviorñhas notbeen a focus of attention of the human factors community.there is one major exception: the interest the field has shown in studying industrial accidents and near accidents, especially in the nuclear powerindustry, and in developing ways to decrease the probability and severity ofsuch accidents (reason, 1990; senders and moray, 1991). with this exception, most of what psychologists have done that relates directly to the problem of detrimental environmental change has not been done within the mainstreamof human factors research, and the results of that work have not been published in the journals most strongly associated with human factors research.the problem of environmental change has not captured the imagination ofthe human factors research community as a whole.as to why this is the case, we can only speculate. one possibility isthat human factors researchers believe they have little to offer in this area.we think that human factors does have something to offer, and the mainpurpose of this chapter is to make that point.another possibility is that human factors researchers have assumed thatthe best way for the discipline to address the problem of environmentalchange is indirectly, through work on more generic problems, such as thedesign of displays, of personmachine interfaces, of work situations, and so on.this view has considerable merit. when one designs a better interfacefor a computer system, or when one discovers and articulates principles thatcan help designers produce interfaces that are better suited to human use,one is facilitating the work of anyone who uses systems with these interfaces, including earth and atmospheric scientists working on the problem ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change163global warming, modelers developing sourcereceptor models for predictingthe dispersion of sulfur dioxide emissions, and agronomists attempting tobalance variables in a plan for a sustainableagriculture approach to theproduction of crops.similarly, when one designs an informationmanagement systemñordiscovers characteristics of human beings as information processors thathave implications for the design of such a systemñone is contributingindirectly to the work of anyone who makes use of such a system, includinga variety of people working on environmental problems. just as it is notnecessary for the materials scientist to have the building of better automobiles in mind in order to affect the automotive industryñby, for example,developing a new lightweight superstrong compositeñone need not focusexplicitly on the environment in order to have a beneficial impact on workon environmental problems.this being said, we believe it is important to raise the question ofwhether there are opportunities for the human factors community to makemore direct and explicit contributions to work on the problem of environmental change than it has done in the past. a major purpose of this chapteris to stimulate thought and discussion about this question.research needswe believe that the extremely important problem of detrimental environmental change represents a major challenge and opportunity for humanfactors research and that such research has something of value to contribute,especially when it is directed to the question of how technology might bedeveloped so as to serve its human purposes without affording the means ofenvironmental degradation.in what follows, we suggest a few specific research questions that webelieve deserve attention from the human factors community. we focusprimarily on problems that fit reasonably well within human factors, asdefined by the work that has traditionally been done in this field. thepossibilities become more numerous when one considers problems that fallwithin the domain of applied psychology, broadly defined.we offer our suggestions not as an agenda for research but as points ofdeparture for further discussion. the most pressing need in this area is forhuman factors researchers who are concerned about environmental changeto begin exchanging ideas about the problem and how the human factorsprofession might help address it. we believe that such discussion wouldidentify many ways in which the community can productively involve itselfin this important area.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchenergy production and usethe production and use of energy effect environmental change throughthe methods used to extract energy sources from the earth, through thedepletion of natural resources, and through the byproducts of energy transduction and utilization. the per capita demands for energy vary greatly indifferent parts of the world. not surprisingly, they are much greater incountries that are highly industrialized than in those that are not, but evenwithin the industrialized world, there are large differences in energy use.there is a need to better understand why these differences exist. some, butnot all, of the difference can be attributed to differences in industrial productivity and in standards of living. there is a growing sense that attitudesñabout efficiency and waste, about public versus private transportation, about personal conveniences and the public goodñare important factorsin the equation, but their role is not well understood.there are numerous specific questions relating to energy use and environmental change that deserve the attention of human factors researchers.what determines when working from home or a satellite office can be anacceptable, if not a preferred, alternative to commuting to a centralizedworkplace? under what conditions can teleconferencing be effectively substituted for facetoface meetings? how can the effectiveness and acceptability of teleconferencing systems be increased?as we noted earlier, human factors professionals have involved themselves in energy generation and use primarily by studying human error inpower plant operations and developing methods to decrease the probabilityof mishaps and the potential severity of their effects. this research is ofundoubted importance and should continue to be priority.improving public transportation facilitiesthe personal automobile is, by far, the preferred mode of travel in theunited states (gray and alson, 1989). this is due to a number of factors,but chiefly to the great convenience of the private auto, compared withother types of transportation in many parts of the country. using privateautos, however, puts a greater burden on the environment than does usingpublic mass transit. an environmentally beneficial objective, therefore, isto enhance the attractiveness of public transportation so that it will moreoften be the preferred means of transport, especially in major urban areas.this is, in part at least, a human factors problem. we need to betterunderstand why people choose the modes of transportation they do whenother modes are also available. such knowledge could be applied to makingpublic transportation more attractive, and, to the extent that the preferencefor private transportation is based on a lack of understanding of the prosemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change165and cons of the alternatives, it could be used to guide programs aimed atinforming the public in this regard.substituting resourcelight for resourceheavy technologiesto the extent that needed or desired services can be provided by technologies that make relatively light demands on energy and other resources,the interests of environmental preservation will be well served by usingsuch technologies. in particular, when the transmission of information canbe substituted for the transportation of people and material, the environmentbenefits in a variety of ways.finding ways to substitute resourcelight technologies for resourceheavytechnologies is especially desirable in view of the rapidly increasing demands that underdeveloped countries are expected to put on resources byattempting to catch up, economically, with the more developed parts of theworld (stern et al., 1992). to the extent that these countries could beenabled to adopt energy and resourceefficient methods of delivering desired goods and services, without first appropriating inefficient methodsthat have been utilized in much of the industrialized world, the benefitswould be global as well as regional.telecommuting and teleconferencingtelecommunications technology has the potential to make it possiblefor more people to work, at least part of the time, from their homes ratherthan commute to offices. it also has the potential, via teleconferencingfacilities, to reduce the need for travel to meetings. although these possibilities were recognized by the earliest promoters of teleconferencing andtelecommuting (bavelas et al., 1963; nilles et al., 1976), they have not yetbeen realized as much as might have been expected. why that is so is notentirely clear, but there can be no doubt that many human factors issues areinvolved in the question of how to make these technologies attractive andeffective from the userõs point of view.electronic substitutes for papersubstituting electronic means of storing and distributing informationfor methods that depend on the use of paper is one instance of the substitution of resourcelight for resourceheavy technologies that deserves specialattention. paper and paper products account for about onethird of all solidwaste in the united states. a considerable fraction of paper waste is fromnewspapers (whose daily circulation is about 63 million according to thebureau of the census, 1990) and magazines. given that most buyers ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchnewspapers are interested in only a fraction of the information that is inthem, that buyers discard newspapers immediately after reading them, andthat printing and distributing them are energyintensive processes, this methodof information distribution is extremely inefficient relative to technologically feasible alternatives. similar observations apply to magazines.despite many predictions that less paper would be used as a result ofthe increasing use of electronic information exchange systems, there is littleevidence of any such reduction. it may even be that computer technologyhas stimulated the use of more paper than ever before. nevertheless, thepotential remains for decreasing the use of paper by making more effectiveuse of electronic information storage and distribution. significantly realizing this potential would have the doubly beneficial effect of conserving theenergy and natural resources used in the production of paper and of reducing the generation of solid waste.the technology exists for distributing news and information electronically rather than in traditional newspapers and magazines; to date, however,that technology is not sufficiently widely installed in homes to be a feasiblebasis for replacing paper media. it seems highly likely, however, that in thenotdistant future most homes will have the means of making electronicnewspapers and magazines practical. there are likely to be nontechnicalobstacles to their acceptance and use by the public, stemming from the factthat video displays, even if made to look something like a book, are verydifferent from the types of print media with which people are familiar. itwould be useful to know what would make electronic books, newspapers,and periodicals acceptable to people as replacements for their paper counterparts.this is not to suggest that realization of the potential of informationtechnology for reducing the need for paper awaits only a better understanding of the psychological deterrents to the use of electronic media. thepractical usability and the actual use of communication facilities also depend on the existence of an adequate infrastructure, pricing policies thatprovide incentives for use, and general access to the critical facilities. useracceptability, however, is likely to be a key determinant of the extent towhich this technology is appropriated when other impediments to its exploitation no longer apply.simulation and virtual reality technologyother special cases of substituting resourcelight for resourceheavytechnologies involve the use of simulated aspects of reality for a variety ofpurposes. simulators have been used for flight training for many years.this was motivated in part by safety considerations, and in part by the factthat operating a simulator is much less expensive than operating real aircraftemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change167for training purposes. a major reason is that it requires less expenditure ofenergy and other resources, a fact that benefits the environment as well.the development and use of simnet, the armyõs simulation systemfor training tank teams, illustrates what is possible by way of networkbasedsystems that are capable of simulating situations involving many people andmachines interacting in complex ways (thorpe, 1993). a simnetbasedtraining exercise is not only much less expensive than a comparable exercise involving real tanks but also much easier on the environment. how toensure the effectivenss of this approach to team training remains a challenge.virtual reality technology carries simulation, in theory at least, to a newplateau. the goal of developing this technology is to simulate objects andsituations in such a way that people can perceive and interact with thesimulated realities very much as they would with whatever it is that issimulated, except without the inconvenience or, sometimes, the danger thatwould be involved in interacting with the real thing. there are many humanfactors questions relating to the development and use of virtual reality technology that represent challenges for research; the national research council has completed a study of some of these questions (durlach and mavor,1995).recycling and waste handlingimproving the technology of recyclingrecycling of waste materials is a relatively new technology. it seemsreasonable to assume that, as with any new technology, its effectiveness andefficiency could be improved. in particular, inasmuch as the energy required for some recycling operations limits their utility (georgescuroegen,1976), there is a need to find more efficient methods for processing recyclable materials, for example, new ways to separate trash into unrecyclableand the several recyclable categories and new ways to transform the recyclable types into reusable materials.a major problem of waste recycling is getting sustained citizen participation in recycling programs (geller et al., 1982). education and advertising campaigns have not been very effective (coach et al., 1979; geller etal., 1975). efforts to motivate people to recycle have sometimes met withmodest shortterm success but have not managed to effect lasting change(geller, 1987; humphrey et al., 1977). and in some cases, simple positivereinforcement schemes have even produced unwanted behavior (geller, 1981).planning and executing recycling programs that will effect the lasting changesin attitudes and behavior that are essential to make real progress on theproblem of waste remains a significant unmet challenge.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchradioactive and toxic waste handlingradioactive and toxic wastes represent special problems and requiresome innovative approaches. given that about a dozen u.s. nuclear reactors are ready for decommissioning now and about 50 will be ready forretirement in the western world before the end of the century (shulman,1989), the problem of handling nuclear wastes will be getting much moreattention than it has in the past. because very few nuclear reactors have yetbeen dismantled, the technology for this undertaking is still being developed.much attention will be focused on the cleanup of the hanford site in thestate of washington, where weaponsgrade radioactive materials have beenproduced since the days of the manhattan project in the early 1940s. thiscleanup project alone is planned to take 30 years to complete. it is alsoexpected to require resolution of many human factors issues. among thesewill be issues having to do with the design of control facilities for a vitrification plant in which liquid wastes will be solidified and issues relating tothe design and use of teleoperator systems for remote handling of radioactive materials. because of the industryõs limited experience with dismantling and cleanup operations, there will need to be some innovative thinkingabout the allocation of functions to people and machines and the design ofpersonmachine interfaces for this purpose (wise and savage, 1992).designing for error preventionhuman error is known to be a major cause of industrial accidents. theaccident at chernobyl occurred because of an interaction of poor plant design, poor management decisions, and violations of procedures (reason,1990). the bhopal incident was caused by a combination of operator error,poor training, and bad policies, including the policy of storing large quantities of hazardous materials, thus increasing the chances that an accident,should it occur, would be on a very large scale (hazarika, 1986). at threemile island, inadequacies in training, operating procedures, control roominterface design, and maintenance practice were all seen to be contributingfactors. more generally, analyses of industrial accidents have revealed agreat variety of human errorsñin system design, regulation, operation, maintenance, communication and management (rasmussen and batstone, 1989;reason, 1990).inasmuch as industrial accidents can haveñand have hadñserious environmental consequences, work on the problem of designing industrial controlstations and operating procedures so as to minimize the possibility of human error is very much in the spirit of what this chapter is intended topromote. the most difficult challenge here is to identify vulnerable pointsin an industrial process before any disastrous errors occur. although theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change169occurrence of a disaster should always be a stimulus to research on how toprevent a recurrence, the greatly preferred objective is to prevent the initialdisaster from happening. unfortunately, the successful prevention of accidents of a type that has never occurred is likely to go unrecognized; until anaccident has happened, people tend to be unaware of its possibility.it has become increasingly evident that the traditional ergonomics ofcontrol room design is insufficient to prevent largescale accidents. accidents occur because of complex interactions among people at all levels ofan organization and between people and plant hardware; they occur despiteregulations, training, and operating procedures that are intended to minimize accident potential. attitudinal variables may play a more importantrole than has been realized. managementõs interest in developing a òsafetycultureó within a company plant is also a key factor. to understand thecauses of accidents and how to prevent them, we need to understand thepsychology of a system in its entirety, from the ergonomics of design to thesocial dynamics of òwhistle blowing.óautomation is sometimes seen as a solution to the problem of humanerror because it removes human operators from the scene. but automationdoes not necessarily reduce the probability or severity of accidents. whenhighly skilled operators are removed from an industrial system, the systemsometimes loses the protection against design errors that the workersõ skillmay provide, and the hazardous implications of those design errors may bevery difficult to discover before an actual incident. in automated systems,the daytoday role of humans tends to be the performance of maintenance,and we know that accidents can occur because of faulty maintenance. zuboff(1988) has described how automation, if not introduced in an appropriateway, can reduce quality of performance.designing for longevity, recyclability, and disposabilitysafety and usability have long been major objectives of human factorsengineers in equipment design. other objectives that have implications forthe management of environmental change include maintainability, repairability, recyclability, and disposability. such design objectives should increase in importance if environmental issues become of greater concern.the special challenge to human factors is to find ways to satisfy the environmentally oriented objectives without compromising the traditional focuson user safety and convenience.need for new perspectiveshuman factors concepts and methods can be applied to societal problems at many levels. one aid to thinking in these terms is the abstractionemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhierarchy proposed by rasmussen (1986; see his figure 4.1). at the lowestlevel of this hierarchy the focus is on òphysical form.ó examples of theapplication of ergonomic design at this level include switches that cannotbe turned the wrong way, toilet handles that make it easy to use differentamounts of water following urination or defecation (a design that is common in australia where there is a chronic water shortage), and the interlockthat requires one to cover the gas tank filler hole with a cap in some statesso as to reduce vapor loss to the environment.at rasmussenõs next level, òphysical function,ó the emphasis is onlocalized systems. designing for energy efficiency and resource conservation is a possibility at this level. an electrical system that automaticallyturns lights off when a room is unoccupied is one example of such a system.a central heating system that (except when overridden by manual control)adjusts temperature in different parts of a house according to patterns of useis another.the next level, ògeneral form,ó would include things like automatedguideways for automobile traffic in specific locations and intelligent navigation systems that can reduce fuel consumption by optimizing travel routes.a fourth level, ògeneralized function,ó would include the design of complete living and communication systems, including òsmart houses.ó at thislevel the application of information technology has the potential to changein fundamental ways how people work, travel, communicate, and live.the top level concerns relatively global problems and goalsñthe controlof global climate change would be a case in point. at this level, issues ofpolitics, ethics, and perhaps philosophical or religious beliefs are likely to beencountered. (several articles in science in the 1960s cited instances inwhich people were given tractors and other equipment that would enablethem to produce two harvests a year or to till more land; the advantages didnot follow, because the dominant view in the culture was that fate, not technology, determines the provision of lifeõs necessities). difficulties occurbecause sometimes measures would benefit one country or region of theworld at the expense of others. ethical complications arise because peoplehave different ideas about such questions as the moral responsibility of human beings toward other species and of this generation to future generations.we have sketched rasmussenõs taxonomy here to make the point thatdifferent levels of problems require different kinds of approaches. this factshould be recognized in any consideration of how human factors might beapplied to the problem of detrimental environmental change and the host ofsubsidiary problems that it subsumes. traditionally, human factors hasdealt primarily with problems at the level of the design of specific devicesand personmachine systems. this will continue to be important, and suchefforts can have significant environmental implications. there is, however,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change171also a need to broaden the perspective and to attempt to find ways to address problems at more general and global levels.predicting the behavioral effectsof interventionsa generic problem is the difficulty of predicting the effects of efforts tochange human behavior in the interest of environmental preservation, eitherdirectly or through the modification of technology. actual effects oftenturn out to be different from what was desired. this point is illustrated bythe consequences of some efforts to modify traffic patterns. bypasses andbeltways have been built to take traffic away from congested streets byproviding alternative routes so that drivers do not have to go through thecenter of the city. sometimes, however, these have increased traffic notjust in the existing areas of congestion but in new areas as well. theprovision of new roads has encouraged more people to drive into the city,and the appearance of large, empty roads has stimulated the development ofhousing to make use of them.highway safety provides another example of how an effort to reduce anundesirable effect of human behavior can itself have unanticipated consequences for human behavior. when antilock brakes were put into cars, theassumption that driving safety would be improved was sufficiently crediblethat insurance premiums were reduced for automobiles with this feature.empirical evidence gathered by a taxi company in munich indicated nosignificant decrease in accident frequency but a significant increase in driving speed (there is no speed limit on the autobahn) and in speed changes(aschenbrenner et al., 1986). apparently, people drove faster because theybelieved their braking systems were safer and that as drivers they would beable to cope more effectively with emergencies. as a result of this study,insurance implications were reconsidered.the general problem was discussed in terms of cybernetic theory almost 40 years ago by ashby (1956). the problem involves whether to treatselforganizing systems as deterministic or stochastic. it is very difficult topredict how a complex system will evolve if it has many selforganizingcharacteristics; this complicates the task of the planning of interventionsinvolving such systems. òselforganizingó here does not imply a consciousor purposive response by the system to the inputs of the planners; it simplyconnotes a system for which the list of states that can be entered changessuddenly and òspontaneouslyó from time to time or a system in which thetransition probabilities from one state to another are not constant. in general, very large, complex, and tightly coupled systems with many subsystemsemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchshow such selforganizing properties in response to disturbances, and suchresults may not be predictable, even stochastically (moray, 1963).from the above examples, one might draw the conclusion that the effects of countermeasures identified from a causal analysis may be offset bythe effects of boundaryseeking human adaptation. the implication, forpresent purposes, is that anyone attempting to make design changes in apersonmachine system to compensate for a pattern of behavior with undesirable environmental consequences should be aware that the design changesmay evoke unanticipated changes in human behavior that could also haveundesirable environmental consequences. this problem deserves more studythan it has received; it is especially important for efforts to modify humanbehavior that harms the environment.concluding commentsmany of the most troublesome aspects of environmental change are thedirect consequence of human behavior, so it is appropriate that changingthat behavior should be high on the list of goals for any program of environmental preservation. but behavior is seldom changed significantly or forvery long simply in response to scolding, admonishment, pleading, or evenrational explanation of why change is required. describing what the environment could be in 100 years has little effect on people who feel little orno responsibility toward unborn generations. systems must be designedthat make it difficult to behave in ways that will make things worse.we have focused here on how human factors research might contributeto shaping technology so that the natural consequences of its use for humanends will be more environmentally benign. we have pointed to a fewexamples of the kinds of specific research issues that should be addressed.human factors research can be applied to the goal of reversing undesirabletrends in environmental change in other ways as well. it can help extendour understanding of how human behavior causes environmental change;and it can contribute to the development of more effective tools for use inthe study of environmental change; and it can help assess the effectivenessof efforts to modify undesirable current trends. finally, it may be able tocontribute in ways that will become clear only when a significant number ofhuman factors researchers turn their attention to this area.a major challenge for the design of environmentally benign systems isinducing people to see constraints less as constraints than as ways to affordsomething else. the constraint that we all drive on the same side of theroad is recognized as an opportunity for safe travel. the constraint on thevoltages available in domestic power supplies is an opportunity for safe andefficient use of appliances. often, however, when constraints are introduced for safety or health purposes, people react negatively to what theyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change173see as encroachments on their freedom of choice. mandatory seatbelt andmotorcyclehelmet laws have sometimes been repealed despite conclusiveevidence that seatbelt and helmet use prevents death and serious injury onthe highways. laws prohibiting smoking in public places encountered enormousinitial resistance despite the evidence that smoking, including breathingsecondhand smoke, is injurious to health. dealing effectively with thesekinds of issues is, at least in part, a human factors problem.detrimental environmental change is becoming perceived, by both thescientific community and the general public, as one of the most seriousproblems that is now facedñand that will continue to be faced for theforeseeable futureñnot only by individual nations but by the world as awhole. because this problem has global implications, it should presentunusual opportunities for international collaboration among researchers inmany countries. if such collaboration is to be effective, the researchersmust acquire some new skills and perspectives. it is not safe to assume thatwhat works in one country or culture will work equally well in another. wemust learn how to collaborate effectively if we are to have any hope ofmaking real headway on problems that are global in extent. otherwise, werun the risk of designing the behavioral analogs of very tall smokestacksand exporting various forms of cultural acid rain to other cultures in ourefforts to help our own society.a considerable amount of human factors research has addressed thequestion of how environmental variables affect human performance; however, the problem of environmental deterioration has not been a prominentfocus of human factors research. human factors, as a discipline, has muchto offer to efforts to find solutions to various aspects of this problem. andthe problem is sufficiently urgent that even a small probability of making auseful contribution justifies the attempt.referencesaschenbrenner, k.m., b. biehl, and g.m. wurm1986antiblockiersystem und verkehrssicherheit: ein vergleich der unfallbelaestungvon taxen mit und ohne antiblockiersystem. (teilbericht von die bundesanstaltfur strassenwesen zum forschungsproject 8323.) mannheim, f.r. germany. citedin wilde, g.s. (1988). risk homeostasis theory and traffic accidents: propositions, deductions, and discussion in recent reactions. ergonomics 31:441468.ashby, w.r.1956an introduction to cybernetics. london, england: chapman and hall.baker, l.a., a.t. herlihy, p.r. kaufmann, and j.m. eilers1991acidic lakes and streams in the united states: the role of acidic deposition.science 252:11511154.baum, a., and j.e. singer, eds.1981advances in environmental psychology, vol 3. energy in psychological perspective series. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchbavelas, a., t. belden, e. glenn, j. orlansky, j. schwartz, and h.w. sinaiko1963teleconferencing: summary of a preliminary research project. study s138.arlington, va.: institute for defense analysis.bureau of the census1990statistical abstract of the united states. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.coach, j.v., t. garber, and l. karpus1979response maintenance and paper recycling. journal of environmental systems8:127137.cone, j.d., and s.c. hayes1980environmental problems/behavioral solutions. monterey, calif.: brooks/colepublishing.crabb, p.b.1992comment: effective control of energydepleting behavior. american psychologist47:815816.crossen, p.r., and n.j. rosenberg1989strategies for agriculture. scientific american 261(3):128135.durlach, n.i., and a.s. mavor, eds.1995virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges. committee on virtualreality research and development, national research council. washington, d.c.:national academy press.geller, e.s.1981waste reduction and resource recovery: strategy for energy conservation. pp.115154 in a. baum and j.e. singer, eds., advances in environmental psychology,vol 3. energy: psychological perspectives series. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.1986prevention of environmental problems. pp. 361383 in handbook of prevention.new york: plenum.1987environmental psychology and applied behavior analysis: from strange bedfellows to a productive marriage. pp. 361388 in d. stokols and i. altman, eds.,handbook of environmental psychology. new york: wiley.geller, e.s., j.l. chafee, and r.e. ingram1975promoting paperrecycling on a university campus. journal of environmentalsystems 5:3957.geller, e.s., r.r. winett, and p.b. everett1982preserving the environment: new strategies for behavior change. elmsford,n.y.: pergamon press.georgescuroegen, n.1976energy and economic myths: institutional and analytical essays. new york:basic books.gibbons, j.h., p.d. blair, and h.l. gwin1989strategies for energy use. scientific american 261(3):136143.gore, a.1992earth in the balance: ecology and the human spirit. new york: penguin.gray, c.l., jr., and j.a. alson1989the case for methanol. scientific american 261(5):108114.hamilton, d.p.1992envisioning research with virtual reality. science 256:603.hazarika, s.1986bhopal: the lessons of a tragedy. london, england: penguin.holahan, c.1986environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 37:381407.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental change175houghton, r.a., and g.m. woodwell1989global climatic change. scientific american 260(4):3644.human factors society1991human factors society 1991 directory and yearbook. santa monica, calif.:human factors society.humphrey, c.r., r.j. bord, m.m. hammond, and s.h. mann1977attitudes and conditions for cooperation in a paper recycling program. environment and behavior 9:107124.la riviere, j.w.m.1989threats to the worldõs water. scientific american 261(3):8094.mohnen, v.a.1988the challenge of acid rain. scientific american 259(2):3038.moray, n.1963introduction to cybernetics. london, england: burns and oates.myers, n.1989deforestation rates in tropical forests and their climatic implications. london,england: friends of the earth.national research council1977drinking water and health. safe drinking water committee, commission onlife sciences. washington, d.c.: national academy of sciences.1983changing climate: report of the carbon dioxide assessment committee. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1990the improvement of tropical and subtropical rangelands. board on science andtechnology for international development, office of international affairs. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1991rethinking the ozone problem in urban and regional air pollution. committeeon tropospheric ozone formation and measurement, board on environmentalsciences and toxicology. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nickerson, r.s.1992looking ahead: human factors challenges in a changing world. hillsdale,n.j.: erlbaum.nilles, j.m., f.r. carlson, p. gray, and g.j. hanneman1976the telecommunicationstransportation tradeoff. new york: wiley.office of technology assessment1988urban ozone and the clean air act: problems and proposals for change. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.postel, s.1985thirsty in a waterrich world. international wildlife 15(6):3237.rasmussen, j.1986information processing and humanmachine interaction: an approach to cognitive engineering, vol. 12. new york: north holland.rasmussen, j., and r. batstone1989why do complex organizational systems fail? summary proceedings of a crossdisciplinary workshop in safety control and risk management. washington, d.c.:world bank.reason, j.1990human error. new york: cambridge university press.repetto, r.1990deforestation in the tropics. scientific american 262(4):3642.russell, j.a., and l.m. ward1982environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 33:651688.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchsaegert, s., and g.h. winkel1990environmental psychology. annual review of psychology 41:441477.schlesinger, w.h., j.f. reynolds, g.l. cunningham, l.f. huenneke, w.m. gerrell, r.a. virginia, and w.g. whitford1990biological feedbacks in global desertification. science 247:10431048.schwartz, s.e.1989acid deposition: unraveling a regional phenomenon. science 243:753763.senders, j., and n. moray, eds.1991human error: cause, prediction, and reduction. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.shulman, s.1989when a nuclear reactor dies, 98 million dollars is a cheap funeral. smithsonian20(7):5669.soule, m.e.1991conservation: tactics for a constant crisis. science 253:744750.steinhart, p.1990no net loss. audubon july:1821.stern, p.c.1992psychological dimensions of global environmental change. annual review of psychology 43:269302.stern, p.c., o.r. young, and d. druckman, eds.1992global environmental change: understanding the human dimensions. committee on the human dimensions of global change, national research council.washington, d.c.: national academy press.stolarski, r.s.1988the antarctic ozone hole. scientific american 258(1):3036.stolarski, r.s., r. bojkov, l. bishop, c. zerefos, j. staehelin, and j. zawodny1992measured trends in stratospheric ozone. science 256:342349.thorpe, j.1993synthetic environments strategic plan. draft 3b. defense advanced researchprojects agency, alexandria, va.wallace, d.r.1985wetlands in america: labyrinth and temple. wilderness 49:1227.wilson, e.o.1989threats to biodiversity. scientific american 261(3):108116.wise, j.a., and s.f. savage1992human factors in environmental management: new directions from the hanfordsite. proceedings of the human factors society 36th annual meeting. santamonica, calif.: human factors society.zuboff, s.1988in the age of the smart machine: the future of work and power. new york:basic.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1776communication technology andtelenetworkingraymond s. nickersonintroductionamong the more significant events in the recent history of longdistance communication have been the building of computerbased communication networks and the development of technologies that have made possible the implementation and exploitation of these networks. in this chapterwe focus on these technologies and on the challenges and opportunities forhuman factors research that they present.we begin with a brief historical overview of computercommunicationsnetworking technology. we then focus on current trends, especially thephenomenon of òglobal connectivityó that networking is coming to represent and some of the implications this could have. in the remainder of thechapter we discuss some of the human factors issues and research needs thatrelate to networking and its future development and applications.historical overviewnetworks that link computers from different geographical locations area relatively recent phenomenon. since the first such networks were implemented, the technology has advanced rapidly. it appears that this rapidadvance will continue and that applications of the technology will becomeincreasingly widespread over the near term.the first experimental networks connecting independent, nonhomogeneous,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchgeographically distributed computers were established in the mid1960s (daviesand barber, 1973; marrill and roberts, 1966). the arpanet, which wasto become the largest operational network in the world and to remain so formany years, was started as a fournode system by the advanced researchprojects agency of the u.s. department of defense in 1969 (heart, 1975;heart et al., 1978). according to pool (1993), its successor, the internet,connected about 1.7 million host computers and between 5 million and 15million users as of 1993, and the numbers have been doubling annually.the establishment and proliferation of computer networks have beenaccompaniedñindeed made possibleñby an everincreasing blurring of thedistinction between computer and communication technologies. the internetand the many smaller networks that connect to it depend on computingresources for all aspects of their operation and for the provision of thevarious services, such as electronic mail and bulletin boards, teleconferencing, information utilities, and the many others that they offer.today there are several types of networks: local networks, longdistance networks that use telephone lines, satellite networks that communicate by radio transmission, and network complexes that use a variety ofmeans of transmission. some networks are designed to connect only theterminals in a single building or office complex; at the other extreme arethose that connect facilities in different countries and regions of the world.networks have been established to serve the interests of government agencies, business corporations, educational institutions, and the general public.not only have networks been rapidly increasing in number and size; thebandwidth or òthroughputó capacity of the individual links of which theyare composed has been expanding greatly as well. widearea networks nowtypically operate at 1.5 megabits (million bits) per second, and many localarea networks have transmission rates of 10 megabits per second. systemsthat use optical fibers as the transmission medium support rates of 100megabits and, in a few cases, 1 gigabit (billion bit).technology trends and expectationsnetwork enhancements will come from the development of increasinglypowerful computing devices, many of which are especially designed fornetwork applications, as well as from improvements in the methods fortransmitting information from point to point and from the development ofnew network configurations and new ways of linking networks together.rapidly increasing bandwidthprobably the most significant predictable trend in networking is a continuing increase in network bandwidths at all levels of network operations.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking179systems with transmission rates of 10 gigabits per second could be in placeby the end of the century or soon thereafter (kahn, 1987); and there isalready speculation that terabit (trillion bit) capacity systems might be feasible in the notdistant future (partridge, 1990).optical fiber will become increasingly used as the information conduitfor future systems (bell, 1989; desurvire, 1992); it is expected that mosthomes will have access to broadband fiber networks within 10 to 20 years(shumate, 1989). wireless terminals, foreshadowed by cellular telephonetechnology, will also become more generally available, as will highresolution color terminals with threedimensional graphics capability.if network bandwidth continues to increase at anything like its recentrate, it will soon be feasible to transmit enormous amounts of data (including digital voice and video) at very low cost. as more and more systemsacquire the capacity to transmit highquality speech with little or no compression, digital voice seems certain to be an increasingly practical mode ofcommunication between one person and another through computer networks,and between people and computers (makhoul et al., 1990). speech recognition technology is also becoming sufficiently mature to be useful in a variety of contexts (waldrop, 1988).although bandwidth limitations have been a problem for digital speechtransmission, the consequences of these limitations have been more severefor picture transmission. trying to transmit pictorial information through achannel that can handle, say, 50,000 bits per second is a little like trying tofill a swimming pool through a straw. but again, if network bandwidthsincrease at rates close to those experts have been predicting, digital videotransmission will become a practical reality for many applications reasonably soon.this is not to suggest that there will not be a desire for still greaterbandwidth; to date the appetite for increased bandwidth has always managed to stay ahead of the technologyõs ability to deliver, and there is littleevidence that this will change right away, if ever. for present purposes, theimportant point is that the technology is advancing rapidly, its applicationsand potential applications multiplying apace.global connectivityone way to characterize what is happening in telecommunications is tosay that the degree to which people everywhere are connected, or could beconnected, to other people and to information resources of all kinds, independently of location, is rapidly increasing. the national research councilõs(1988) computer science and technology board has recently called for thedevelopment of an integrated national computer network system that wouldpermit communication between any two computers in the country. this callemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhas been echoed in legislative proposals to make the establishment of highspeed data highways a matter of national priority (gore, 1991). there issimilar interest in the establishment of national networks in other countriesaround the world. such networks could be linked by internet gateways.the evolving macrosystem of interlinked networks can be thought ofas one enormous global nexus that has the potential to increase by manyorders of magnitude the degree to which individuals and information resources all over the world are interconnected and therefore accessible toeach other. some technologists envision, within the next decade or two, asingle worldwide integrated services digital network that would be capableof handling digitally encoded information of any type (data, facsimile, voice,graphics, motion pictures) and that would link offices, schools, and homesto information resources of various sorts (libraries, museums, national andinternational data banks) throughout the world (denning, 1989b; forester,1987).what the continuing development of computer networking and the global connectivity it represents will mean is very difficult to say at this point,but it seems a safe bet that the implicationsñtechnological, political, socialñwill be profound. denning (1989b) believes an emerging worldwidenetwork of computers, which he refers to as òworldnet,ó could be a pervasive reality by the year 2000, and he has argued that such a facility wouldquickly become indispensable to businesses that wish to remain competitivein a networked world. one suspects that the implications for education, forrecreation, for politics, and for daily life will be equally great.access to information and to peoplea global wideband network has the potential to give individuals unprecedented access to information and information resources independentlyof their location. such access will be used to provide the ability to browsethrough the worldõs libraries, dial up movies for home viewing, consultinteractive encyclopedic information services (including process simulationsand manipulable microworlds), make òvirtualó visits to museums and otherplaces of interest, study in classrooms without walls (including using international collaboratives for educational purposes), participate in instantaneous polls and referenda, enjoy interactive media (òtell [or show] me moreónews and entertainment), and undoubtedly take advantage of possibilitiesthat we cannot now imagine.the kind of connectivity that computer networks are expected to provide in the future will increase not only access to information and information resources but also access to people, independently of their location. itis to be expected that new patterns of interpersonal communication willemerge from the widespread use of this technology. already electronicemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking181mail, which accounts for a very substantial fraction of the total traffic overcomputer networks (denning, 1989a), has significantly changed the communication patterns of many people who use it.unlike the telephone, radio, and television, computer networks are usedfor both pointtopoint and broadcast communications. electronic mail tendsto be used for persontoperson communication; that is to say, messages aresent to specified individual recipients although they can also be readily sentto groups of recipients. electronic bulletin boards are used to post messages that can be read by anyone who has access to the boards on whichthey are posted. often this means a fairly large number of people.new methods of information distributionthe idea of electronic information repositories accessible to the generalpublic is not new. for decades, forwardlooking technologists have givenvisionary accounts of what interaction with such systems could be like(bush, 1945; licklider, 1965; parker, 1973). parker, for example, envisionsthe ability of the reader of an electronic newspaper to call up a bibliographic sketch of an individual who is the subject of a news story, to gettutorial information on a topic that is in the news, to do an automatic searchof advertisements for items of interest, and, in general, to access information resources that could transform the reading of the news into a muchricher experience than it now is.advantages of electronic communication of information include speedñinformation is communicated to everyone within a community of interestessentially instantaneouslyñand representational versatilityñconventionaltext can be supplemented with animations and process simulations, including those with which the user can interact. in addition, the technologycould provide users with a variety of tools and capabilities for working withvery large information stores and getting what they want from them, without being burdened with a mass of data in which they have no interest.despite the considerable interest in the idea of electronic newspapers,magazines, and journals, not much has been done along these lines to date(although a great deal of òprepublicationó information and data are exchanged among scientists via computer networks and much debate of topical scientific questions takes place on electronic bulletin boards that servespecific user communities). one wonders why the idea has not caught onmore rapidly. one possibility is that not enough people have the terminalequipment and network access that is needed to make electronic distributionfeasible on a large scale. other impediments to the widespread use ofelectronic media for the distribution of news and technical information maybe general resistance to change, distrust of (lack of confidence in) the medium, unacceptability of the quality of visual displays (as compared withemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchconventional print media), and the intangibility of the medium (peopleñespecially authorsñmay see printed pieces as more òrealó than electronicones). research on the question of why people often object to reading printon visual display terminals as opposed to print on paper has provided someleads that need to be explored further (gould et al., 1987).changing roles and functionsgiven the type of connectivity global telenetworks are expected to provide and the information handling tools that are already beginning to appear, new methods of information distribution are likely to become increasingly widely used. these innovations will change our fundamental ideasabout information packaging and dissemination and will have implicationsfor the traditional roles of editors, publishers, librarians, and other information workers. questions abound. what, in the age of electronics, willconstitute a òdocumentó or its electronic analogue? what will publicationmean? who will perform the functions of quality control historically performed by editors and publishers? what will be the nature of a library?what services will it provide?it seems likely that there will be a continuing need for publishers,librarians, and other òinformation brokersó in a world in which informationis increasingly gathered, stored, distributed, and used in electronic form.the daily tasks that informationhandling professionals perform will change,however, as will the nature of the services they provide.implications for energy and resource consumptionas we make greater use of electronic means of distributing informationthat has traditionally been distributed by newspapers, magazines, journals,and books, there could be a decrease in the need for and use of paper. thiswould be a desirable consequence from an environmental point of view, asit would reduce natural resource use, energy use, and waste production(chapter 5). whether increased use of electronic publishing will in factdecrease the demand for paper remains to be seen; to date, there is littleevidence that computer technology generally, or the application of this technologyto information distribution in particular, has done so (herman et al., 1989;nickerson, 1992).it appears that people strongly prefer to read print on paper rather thanwords on an electronic visual display. it is not clear to what extent this ismore than a matter of discomfort with change from the familiar. given thepotential that electronic distribution of information has for reducing ourdependence on paper and the fact that, so far, increased use of electronicdistribution has not been accompanied by a decrease in the use of paper, itemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking183seems important to attempt to understand better the causal relationshipsinvolved. in that way, effective steps can be taken to realize the potentialfor savings more fully.participatory democracybecause of the possibility of twoway communication, computer networks could have profound effects on the ways in which decisions are madeat various levels of government and on the extent to which citizens participate directly in the making of those decisions (lemelshtrich, 1990). notonly will instantaneous polls and referenda be possible, but also there willbe new types of forums for debate on issues of public interest by anyonewho wants to participate.a hint of how network technology may facilitate spontaneous politicalcommunication can be seen from an inspection of the messages that areposted on generalinterest electronic bulletin boards. one informal analysisof 1,000 messages posted over a fiveweek period on a company boardrevealed that about 14 percent of them were classifiable as political commentary, discussion, or debate. other major message types were requestsfor information (òdoes anybody know . . . ?ó), 21 percent; advertisements(to sell or rent), 16 percent; and unsolicited information (meeting notices,news, service or product recommendations or warnings), 13 percent (nickerson,1994).human factors issueshuman factors considerations pertaining to communications andtelenetworking are important, in part, because eventually nearly everyone islikely to be a user of this technology. many people will use it in their work,some in relatively traditional work settings and others in radically differentcontexts. simply by making all types of information more generally accessible, computer networks greatly increase the possibility of doing òofficeworkó in places other than traditional centralized offices. in some instances,information technology is changing the character of the work that gets done,and it will continue to do so. telenetworking is itself a major industry thatoffers job opportunities to many people.not all the applications of this technology will be in the workplace.there will be many opportunities to apply it to education, to politics andgovernance, and to avocational and recreational activities as well. peoplewill have access to computer networks in the future, whether they activelyseek it or not, simply by virtue of the fact that televisions will be designedto serve not only as oneway delivery systems for broadcast tv but also asemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtwoway terminals that can both bring information into the home and provide users with the means of transmitting to a network.the opportunities for human factors research relating to this technologyare many and varied. by way of illustrating the diverse nature of theproblems, we will focus on three general problem areas: personcomputerinteraction, persontoperson communication, and what, for want of a betterterm, we will call òvirtualization.ó we will mention a few research opportunities in each of these areas. the possibilities for human factors involvement in this field include these examples, but also extend way beyond them.personcomputer interactionpsychologists and human factors researchers have given a great deal ofattention to the topic of personcomputer interaction. most of the researchthat has been done has focused on the question of how to facilitate it,howñthrough improvements in the designs of interfaces and interactivetechniquesñto make the interaction more natural and more effective. thisproblem is of undoubted importance and deserves continued attention.terminal and interface designan obvious problem will be improving the design of terminals that givepeople access to computing resources and of the interfaces through whichpeople communicate with information resources. this has been a majorfocus of human factors research since computerbased systems began to beused widely by people other than computer scientists and system developers(nickerson, 1986).most terminals today depend primarily on twodimensional visual displays as output devices and on typewriterlike keyboards, typically complemented with a pointing and drawing instrument, such as a mouse or trackball,for input. the effective exploitation of other inputoutput modalities andmethods will become an increasingly important challenge as the communityof users of terminals that provide access to computer networks continues toexpand and as technology widens the range of practical inputoutput options. speech will become an increasingly feasible option for both inputand output, for example (makhoul et al., 1990; weischedel et al., 1990). sowill òwalkaround,ó threedimensional, òvirtualrealityó representations ofobjects and environments with which users can interact (durlach and mavor,1995). how fully the technological possibilities in these and related areasare realized will depend, to a large extent, on how effectively the numeroushuman factors issues that pertain to them are addressed.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking185information finding and utilizationrealization of the potential benefits that can come from the connectivity to information resources provided by computer networks will require thedevelopment of a variety of usersõ tools. physical access to very largeinformation repositoriesñthe electronic equivalent of major libraries, forexampleñwill be of little value unless users have effective methods forgetting at the information they need or want without spending an undueamount of time and effort in unproductive search. as bromley (1986:628)has put it:more information than we can ever conceivably want will be available tous within seconds. what do we do with it? how do we condense, correlate, and sort it so that humans can base decisions on it? this is one of themajor challenges facing all science, all society.there already exist many large electronic databases that serve a varietyof purposes and special interests: electronic funds transfer, airline reservations, stock price quotations, credit card and check authorization, crimeinvestigation, scientific research, and numerous others. databases that holdthe results of dna sequencing research or the astrophysical data collectedby spaceprobing satellites are growing very rapidly and are expected tocontinue to do so for the foreseeable future. ensuring prospective userseasy access to these databases is important, and achieving this goal becomes increasingly difficult as the amount of data in the databases grows.there is a need for tools that will facilitate information access both inthe narrow senseñaccess by specialists to the focused databases that servetheir special interestsñand in the broad senseñaccess by nonspecialists toinformation that is available to the public through news media, libraries,and generalpurpose information services to which anyone can subscribe.there is also opportunity for innovative work on information representationand presentationñhypertext systems that include multimodal representations provide a hint of the possibilitiesñand on the design of navigationaids to help users move around effectively and efficiently in multidimensional datarich environments. for more on the topic of information accessand organization, see chapter 7.personal information managementmost people, over the course of their lives, acquire a variety of types ofinformation that they need or desire to retain for their personal use orreference: legal documents, medical records, financial papers, recipes, books,letters, pictures, and so on. all of this information is, in principle, storableemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchin digital form, and in the future more and more of it will be delivered andretained electronically (or photonically). also, because of the existence ofcomputer networks and the connectivity to information sources they represent, people may acquire much more information that they wish to retain forpersonal use than they do now.if people are to efficiently manage large amounts of information inpersonal electronic repositories, if they are to keep electronic files accurate,timely, and retrievable and not find this a burdensome chore, they will needsome tools and methods designed for this purpose. simply replacing paperfiles with electronic files does not ensure greater accessibility to information. although the computer gives one the potential for handling muchlarger databases much more efficiently, it does not rule out the possibilityof creating chaos. moreover, because of the ease with which electronicallystored information can be erased, either intentionally or inadvertently, special precautions must be taken to protect personally valued information.the design of information systems to serve the personal needs of individuals represents a challenge to both software producers and human factorsspecialists. and this will become increasingly important as more and morepeople gain access to computer networks and to the everexpanding collection of information sources to which they connect.in addition to the need for tools to facilitate the organization of electronic information for retention, maintenance, and ease of access and use,there will be a need for new methods for coping with the information overload that connectivity to electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, andother information resources can produce. heavy users of such resourcesoften develop their own techniques for keeping the amount of informationthey have to attend to within acceptable bounds. the need for approachesthat are demonstrably effective and usable by nontechnical users will growas the potential connectivity of the ordinary citizen to information sourcesof various sorts increases.attitudes and beliefs about computersone question that has not received the attention it deserves is, whatattitudes and beliefs do people have about the computer systems with whichthey interact and how are those attitudes and beliefs are affected by theirinteractions? weizenbaum (1976) has expressed amazement at, and considerable discomfort with, the seriousness and intensity of the interactions thatmany people had with his rogerian òelizaó program. he and others havequestioned the advisability of giving people the impression that the systemswith which they communicate are smarter than they really are.there is some evidence that people are more willing to disclose information, including information about socially frownedupon behavior or attiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking187tudes, on a computeradministered questionnaire than in a facetoface interview (kiesler and sproull, 1986; sproull and kiesler, 1991). there areseveral possible explanations for this, but so far they must be consideredspeculative.several observers have raised the question of how the ubiquity of computers and computerbased systems, and their increasing ability to do thingsthat were once considered uniquely human, will affect the way we perceiveourselves (turkle, 1984; roszak, 1986). the more that people with littleunderstanding of how computers work have occasion to interact with thesesystems, the more relevant and important this question becomes. what canbe done to increase the likelihood that peopleõs conceptualizations of whatcomputerbased systems can do and how they do it are reasonably accurate,or at least not inaccurate in destructive ways?persontoperson communicationin the past, human factors researchers gave more attention to personcomputer communication than to computermediated communication betweenand among people. this is not surprising, as the facilitation of interpersonal communication was not seen as a primary application of computertechnology until fairly recently. with the development and rapid growth ofcomputer networks, however, it has become apparent that facilitating communication between and among people is one of the most powerful applications that this technology can have. among the obvious examples of suchapplications are electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, and computerbased teleconferencing.electronic mailelectronic mail (email) is a new form of interpersonal communicationthat has been made possible by the existence of computer networks. itshould be studied from a human factors point of view. to date, emailfacilities have been used primarily by people who are òcomputer literate,óin particular those who use computers regularly either in their work or foravocational purposes. it seems highly likely, however, that the use of email will increase in the future and that the user community will includemany people who do not now use computers for either work or play.there are many research questions relating to email and its use. whouses it? and for what purposes? how accessible is it? how much trainingdo people who do not use computers for other purposes need in order to beable to use email effectively? how do the usability and usefulness ofspecific email systems depend on the details of the systemsõ designs andoperating characteristics? does computermediated communication haveemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchany unique characteristics, and if so, what are they? to what extent does itreplace other means of communication for its users? what effects, if any,does email have on the operation of organizations whose members use itdaily? how does interpersonal communication through email resemble ordiffer from communication via other media?clearly, electronic messages do not contain many of the nonlinguisticcues (e.g., òbody languageó) that often convey nuances of feelings andattitudes of participants in facetoface or voice interactions, and they typically lack most of the clues to sendersõ status or position that are oftenfound in letterheads or signature blocks (sproull and kiesler, 1991). computermediated communication systems also tend to be opaque to personalcharacteristicsñunattractive physical appearance, speech impediments, behavioral anomaliesñthat sometimes, unfortunately, inhibit effective communication on a persontoperson basis (zuboff, 1988). similarly, theyfilter out the advantages that aspects of appearanceñphysical attractiveness, an authoritative voice, an imposing demeanorñcan provide. in general, they have been seen by many observers as user òequalizersó in thesense that they mask many of the factors that differentiate people in facetoface contact (hiltz et al., 1980; vallee et al., 1974; zuboff, 1988).sproull and kiesler point out that the weakening of social differences isnot unique to computermediated communication, but is seen, albeit to lesserdegrees, in other technologies (1991a:43):the telephone eliminates visual cues and therefore reduces oneõs ability todeduce the other personõs social position and to grasp the importance ofsocial differences in the interaction. over the telephone, though, one retrieves some social information in nonvisual form. the secretary whoanswers or places calls, variations in standard ways of greeting, and pausesand tone of voice all convey social information.several years ago, uhlig (1977) suggested the need for an etiquette ofcomputerbased message technology that would probably differ from theetiquette that applies to more traditional forms of communication. has suchan etiquette emerged? is one emerging? is email less constrained bytraditional social conventions than is facetoface or voice communication?does it evoke more extreme positions and the venting of anger more openly(kiesler, 1984; kiesler et al., 1984; short et al., 1976)?sproull and kiesler (1991) suggest that because email is relativelyimpoverished in social cues and shared experience, it lends itself to communication in which the participants produce messages that display less socialawareness than facetoface or voice communication. reduced social awarenessis seen in òmessages characterized by ignoring social boundaries, self revelation, and blunt remarksó (p. 39). people tend to be more open and lessinhibited when using electronic mail than in facetoface or voice communiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking189cation, sproull and kiesler argue, because the possibility of a critical audience is less apparent in the former case: òbecause a person composing anelectronic message lacks tangible reminders of his or her audience, thewriter can easily forget the forms appropriate for communicating with thataudienceó (p. 49).we know that interpersonal communicationñface to face, by telephone,or in writingñis by far the most common form of office activity (bair,1987; helander, 1985; panko, 1982). we know too that a large part of thetypical managerõs job is communication, much of which occurs in meetingsand group settings (mintzberg, 1973). whether or not widespread use of email will affect the amount of time devoted to communication, patterns ofcommunication that did not exist before will probably emerge. one canspeculate about this, but it would be useful to have some observationalstudies of the patterns of use of actual email communities, of which manyalready exist. because this form of communication is new, new observational and experimental techniques may be needed to study it. the generalquestion of how computer and communication technologies will affect theways in which people communicate with each other is extremely importantand deserves considerable research effort (national research council, 1984).one question of special interest is how the use of email and relatedtechnologies can be expected to affect the productivity of their users. atthis early stage in the development and use of these facilities, it is notpossible to say anything definitive on this question. one might guess thatuse of email would improve productivity, since email can greatly facilitate communication among all the members of a functional group. of course,it would be naive to assume that all the email communication that is donedirectly serves the goals of the organization; however, there may be indirectbenefits even from the facilitation of communication for purely personalpurposes. some preliminary data on the question have been reported. sproulland kiesler (1991) found a high correlation between the degree to which agroup used email to coordinate its activities and the groupõs productivity.they note that correlation does not demonstrate a causeeffect relationship,but they appear to believe there to be one.electronic bulletin boardsan electronic bulletin board can be thought of as a special form ofelectronic mail, and much of what has been said in the preceding sectionabout email applies to electronic bulletin boards as well. the electronicbulletin board is a sufficiently important innovation, however, to warrantspecial mention.like a conventional bulletin board, an electronic bulletin board is apublic medium; messages posted on it can be read by anyone who hasemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchaccess to it. also like conventional bulletin boards, electronic bulletinboards serve a variety of communities of users. the users of a conventionalbulletin board might be the occupants of a building, the patrons of a store,the residents of a neighborhood; those of an electronic bulletin board mightbe the employees of a corporation, the students and faculty of a university,the users of a computer network service.perhaps the most obvious advantage of electronic bulletin boards overconventional bulletin boards is that users do not have to go to a particularplace to read or post messages. because boards can be accessed fromessentially anywhere, the user community for a particular board can bedefined by common interests rather than by a common location. otheradvantages include the ease with which the postings on an electronic bulletin board can be scanned, excerpted, corrected, elaborated, and processed inmany other ways.individuals can use electronic bulletin boards in a variety of ways andto varying extents. one may read notices only, or one may post some aswell. some users read all the notices that are posted, checking the postingsat fairly regular intervals; others scan them only occasionally. replies toòdoes anybody know?ó questions are sometimes posted; often they are sentprivately to the questioners via email. patterns of communication thatspontaneously emerge include multiperson dialogues, perhaps initiated by aquestion or comment that evoked responses from several people.the existence of electronic bulletin boards could have a great effect onthe way people communicate with each other in the future. as more andmore people acquire access to computer networks, they will also be acquiring access to widely distributed communities with common interests. whatthis will mean to peopleõs daily lives remains to be seen. one opportunityfor human factors research is the observational study of the evolution ofthis new mode of communication. another is developing an understandingof this technology and of the needs and preferences of its users as a steptoward promoting design decisions that will enhance the usefulness of electronic bulletin boards to the general population.teleconferencingthe idea of using network technology to hold conferences among òattendeesó located in different places has been of interest since the early1960s (bavelas et al., 1963). despite this longstanding interest and despitethe implementation of several experimental systems, teleconferencing hasnot yet become widely used, even when facetoface meetings involve theexpense and inconvenience of considerable travel. this may be due to acombination of technical and nontechnical factors (nickerson, 1986).some of the technical limitations of teleconferencing systems are beingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking191eased as networks acquire sufficient bandwidth to support the realtimetransmission of sufficiently highfidelity video representations of participantsõ images to create a realistic impression of an actual gathering. whetherthis will ensure the maturing of teleconferencing into an effective and widelyused technology remains to be seen. it seems likely that the acceptability ofthis technology will depend, to a large degree, on the kinds of usersõ toolsthat teleconferencing systems offer to facilitate group problem solving anddecision making.the dynamics of electronic òmeetingsó differ from those of facetofacemeetings in a variety of ways. for example, many of the factors that determine which participants play dominant roles in facetoface meetings appearto be less influential in electronic meetings. these include gender (mcguireet al., 1987) and status (dubrovsky et al., 1991). one might expect similardiminution of the influence of age, race, and physical appearance.sproull and kiesler (1991) suggest that consensus is more difficult toachieve with electronic than with facetoface groups. is this because peopleare more susceptible to peer pressure in a facetoface group than whencommunicating electronically? if so, the possibility arises that a facetoface meeting is more likely than an electronic one to result in what appearsto be a consensus, but in fact is not.it seems reasonable to expect that electronic meetings will differ substantially from facetoface meetings for some time to come, perhaps indefinitely. we would also expect, however, that the dynamics of electronicmeetings will change as the technology continues to be developed and enhanced. ideally, we would like the technology to develop in such a waythat electronic meetings come to have all, or most, of the advantages offacetoface meetings and some others that come from the availability offacilitative tools as well. realization of this desire will require a betterunderstanding than we now have of the factors that can determine the relative effectiveness of working groups.virtualizationas used here, the term virtualization connotes the development of capabilities that make it possible for people to function at a distance from neededresources or to interact with simulated representations of objects and environments much as they would with the real things. capabilities of thesetypes are basic to such ideas and phenomena as telecommuting, computersupported cooperative work, and virtual or artificial realities.telecommutingwhether information technology, generally, has yet had a significantemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchimpact on productivity in the workplace is a matter of some debate (seechapters 1 and 8). the picture is clouded in part by (a) the difficulty ofmeasuring productivityñespecially whitecollar productivityñin completelyunambiguous ways and (b) the fact that information technology, by virtueof its pervasiveness, has many indirect effects that are hard to isolate andtrack.there seems little doubt, however, that information technology, particularly computerbased communication networks, has the potential to enhance productivity greatly. the need to maintain large inventories of materials, parts, and finished products has a negative effect on productivitybecause it represents a major component of the cost of getting products intothe hands of users. òjustintimeó manufacturing reduces the need for suchinventories, but it depends on fast and effective communication techniques.the substitution of the transmission of information for the movement ofpeople and material is another way in which computer networks can contribute to increased productivity, because this means the delivery of thesame services at the expenditure of fewer natural or economic resources.using computer networks to enable people to work at home or in òvirtual officesó outside traditional centralized office buildings has been ofinterest for some time. the idea of teleworking, or òtelecommuting,ó waspromoted by nilles et al. (1976) shortly after the first oil crisis of the early1970s, partly on the grounds that bringing jobs to people electronically,rather than transporting people to jobs, would have the doubly beneficialeffect of conserving energy and saving transportation costs. it would alsohelp the environment by reducing air pollution from vehicle emissions,traffic congestion, and office space requirements.according to one estimate, perhaps as many as 15 or 16 million peoplein the united states could be considered teleworkers as of 1989 (martin,1989). however, the percentage of the workforce, especially the whitecollar workforce, that could work from home is believed to be many timeslarger than is currently doing so (harkness, 1977; kraut, 1987). how fullythe potential for telework will be realized will depend, in part, on howeffectively a variety of human factors issues are addressed. some of theseissues have to do with the design of devices and softwareñthe tools thatmake telework technically feasible. others, however, relate to less tangible, but no less important, aspects of the work situation that help determine not only productivity but worker satisfaction.telework has become a symbol of liberation to some people and ofisolation to others (huws et al., 1990). how it is perceived depends on theindividual workerõs circumstances and the details of the arrangement between worker and employer. among the issues that appear to contribute toworker satisfaction with telework are whether the worker is considered anindependent contractor or a company employee, whether work is monitoredemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking193electronically, and how compensation is determined. this is not to suggestthat all workers prefer the same arrangement (chamot and zalusky, 1985;gregory, 1985). telework situations differ from more traditional workarrangements in many respects, some obvious, some subtle; studies are neededto provide a better understanding of the variables that determine productivity and job quality from the workerõs point of view.computersupported cooperative workwith the help of computer networks, colleagues can cooperate at adistance in ways that were impossible until fairly recently. people in widelyseparated locations can collaborate, for example, in real time on writing apaper; all the authors can critique the same draft and have the benefit of allthe critiques as soon as they are made. they can, in effect, share the sameòwriting surfaceó despite their geographical separation.network technology has the potential to bring expertise to bear onproblems that are located someplace other than where the expert or expertshappen to be. a team of experts, all located at different places, mightcollaboratively address a problem requiring their expertise. in theory, atleast, highresolution displays, coupled with teleoperator control technology could make it possible for a remotely located surgeon not only to giveadvice to onsite personnel but even to perform operating procedures.how far such innovation can be taken remains to be seen. there islittle doubt that the ubiquity of computer networks will make expertise, likemany other things, less constrained by space and time than it now is. theeffectiveness with which geographically separated individuals will be ableto collaborate, via computer networks, on complex tasks that draw on theircombined skills will depend, to no small degree, on how well the manyhuman factors issues relating to the design of the underlying systems areresolved.telepresencethe telephone created a telepresence of sorts. when two people talk onthe phone, they are in each otherõs presence in a real, if rudimentary, sense,even if they are located half a world away from each other. the higher thequality of the voice transmission and the fewer the interruptions, the greaterthe sense of presence is. film and television can also create a sense ofpresence; watching a film or televised event, one can sometimes get thesense of òbeing thereó to the extent of forgetting that what one is looking atis a picture on a screen.one goal of virtual reality technology is to increase the sense of presence considerably beyond what the current state of the art of communicaemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtion technology permits. it would add, for example, the sense of touch andwould also give the recipient of the sensory information the ability to movethe sensing devices around in the experienced context. by moving oneõshead and eyes, for example, one would cause the optical sensors to move ina corresponding way. this would give the recipient control over where tolook, much as one would have if at the remotely located scene.as the bandwidth of computer networks continues to increase, it will bepossible to transmit an increasingly detailed and veridical representation ofa physical situation to a remotely located individual. it seems unlikely,however, that it will be possible, at least anytime soon, to represent mostnontrivial situations in sufficient detail that one could not tell the virtualreality from the real thing. fortunately, this degree of realism is not necessary for most applications, but the question of how real (in appearance) isreal enough is open and probably must be answered on a casebycase basis.representations of reality that would be more than adequate for some applications might be inadequate for others. there is a need for work on thequestion of how to determine the degree of fidelity required in specificinstances.concluding commentsour main purpose in this chapter has been to point out that computernetworking and associated developments have profound implications forhuman communication and represent some significant challenges and opportunities for human factors research. we have considered only a few ofthe research questions that arise and these only in a cursory way. the needto focus more attention on computerbased networking will increase as thetechnology for it continues to develop and its applications continue to expand.in keeping with the overall theme of this book, we have focused primarily on the future of networking and the prospects of extensive connectivityof people to information resources of many types and of people to peopleindependently of geographical location. it should also be noted, however,that there are many opportunities for human factors work on the networkingsystems that currently exist. the evidence suggests that the currently operating electronic information resources are not utilized as effectively as theycould be even by people who have easy access to them and could presumably benefit from making greater use of them (general accounting office,1989). in this regard, see also chapters 4 and 7.there can be little doubt that the increasingly widespread use of communications technology in the workplace is changing the nature of manyjobs and the knowledge and skill requirements for performing them. thisemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking195technology is affecting jobs throughout industry and at all levels of responsibilityñfrom clerical workers who have to master a variety of computerbased document preparation and information management tools to highlevel managers who have to learn to deal with new patterns of intra andintercompany communication, more fluid organizational structures, and challengesstemming from the innovative exploitation of communication technology bycompetitors. studies are needed both to help us understand the changes thatare taking place and to anticipate the likely jobskill requirements of thefuture.but the effects of computer networking will be felt far beyond theworkplace. we need to better understand its implications for education; forcivic, political, and personal decision making; for leisure and daily lifeoutside the workplace. what might it mean for people who are confined totheir homes, to hospitals, to nursing homes, to prisons? how can it beexploited to give shutins greater access to other people, to informationresources, and to the world in general?what must be done to ensure the usefulness and usability of this technology? special and generalpurpose databanks will be increasingly accessible through computer networks; information services will proliferate, aswill networkaccessible expert systems, electronic consultants, and electronic advice givers. how can such resources be made approachable forpeople who are intimidated by computer technology, for people who cannottype, for people who are disadvantaged in one way or another? how canwe minimize the chances that these resources will widen the gap betweenhaves and have nots? between bettereducated and less welleducated people?between people who are well connected to computer resources and peoplewho are not?what are some of the major risks inherent in this technology? what arethe computer network analogues to nuisance telephone calls? to mail andtelemarketing fraud? what safeguards can be built against them? howshould people be encouraged to think about networks, data structures, andinformation spaces? what sorts of metaphors or mental models will beuseful and not misleading and detrimental?communication is a fundamental human activity. technology has affected it in numerous ways in the past. the proliferation of computernetworks has the potential to affect it greatly in the future. already it ispossible to identify many human factors questions that are raised by telenetworkingand associated developments; many more are likely to arise as the impact ofthe continuing development of these technologies on our daily lives becomes increasingly evident.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchreferencesbair, j.h.1987user needs for office systems solutions. pp. 177194 in r.e. kraut, ed., technology and the transformation of white collar work. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.bavelas, a., t. belden, e. glenn, j. orlansky, j. schwartz, and h.w. sinaiko1963teleconferencing: summary of a preliminary research project. study s138.arlington, va.: institute for defense analysis.bell, t.e.1989telecommunications. ieee spectrum 26(1):4143.bromley, b.a.1986physics: natural philosophy and invention. american scientist 74:622639.bush, v.1945as we may think. the atlantic monthly. 176(july):101108.chamot, d., and j.l. zalusky1985use and misuse of workstations in the home. pp. 7684 in m.h. olson, ed., officeworkstations in the home. board on telecommunications and computer applications, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.davies, d.w., and d.l.a. barber1973communications network for computers. new york: wiley.denning, p.j.1989athe science of computing: the arpanet after 20 years. american scientist77:530534.1989bthe science of computing: worldnet. american scientist 77:432434.desurvire, e.1992lightwave communications: the fifth generation. scientific american 266(1):114121.dubrovsky, v., s. kiesler, and b. sethna1991the equalization phenomenon: status effects in computermediated and facetoface decision making groups. human computer interaction 6:119146.durlach, n.i., and a.s. mavor, eds.1995virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges.committee on virtualreality research and development, national research council. washington, d.c.:national academy press.forester, t.1987hightech society: the story of the information technology revolution. cambridge, mass.: mit press.general accounting office1989cancer treatment: national cancer instituteõs role in encouraging the use ofbreakthroughs. washington, d.c.: general accounting office.gore, a.1991infrastructure for the global village. scientific american 265(3):150153.gould, j.d., l. alfaro, r. finn, b. haupt, and a. minuto1987reading from crt displays can be as fast as reading from paper. human factors29:497507.gregory, j.1985clerical workers and new office technologies. pp. 112124 in m.h. olson ed.,office workstations in the home. board on telecommunications and computerapplications, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking197harkness, r.c.1977technology assessment of telecommunicationstransportation interactions. menlopark, calif.: stanford research institute.heart, f.1975the arpanet network. in r.l. grimsdale and f.f. kuo, eds., computer communication networks: 1973 proceedings of the nato advanced study institute.leyden, netherlands: noordhoff international publishing.heart, f., a. mckenzie, j. mcquillan, and d. walden1978arpanet completion report. cambridge, mass.: bolt beranek and newman.helander, m.g.1985emerging office automation systems. human factors 27(1):320.herman, r., s.a. ardekani, and j.h. ausubel1989dematerialization. pp. 5069 in j.h. ausubel and h.e. sladovich, eds., technology and environment. national academy of engineering. washington, d.c.: national academy press.hiltz, s.r., k. johnson, c. aronovitsh, and m. turoff1980facetoface versus computerized conferences: a controlled experiment. report 12. newark: new jersey institute of technology.huws, u., w.b. korte, and s. robinson1990telework: towards the elusive office. new york: wiley.kahn, r.e.1987networks for advanced computing. scientific american 257(4):136143.kiesler, s.1984computer mediation of communication. american psychologist 39:11231134.kiesler, s., and l.s. sproull1986response effects in the electronic survey. public opinion quarterly 50:402413.kiesler, s., j. siegel, and t.w. mcguire1984social psychological aspects of computermediated communication. american psychologist 39:11231134.kraut, r.e.1987social issues and whitecollar technology: an overview. pp. 121 in r.e. kraut,ed., technology and the transformation of whitecollar work. hillsdale, n.j.:erlbaum.lemelshtrich, n.1990the expression of opinions through the new electronic mass media: an experimental and cybernetic view. in n. moray, w.r. ferrell, and w.b. rouse, eds., robotics, control and society. new york: taylor and francis.licklider, j.c.r.1965libraries of the future. cambridge, mass.: mit press.makhoul, j., f. jelinek, l. rabiner, c. weinstein, and v. zue1990spoken language systems. annual review of computer science 4:481501.marrill, t., and l.a. roberts1966cooperative network of timesharing computers. pp. 425431 in proceedings ofthe afips 1966 sprint joint computer conference. arlington, va.: americanfederation of information processing societies press.martin, a.1989thereõs no place like home . . . to work. human resource executive july:5051.mcguire, t., s. kiesler, and j. siegel1987group and computermediated discussion effects in risk decision making. journalof personality and social psychology 52:917930.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmintzberg, h.1973the nature of managerial work. new york: harper and row.national research council1984research needs on the interaction between information systems and their users:report of a workshop. committee on human factors. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1988toward a national research network. national research network review committee, computer science and technology board. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.nickerson, r.s.1986using computers: human factors in information technology. cambridge, mass.:mit press.1992looking ahead: human factor challenges in a changing world. hillsdale, n.j.:erlbaum.1994electronic bulletin boards: a case study in computermediated communication.interacting with computers 6:117134.nilles, j.m., f.r. carlson, p. gray, and g. hanneman1976telecommutingñan alternative to urban transportation congestion. ieee transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics 6:7784.panko, r.1982serving managers and professionals. pp. 97103 in afips office automationconference proceedings. arlington, va.: american federation of informationprocessing societies press.parker, e.1973technological change and the mass media. pp. 619645 in i. pool, w. schramm,f. frey, n. maccoby, and e. parker, eds., handbook of communication. chicago,ill.: rand mcnally.partridge, c.1990a faster data delivery. unix review 8(3):4348.pool, r.1993beyond databases and email. science 261(august):841843.roszak, t.1986the cult of information: the folklore of computers and the true art of thinking.new york: pantheon books.short, j., e. williams, and b. christie1976a social psychology of telecommunications. new york: wiley.shumate, p.w., jr.1989optical fibers reach into homes. ieee spectrum 26(2):4347.sproull, l., and s. kiesler1991connections: new ways of working in the networked organization. cambridge,mass.: mit press.turkle, s.1984the second self: computers and the human spirit. new york: simon andschuster.uhlig, r.p.1977human factors in computer message systems. datamation 23(4):120126.vallee, j., r. johansen, r.h. randolph, and a.c. hastings1974group communication through computers. vol. 2: a study of social effects.report r33. menlo park, calif.: institute for the future.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communication technology and telenetworking199waldrop, m.m.1988a landmark in speech recognition. science 240:1615.weischedel, r., j. carbonell, b. grosz, w. lehnert, m. marcus, r. perrault, and r. wilensky1990natural language processing. annual review of computer science 4:435452.weizenbaum, j.1976computer power and human reason: from judgment to calculation. san francisco: freeman.zuboff, s.1988in the age of the smart machine: the future of work and power. new york:basic books.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research2007information access and usabilitychristopher d. wickens and karen s. seidlerintroductionwe are a society increasingly driven by information. accurate, uptodate information underlies the effective and progressive functioning of governmental, economic, and social institutions, impacting everything from thefocus and quality of public policy decisions to the competitiveness of industrial research and development. in this modern realityñsometimes labeledthe information society (e.g., salvaggio, 1989) or the postindustrial society(bell, 1973)ñknowledge and information become the primary resources,displacing manufactured goods and agricultural products as key commodities (stonier, 1983).a number of trends associated with the evolution of an informationsociety beg attention from the human factors community. one trend is thegreatly expanded quantity of information available to people in all professions. for the scholar, this translates into a 3 percent growth per year in theunited states alone in the number of journals, professional conferences, andproceedings (king et al., 1981). worldwide, the growth is even more rapid.this makes keeping abreast of current research on even a restricted topicdaunting, and scholars are increasingly unsure of the extent to which theyhave located relevant literature, let alone digested it. lawyers have witnessed a comparable overwhelming growth in the records they can consultfor legal precedents. in the medical profession, the limited ability of physicians and other health professionals to extract from the literature relevantemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability201information on patient care, teaching, and research has engendered so muchconcern (e.g., huth, 1989) that a new subfieldñmedical informaticsñhasbeen created to address issues related to the development and operation ofmedical information systems (hewins, 1990). somewhat ironically, this subdiscipline is generating its own growing body of literature (see chapter 4).in industry, the exponential increases in system complexity have alsoresulted in voluminous documentation and procedures to support systemoperations and maintenance. the documentation required by the f18 aircraft alone contains 300,000 pages. in nuclear facilities, it is not unheard offor manuals of procedures for dealing with accidents to exceed hundreds ofpages. for the consumer, a growing wealth of information on products andcosts is at least potentially available. in the face of this datarich environment, users are experiencing frustration in locating, accessing, tracking, andinterpreting the information that is germane to their concerns.new information technologies, though, offer viable and powerful waysto manage information collections. among these innovations are: (1) greatlyenhanced storage and access capabilities (e.g., cdrom), (2) expandedcommunication systems that allow faster and greater connectivity, (3) hypermediadevelopments that allow greater flexibility in information representationand database ònavigationó (gluschko, 1990), (4) the advanced graphics capabilities that make direct manipulation interfaces and data visualizationpossible (newby, 1992), and (5) developments in artificial intelligence tosupport òintelligentó systems and interfaces that can, for example, infer userinformation needs and support dialogue in more natural language (allen,1991).yet advances in collection, storage, and dissemination technology donot ensure successful use of electronic information repositories. muckler(1987) has documented the low òhit rateó obtained in typical library database searches, in terms of both the relevant documents that fail to be located (misses) and the unnecessary retrieval of many documents of limitedusefulness or relevance (false alarms). in one case a computer search through10 databases retrieved 16,816 abstracts that were identified as relevant for aparticular topic. only 166 were. more disturbing was the fact that in anindependent, nonelectronic search through the literature, a user located 177useful references that had not been found by any of the database searches.in a study of user success with a legal database, blair and maron (1985)found a similar pattern of results, with only a 20 percent recall of relevantdocuments. even more alarming, though, was the finding that searchersbelieved they were recovering 75 to 80 percent of relevant documents. thisfinding is consistent with a general conclusion reached by macgregor et al.(1987) that users overstated the success of their information retrieval fromelectronic databases.of course, there have been positive interactions as well. wilson et al.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research(1989) report a dramatic example: in eight incidents the lives of patientswere saved because a search of the medline database uncovered information that led the physicians to change the course and direction of theirtreatment procedures. as we increasingly attend to the difficulties usershave with information technologies, such a positive synergy between userand machine will become more common.yet this attention will need to extend beyond the technically sophisticated user. a growing proportion of the labor force will perform informationhandling activities (i.e., production, maintenance, and interpretation) inthe future. we have already seen a substantial growth in the number ofwhitecollar workers (information handlers), from less than 18 percent ofthe workforce in 1900 to over half today (koenig, 1990). and since communication and computing technologies have allowed data to be made directly available in the office, workers are increasingly being asked to confront the information stores without the aid of expert human search intermediaries(e.g., librarians) familiar with the database systems. further, the growth innumbers of end users is not limited to the workplace. electronic information databases are becoming more common in everyday private life. withthe purchase of a modem and an online service, the average person can usea personal computer to tap into large databases at home and carry on manypersonal activities directly (e.g., make airline reservations, shop at home,conduct bibliographic searches). this means that a wide range of skills andtasks are being brought to the computer interface. these more casual orinfrequent users are less likely to possess the intellectual resources or motivation to invest in a timeconsuming learning process. the implications arethat information system designers cannot rely on user perseverance or hightechnical skills to overcome poor interface design. instead, user friendliness will become critical in attracting and keeping end users.in summary, the issues may be represented by three major concerns.first, users must often confront enormous quantities of information in orderto identify and utilize the small portion that is ultimately relevant and meaningfulto them. second, the interface and the database representation designed tomanage the vast information collections may often not be compatible withthe userõs mental model of how the system should work, leading to userfrustration and abandonment of the system. third, even if a user is satisfiedwith the online operation of a system, he or she may be less satisfied withits output if many unwanted items are retrieved (i.e., high recall but lowprecision). alternatively, although the user may be satisfied with the information retrieved, that satisfaction could be unwarranted because of an unsuspected high miss rate.from a human factors perspective, we may think about the problems ofinformation access and retrieval outlined above as resulting from the userõsrequirement to map an information need (sometimes ill defined) onto a veryemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability203large database whose contents and structure may or may not be immediatelyapparent. that is, information is somewhat òhiddenó in the database. lucky(1989) describes this as a problem of acquiring metainformation (information about information). that is, users must determine whether desiredinformation is contained within the database, how it is represented, where itis located, and how to access it. exploiting the new information technologies to address these problems defines a host of important human factorsresearch issues for the next decade, such as the following: what is theoptimum display interface through which the user can understand what information is available? what is the appropriate control/display interfacethrough which the user can explore the information base? how stronglyand how well can intelligent systems draw correct inferences about humanneeds and wishes and how well can those systems help the user formulateand refine those wishes? how can one adequately assess performance withinformation systems, since user satisfaction may not correlate with recalland precision indices?in the following pages, we discuss these issues as they pertain to threeselected classes of databases: (1) the restricted database, the wellstructured database for a particular system in a restricted domain; (2) the fluiddatabase, the lessstructured database of scientific, academic, or generalknowledge; and (3) the base constituted by scientific data. we recognizethat the three classes are not discrete; that is, they share many overlappingfeatures relating to information accessibility and interpretability. in fact,we view the restricted and fluid databases along a continuum that reflectsthe degree to which the database organization can be determined by a userprior to actual use. for convenience and parsimony of expression, we alsotake the liberty of using the term electronic database in its broadest sense,that is, to represent any type of electronic information repository (e.g., anonline bibliographic system, a videotext system, a computerized maintenance manual). we conclude this chapter by focusing in detail on the set ofhuman factors research issues that are common to all of these areas.database representation issuesrestricted domainsthe most structured informationrepresentation domain, and the onemost readily studied from a human factors viewpoint, is one in which theknowledge pertains to the functioning of a single, wellstructured systemña restricted domain. examples include the online help system for a wordprocessing system, the airline flight reservation systems (boehmdavis etal., 1992), the onboard inflight library of information about an aircraft andits surrounding airspace conditions (curran, 1991), all of the entries in aemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmaintenance document for a complex piece of equipment, and the contentsof an industrial inventory. these systems represent the electronic counterparts to such conventional paperbased items as manuals, descriptions ofprocedures, schedules, encyclopedias, and handbooks.in the restricted domain, the contents of the database often are less of amystery to the user than is the location of an information item within thesystem and the means of accessing it. in the hardcopy counterparts, usersmay consult a table of contents or an index to locate information; if thedocument is alphabetically arranged (e.g., a dictionary), its structure is immediately apparent and users can infer the location of information. alternatively, users might choose to thumb through the document or browse to findinformation of interest. to keep track of their place when crossreferencing, they might bend down corners of pages or use highlighters or bookmarks. advanced electronic systems sometimes have analogous capabilties.in the electronic version of an information system, the issue is how todesign the interface so that the user can (a) readily locate needed items ofinformation and (b) access the items efficiently (this might include needingto shift rapidly between sets of òrelatedó items of information). the firstneed has to do with the organizational structure of the database (e.g., hierarchical, matrix, network; see durding et al., 1977), and the second, withthe navigational tools for moving from entry to entry (seidler and wickens,1992). the organizational structure may or may not be independent of thenavigational tools. for example, a database may be organized in a stricthierarchical fashion, but navigational tools may allow the user to directlyaccess any node in the database from any other node with a single command, thus bypassing the hierarchical relationships. this contrast is closelyrelated to that between menudriven search and key word search.much of the empirical investigation relevant to these areas has focusedon such issues as menu organization and key word systems (norman, 1991;shneiderman, 1987). for instance, the issue of the tradeoff between menudepth (the number of levels in the hierarchy) and breadth (the number ofitems per level) has been a popular research topic (e.g., kiger, 1984; miller,1981; snowberry et al., 1983). the general consensus of these studies hasbeen that search time lessens and accuracy improves as breadth is increasedand depth decreased. increasing depth seems to increase the likelihood ofbecoming òlostó in the information space. other menu studies (e.g., card,1982; giroux and belleau, 1986) have looked at the ordering and organization of menu items within a page (e.g., alphabetical, semantic, or random)and have found systematic arrangements better than random ordering ofitems. there have also been studies looking at the advantages of addingmenu descriptors (e.g., latremouille and lee, 1981; snowberry et al., 1985);these have been found to improve performance when applied to upper levelsof the menu hierarchy only. most of these studies of menu organization,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability205though, have used relatively small, homogeneous, and often abstract databases (fisher et al., 1990) unlike those typically found in operational settings. also, search questions were generally goaldirected, which meansthat results may be inappropriate for understanding browsing behavior.research is still needed on how to organize both the structure and thenavigational tools in a way that is compatible with both the usersõ mentalmodel of the database and the taskdefined needs to access the informationin a particular sequence. a classic study by roskehofstrand and paap(1986) revealed that f16 pilots used an inflight information menu morereadily when its organizational structure corresponded to their mental modelof which systems were related to each other; the pilots were less likely touse the menu when the menu designersõ own plan guided the structure.prior to obtaining user input on the question of structure, the designer shouldbe able to define the set of options. this can be difficult because there areso many different ways in which groups of òinformation nodesó could beorganized. for an aircraft, they might be related in terms of system components: thus, all entries pertaining to a common system (e.g., fueluse instruments) would be close together or commonly grouped. alternatively, theymight be grouped according to phase of flight, so all instruments that arefrequently consulted in the same flight phase (and hence frequently used insequence) would be located together, even if they relate to entirely differentsystems. there is little or no guidance as to whether one organizationalstructure is preferable, how either might relate to the usersõ mental model,how homogeneous these mental models may be across different users, orwhether the organizational structure for one task (e.g., normal operation)might differ substantially from the structure needed for a different task(e.g., fault diagnosis and troubleshooting). it is possible that these different structures can exist in parallel through implementation of networks orredundant nodes.allowing the user to tailor or structure the organization adaptively ashe or she sees fit is an attractive approach. yet this solution has threepotential dangers not always considered when making design recommendations:¥the user might not know the ideal organization because all possible scenarios in which information is needed cannot be anticipated a priori.¥there may be undesirable setup costs in establishing configurabledisplays.¥individual structuring will lead to a lack of consistency across different databases.this last concern is crucial, as has been understood by those considering thelack of consistency across such systems as wordprocessing applications,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchkeyboards, and aircraft (andre and wickens, 1992; wiener, 1989). whatshould be the tradeoff, then, between flexibility and adaptability on the onehand, and consistency on the other? it may be that having too much freedom to structure information differently in a system is as bad as having toolittle. human cognition is somewhat adaptable, and it may well be that theuser can adapt to a nonideal but fixed information structure more rapidlyand effectively than the user can mold or adapt the structure to his or herideal.identifying the elements that foster this adaptation is the challenge. itrequires making the organizational structure and navigational proceduresreadily apparent to the user, so that users always know where they are in thedatabase relative to where they want to be. this issue of visibility ofdatabase structure to the user is addressed by the implementation of electronic database òmaps,ó whose utility has been well validated (e.g., vincenteand williges, 1988). major design challenges still confront the humanfactors community in addressing how such maps can spatially represent thevast number of nodes and entries in large databases in a way that allows theuser to visualize the full structure readily (mackinlay et al., 1991; shneiderman,1987).fluid domainswhen dealing with information in a restricted domain, the user generally must access or òunpackó specific pieces of information that exist atnodes of the database and whose identity is known before the search begins.for example, a technician might need to look up a particular maintenanceprocedure. the contents of the restricteddomain databases are fairly welldefined in advance by the system designer. in contrast, many domains haveboundaries that are far less concretely defined, and the organizational structure within these domains is much less well described by either a systemshierarchy or a simple ndimensional matrix. instead, the relationships between information sources in the fluid database, such as a libraryõs holdings, derive meaning from the information needs and use context. the taskin using such databases may extend beyond òunpackingó information withina node to understanding the relationships between items in the database. asexamples, we may consider the online bibliographic retrieval of articlesabout a particular topic (newby, 1992); books of a userõs preference (pejtersen,1989); the set of legal decisions, statutes, and regulations bearing on aparticular type of case; the set of aircraft incident reports with commonfeatures listed in the aviation safety reporting system (williams et al.,1992); and a set of medical cases with similar typologies (hubbard et al.,1987; see also chapter 4).a database of this sort is characterized by the fact that a single organiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability207zational framework is not typically imposed at the outset of data generation,or, if one is, then it must evolve to accommodate the unpredictable growthof information. this contrasts with the computer help system or the maintenance information system mentioned in the previous section; there the components and functions are specified in advance by design and, therefore,possess a fairly concise hierarchical or network structure. instead, the fluiddatabases are contributed to by various people (or events) over time, haveno tightly constrained structure or boundary, and are employed by userswho may have a very divergent set of task needs. any efforts by oneindividual to impose a particular parsimonious taxonomy will probably defeat other users with different needs and information uses.consider, for example, a database of human factors research. differentpeople will have very different criteria regarding the boundaries of such adatabase. should it include the social psychology of multiperson interaction? personality types as they affect this interaction? physiology? management and organizational practices? correspondingly, how should theinformation sources in the data be organized? their multidimensionalitydefies classification into a simple hierarchical framework. four logicaldimensions of organization of the human factors data immediately come tomind. that is, such data can be organized according to:¥the domain of applicability (e.g., computer, transportation, consumerproduct),¥the functions addressed (e.g., control, communications, monitoring),¥the relevant psychological components (e.g., perception, memory,attention), and¥the chronological order of the study.other dimensions are also possible.the difficulty in organizing and condensing the entire contents of thefluid database makes a menu structure generally unwieldy as a search mechansim(although menus have sometimes been employed in frontend database aidsand some very specialized domain databases, such as cansearch, anexpert system to search cancer therapy literature, described by pollitt, 1987).furthermore, menus do not offer search power for complex queries. instead, the command mode, usually via key word entry, places the user in anactive search role (shneiderman, 1987) and is commonly used to enact thesearch request. in order to generate sets and subsets of information items, auser constructs a query statement that is then compared against a documentrepresentation via some information retrieval technique (belkin and croft,1987). the information system may employ any one of a number of information retrieval techniques. the most common method used today in largeoperational systems is the exact match, whereby the usersõ query statementemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmust exactly match the document representation, often described by keywords, in order for a document to be recovered. this method may involveboolean, string, or fulltext search. exact match techniques generally resultin highprecision retrieval but low recall. other retrieval methodsñpartialmatch techniquesñcompare the query with a document or group of documents represented as sets of features or index terms. these terms areassigned a priori by either human indexers or machineautomated processes.documents are then ranked or recovered based upon some measure of thesimilarity (e.g., probabilistic, vectorspace, cluster, fuzzy set, spreading activation) between the query and document representation.some key word searches are performed relatively easily. these generally encompass what has been termed knownitem (blair, 1984) or dataretrieval (vigil, 1985) searches, such as when a user seeks a specific knowntitle, author, date, or isbn number of a record. other types of searches(topical or subject searches), requiring more complex strategies and problemsolving behaviors, are generally less effective (muckler, 1987). this islargely because users have trouble translating concepts into the formal logicof the computer. in indexed databases, the key words may not correspondto the userõs representation of the terms. in fulltext databases, there maybe problems with synonymy and imprecise language. in both, key wordsystems users often experience difficulty in constructing and manipulatingboolean statements.to assist users in their search tasks, artificial intelligence techniquesare increasingly being applied to information system design. successfulprototype systems to date have already automated many of the mechanicalaspects of the search process that were problematic for users. examplesinclude guidance in connecting to an online service or database, downloading results, and translating the user query into a boolean statement (hawkins,1988). the more intellectual components of the search process, such as theformulation of the search query and selection of a search strategy, however,are much less well understood, although they have received attention. forthese latter research attempts, a major focus has been describing the knowledge people use when searching for information, with the goal of incorporating this knowledge into the expert system (e.g., croft and thompson,1987).other research has examined various aspects of the cognitive processesinvolved in information search, including learning (e.g., polson and friedman,1988), problem solving (e.g., chen and dhar, 1991), memory (e.g., prasseet al., 1988), and comprehension, again with the aim of supporting information systems design. for instance, in their research on problemsolvingbehavior in information search, chen and dhar (1991) identified five strategies used during online catalog search and reported improved performancewith a system redesigned to respond to these strategies. other problememerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability209solving research has included identification of search tactics (bates, 1986),development and selection of search strategy (brooks et al., 1986), identification of heuristics used in search formulation (harter and peters, 1985),and identification of query formulation subtasks (harter, 1986). some research has also focused on developing user models that can be incorporatedinto an intelligent system to enhance its capability to respond to the variedneeds and the inherent flexibility of individual users (e.g., brooks et al.,1986). modeling knowledge acquisition has also been of interest as a wayto facilitate machine learning that will allow intelligent systems to buildtheir own capabilities over time.drenth et al. (1991) noted, however, that these models have rarely focused on anything beyond task identification and documentation of procedures. our understanding of these cognitive processes remains limited. wehave no comprehensive picture of the knowledge and expertise underlyingthe intellectual component of the search process, in part because of thefailure to attend to methodological issues. much of the behavior involvedin humancomputer interaction is covert. if we are to explore informationretrieval behavior within a research paradigm reflecting realistic operationalsettings and constraints, we must identify and use nontraditional techniques(e.g., verbal protocol analysis, critical incident technique; flanagan, 1954).little attention to date has been devoted to exploring these alternative approaches or to developing innovative techniques to elicit and analyze data.other considerations must also be addressed before flexible, powerful,and intelligent intermediaries can truly be implemented and made availablefor use by the general population. a critical but rarely addressed issueconcerns the value of information. what attributes define the subjectivevalue or usefulness of information to the user (morehead and rouse, 1985)?how much responsibility should the computer be given for deciding (and,therefore, providing) what is of value, and what is not? how much information (title? abstract?) should be provided to users to help define therelevant set? can the user specify the necessary attributes of value inadvance of a search in such a way that an expert system could meaningfullyuse these to guide the search and retrieval process?a somewhat related issue concerns the evaluation of retrieval systemperformance. we have noted hints and some documentation of the less thanadequate performance of many database searches (mann, 1987) but no formal procedure for evaluating their performance level is available. even asimple signal detection theory analysis of hits and misses begs the questionof what is considered signal and what is noise (granda and halsteadnussloch,1988; morehead and rouse, 1985). it may be that the evaluation of retrieval performance needs to encompass the use of the information, that is,how the information accessed affects task decisions (see hewins, 1990).evaluating retrieval performance becomes particularly complex whenemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe usersõ goals are not restricted to locating a number of cases with certainattributes and examining each in detail but include understanding more global aspects of the database, such as the correlations or constraints within thedatabaseñfor example, whether human factors studies involving group processes are related primarily to training or to performance. this kind ofunderstanding is often achieved through browsing, and good performancemetrics have not been established for browsing.our discussion of fluid domains has focused on the information searchprocess. as in restricted domains, it is reasonable to suppose that searchperformance will be supported if effective graphic displays to support visualization of the database are available. however, three features of fluiddatabases present challenges for the design of such displays. first, the sizeof fluid databases may be overwhelming, so that very little of the relevantdatabase can be viewed at any one time, and still less of it can be reviewedin any detail (e.g., the text that might describe a particular case). consider,for example, how extensive is the human factors database of all articlespublished in the human factors journal, human factors proceedings, ergonomics, and applied ergonomics. second, database browsing is bestdone flexibly, in real time, so that sometimes a user can òunpackó andexamine a particular item or set of items while at other times he or shemight merely want to note the location of the items in relationship to otheritems (i.e., the user should be able to òzoom inó and òzoom outó to variouslevels of detail). this capability might, for example, help define òclustersóor òuse groups,ó or it might allow the user to determine the correspondence(or lack of correspondence) between the independent data sets of the sameunderlying space. for example, the density of researchers actively workingin certain areas within a particular field could be overlaid on a representation of the frequency of problems calling for research in that field, in orderto determine if there is a mismatch and how that mismatch might best beaddressed. third, the structure of such data may both be ill defined (i.e.,different from user to user) and have a complex relational structure thatdoes not easily lend itself to a twodimensional visual rendering. for example, it is clear that many of the terms relating items within a databasehave òanalogó characteristics so that the spatial proximity between items isa meaningful semantic concept. the degree of similarity between the domain represented by two cases (e.g., studies or incidents) is one example.two legal cases may deal with identical circumstances or with circumstances that have varying levels of similarity. analog relations might alsobe defined in terms of the date of court proceedings, the level of the court,and so on. these analog characteristics make òdistanceó a relevant conceptfor the database study. but how distance in a multidimensional space isbest displayed in a way that is meaningful to and interpretable by the user isemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability211not well understood. a threedimensional structure calls into play issues ofthreedimensional graphics (to be discussed below), while spatial dimensionality greater than three will not easily be envisioned. recent advancesin computer graphics displays, such as the information visualizer system,the òdata wall,ó and the òcam tree,ó give innovative solutions to these problems (card et al., 1990; clarkson, 1991). the data wall, for example, is athreedimensional rendering of a wall (actually a perspective building) uponwhose surfaces reside visible information nodes. these can be organizedaccording to any twodimensional structure and examined at any level ofdistance (or detail) by zooming in and out. the cam tree allows visualrepresentation and examination of a threedimensional hierarchical database. newby (1992) has explored issues in navigating through the threedimensional spatial representation of bibliographical databases.the issue of the visual representation of largescale databases brings usto the third form of database: one in which the data are those revealed byscientific inquiry (e.g., scientific experiments, metaanalysis of experimental results, survey data); this defines a set of research issues related toscientific visualization.scientific visualizationthe availability of massive amounts of scientific data in domains suchas meteorology, geology, demographics, and microbiology, coupled withthe power of computer graphics, has enabled the scientist to visualize datain a variety of sophisticated forms (zorpette, 1989). scientific visualizationboth allows and exploits such capabilities as flexibility of representation(e.g., twodimensional vs. rotating threedimensional views, various colorcoding options), highdimensionality renderings, dynamic updating, and multiformat representation such as windowing text, graphics, and sound. however, the rapid proliferation of such graphics capabilities has somewhatoutstripped the development and application of human factors principles fortheir appropriate employment.in fact, a review of the literature reveals very few empirical studies thathave evaluated the effectiveness of different forms of data representationfor the understanding of complex data sets (jensen and anderson, 1987; liuand wickens, 1992; merwin and wickens, 1991). this paucity of data is, inpart, understandable. the advanced display technology is often complex,expensive, and hard to tailor in a way that is consistent with experimentalprotocol. furthermore, it is extremely challenging to develop experimentalquestions that would correspond to the kinds of loosely structured, oftenexploratory questions that scientists typically ask of their data. the òtaskanalysisó of scientific inquiry is not well understood.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhuman factors issuesin the previous section, we described three general domains of information representation, each of which can potentially be served by advancedinteractive display technology. we now directly consider the human factorsand human performance research issues associated with this technology.cognitive task analysissome research effort must be devoted to carrying out comprehensivetask analyses of users interacting with complex databases. this includesusers of complex, illstructured information databases performing tasks of abrowsing nature as well as scientists attempting to gain insight from complex data (langley et al., 1987). the need for cognitive task analysis hasdirect relevance for the research issues on mental models, automation, andexpert systems that are suggested below.mental modelsinquiry must continue on the mental models that users have of bothrestricted and fluid databases (carroll and olson, 1987). this remains akey issue because of our current awareness that the effectiveness of database retrieval depends on how congruent the organization of the databaseand the navigational mechanism for traversing it are to the userõs mentalmodels (allen, 1991; seidler and wickens, 1992). yet how these modelsshould be assessed, how flexible they are within and between users, andhow different mental models should be òaveragedó across users all remainissues of considerable uncertainty.user models, automation, and expert systemsdistinct from the userõs model of the system is the systemõs model ofthe user. this knowledge is essential for the effective development andimplementation of automation and expert systems that will support information accessibility. the issue cuts across all three domains discussed above.from a computerõs point of view, the issue is: òwhat is the user trying toachieve at this moment and how can i best satisfy those needs?ó it is clearthat such answers must be based on insight gained from research in the twoprevious areas.flexibility versus consistencyautomated systems, as we described above, will attempt to adapt themselves flexibly to suit the momentary needs of the human user. yet tooemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability213much adaptability may well be counterproductive. if a wellintentioned,adaptive change in carrying out a command occurs when the user does notexpect (or need) it, considerable harm could result. yet the research community to date has provided little guidance on the level of sophistication atwhich intelligent adaptability may stop being beneficial and may actuallybe harmful. when, in short, is consistency better than flexibility?methodologyin order to grasp the intricacies underlying information retrieval in allthree domains, we must continue to develop and assess ways to explore userbehavior in contexts reflecting realistic operational constraints. also acutelyneeded are meaningful, practical metrics that can be used to consistentlyevaluate performance within and across systems. these metrics will haveto be sensitive to system usability (see shneiderman, 1987), quality of information, problem context, and resolution.greater attention to these methodological issues will allow studies tocomplement one another, leading, over time, to the development of comprehensive theories of humancomputer interaction that can be used to guideeffective system design.the spatial metaphorin each domain, we have argued that there are analog dimensions ofrelatedness, similarity, and ordering that may often be best served within aspatial framework. this, of course, is definitely true with many aspects ofscientific visualization, such as the geosciences, in which euclidian space isan underlying dimension of the data.given also that humans have extensive familiarity navigating and manipulating in space, a strong argument can be made for exploiting the spatial designs of databases and information networks. yet these design decisions bring with them a number of unresolved issues relating to navigationand lostness (billingsley, 1982; gluschko, 1990; mackinlay et al., 1991).some examples of research issues are the following:¥how should information for very large databases be portrayed, whenusers may need the flexibility to zoom in to higher levels of detail? whatlevels of detail and/or abstraction are necessary?¥what sort of options should a user have to navigate through aninformation base? should these be defined by spatial coordinates, nodes, orkey words? should there be constraints on motion (e.g., only along x, y,and z coordinate axes)? how many user options for navigation should beemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchavailable? what are the best control devices for an operator to navigatethrough this òvirtual information spaceó (card et al., 1990)?¥what are the best ways of conveying information in a dimensionality greater than two? if some representation of threedimensional space isused, what depth cues are necessary to provide a salient sense of depth fordifferent kinds of databases (wickens et al., 1989)? should depth be absolute or ordinal? when should perspective be used to convey informationregarding a third dimension and when should color or intensity be employedinstead? when should the user be presented with two twodimensionalplans or views? when the dimensionality expands beyond three, the displayformatting issues grow exponentially. other important research issuesrelate to the assignment of display dimensions to their referents (i.e., semantic dimensions). are some assignments better than others? are somedisplay dimensions best for representing categorical, rather than continuous,semantic dimensions?¥the issue of spatial representation is closely tied to the relatedconcept of virtual reality (eglowstein, 1990; pausch, 1991), the attempt torender all aspects of database interaction, not just the visual display characteristics, in a threedimensional spatial mode. these use such features asdirect hand position sensing with simulated tactile feedback, spatially localized sound sources, and an òinsideoutó perspective. scores of potentialapplications have been proposed and, in some instances, demonstrated: fromexploratory surgery to architectural design to scientific inquiry to education. certainly human factors concerns relate to the òlevel of realityó thatbest supports performance. it is, for example, well recognized in both thetraining and the system design community that there are times when morereality does not support better performance; at those times performance isbetter supported by more abstract displays or discrete controls (hutchins etal., 1985; jones et al., 1985; wickens, 1992). other human factors issuespertain to fidelity tradeoffs that may be imposed by hardware limitations.can some image resolution be sacrificed to obtain faster speed? or shouldthe opposite tradeoff be preferred (pausch, 1991)? there is also an intriguing possible tradeoff between performance and learning. to what extentdo the features of virtual reality that support better performance within avirtual world actually inhibit the learning and longterm retention about themore abstract properties of that world (wickens, 1992)?training issuesthe issue of training overlaps with issues of information access andutilization in at least three respects. first, it is apparent that adequate use ofinformation technology will often depend upon users being trained early intheir careers about the value and importance of computerbased informationemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability215systems. this lesson has been well learned in the medical profession, inwhich large numbers of health care professionals, untrained in medical information services, now fail to make use of the advantages those servicesprovide (see chapter 4).the second issue relates back to user models. different levels of userexperience may dictate very different structuring needs of information systems (allen, 1991). hence, intelligent interfaces should be quite attentiveboth to the userõs level of knowledge about the domain represented in thedatabase and to the userõs knowledge of the interface itself. finally, thereis the issue of the use of the interface tool itself to train or educate learnerusers about the information it contains. as we have reported elsewhere(wickens, 1992), there really is very little hard evidence that the extensiveautomated flexibility of an information database improves usersõ ability tomaster the information in it.referencesallen, b.l.1991cognitive research in information science: implications for design. annual review of information science and technology 26:337.andre, a.d., and c.d. wickens1992compatibility and consistency in displaycontrol systems: implications for aircraft decision aid design. human factors 34(6): 639653.bates, m.j.1986subject access in online catalogs: a design model. journal of the americansociety for information science 37:357376.belkin, n.j., and w.b. croft1987retrieval techniques. annual review of information science and technology 22:109145.bell, d.1973the coming of the postindustrial society. new york: basic books.billingsley, p.a.1982navigation through hierarchical menu structures: does it help to have a map? pp.103107 in proceedings of the 26th annual meeting of the human factors society.santa monica, calif.: human factors society.blair, d.c.1984the management of information: basic distinctions. sloan management review26(1):1323.blair, d.c., and m.e. maron1985an evaluation of retrieval effectiveness for a fulltext document retrieval system.communications of the acm 28(3):289299.boehmdavis, d.a., r.w. holt, and a.c. schultz1992the role of program structure in software maintenance. international journal ofmanmachine studies 36:2163.brooks, h.m., p.j. daniels, and n.j. belkin1986research on information interaction and intelligent information provision mechanisms. journal of information science: principles and practice 12(1):3744.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcard, s.k.1982user perceptual mechanisms in search of computer command menus. pp. 190196in chi õ82 conference on human factors in computer science. new york:association for computing machinery.card, s.k., j.d. mackinlay, and g.g. robertson1990the design space of input devices. pp. 117124 in chi proceedings. new york:association for computing machinery.carroll, j.m., and j.r. olson, eds.1987mental models in humancomputer interaction. committee on human factors,national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.chen, h., and v. dhar1991cognitive process as a basic for intelligent retrieval systems design. informationprocessing and management 27(5):405432.clarkson, m.a.1991an easier interface. byte february:277282.croft, w.b., and r.h. thompson1987i3r: a new approach to the design of document retrieval systems. journal of theamerican society for information science 36(6):389404.curran, j.1991multidimensional els user interface. sae technical paper series 912108. presented at the aerospace technology conference and exposition, september 2326,long beach, calif.drenth, h., a. morris, and g. tseng1991expert systems as information intermediaries. annual review of information science and technology 26:113153.durding, b.m., c.a. becker, and j.d. gould1977data organization. human factors 19:114.eglowstein, h.1990reach out and touch your data. byte july:283290.fisher, d.l., e.j. yungkurth, and s.m. moss1990optimal menu hierarchy design: syntax and semantics. human factors 32:665683.flanagan, j.c.1954the critical incident technique. psychological bulletin 51(4):327358.giroux, l., and r. belleau1986whatõs on the menu? the influence of menu content on the selection process.behavior and information technology 5:169172.gluschko, r.j.1990hypertext: prospects and problems for crew system design. cseriac soar9022. wrightpatterson air force base, ohio: cseriac.granda, r.e., and r. halsteadnussloch1988the perceived usefulness of computer information sources: a field study. ibmtechnical report tr00.3495. poughkeepsie, n.y.: ibm.harter, s.p.1986online information retrieval: concepts, principles, and techniques. orlando,fla.: academic press.harter, s.p., and a.r. peters1985heuristics for online information retrieval: a typology and preliminary listing.online review 9(5):407424.hawkins, f.1988human factors in flight. brookfield, vt.: gower.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability217hewins, e.t.1990information need and use studies. annual review of information science andtechnology 25:145172.hubbard, s., j.e. henney, and v.t. devita, jr.1987a computer data base for information on cancer treatment. new england journalof medicine 316:315318.hutchins, e.l., j.d. hollan, and d.a. norman1985direct manipulation interfaces. humancomputer interaction 1(4):311338.huth, e.j.1989the underused medical literature. annals of internal medicine 110(2):99100.jensen, c.r., and l.a. anderson1987comparing three dimensional representation of data to scatterplots. pp. 11741178 in proceedings of the 31st annual meeting of the human factors society.santa monica, calif.: human factors society.jones, e.r., r.t. hennessy, and s. deutch, eds.1985human factors aspects of simulation. committee on human factors, nationalresearch council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.kiger, j.l.1984the depth/breadth tradeoff in the design of menudriven user interfaces. international journal of manmachine studies 20:201213.king, d.w., d.d. mcdonald, and n.k. roderer1981scientific journals in the united states: their production, use and economics.stroudsburg, pa.: hutchinson ross.koenig, m.e.d.1990information services and downstream productivity. annual review of informationscience and technology 25:5586.langley, p., h.a. simon, g.l. bradshaw, and j.m. zytkow1987scientific discovery: computational explorations of the creative processes. cambridge,mass.: mit press.latremouille, s., and e.s. lee1981the design of videotex tree indexes: the use of descriptors and the enhancementof single index pages. pp. 65112 in d. phillips, ed., telidon behavioral researchii: the design of videotex tree indexes. ottawa, canada: department of communications.liu, y., and c.d. wickens1992visual scanning with or without spatial uncertainty and divided and selective attention. acta psychologica 79:131153.lucky, r.w.1989silicon dreams: information, man and machine. new york: st. martinõs press.macgregor, d., b. fischhoff, and l. blackshaw1987search success and expectations with a computer interface. information processing and management 23(5):419432.mackinlay, j.d., g.g. robertson, and s.k. card1991the perspective wall: detail and context smoothly integrated. pp. 173179 in s.p.robertson, g.m. olson, and j.s. olson, eds., human factors in computing systems. reaching through technology. chi ô91. new york: association forcomputing machinery.mann, t.1987computer searches. pp. 80102 (chapter 9) in a guide to library researchmethods. new york: oxford university press.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmerwin, d.h., and c.d. wickens1991comparison of 2d planar and 3d perspective display formats in multidimensionaldata visualization. in proceedings of the international society for optical engineering. bellingham, wash.: spie.miller, d.p.1981the depth/breadth tradeoff in hierarchical computer menus. pp. 296300 in proceedings of the 25th annual meeting of the human factors society. santa monica,calif.: human factors society.morehead, d.r., and w.b. rouse1985computeraided searching of bibliographic databases: on line estimation of thevalue of information. information processing and management 21:387399.muckler, f.a.1987the humancomputer interface: the past 35 years and the next 35 years. in g.salvendy, ed., cognitive engineering in the design of humancomputer interaction and expert systems. proceedings of the second international conference onhumancomputer interaction, honolulu, hawaii. amsterdam, netherlands: elsevier.newby, g.b.1992an investigation of the role of navigation for information retrieval. asis meeting.norman, k.1991the psychology of menu selection. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.pausch, r.1991virtual reality on five dollars a day. pp. 265269 in proceedings chi ô91. newyork: association for computing machinery.pejtersen, a.m.1989the book house: modeling usersõ needs and search strategies as a basis forsystem design. risom2794. roskilde, denmark: riso national library, department of information technology.pollitt, a.s.1987cansearch: an expert systems approach to document retrieval. informationprocessing and management 23(2):119138.polson, m.c., and a. friedman1988tasksharing within and between hemispheres: a multipleresources approach.human factors 30(5):633643.prasse, m.j., m. dilon, m.j. gordon, b. mortland, and a. repka1988ftas: a fulltext access system. pp. 327332 in m.e. williams and t.h. hogan,comps., proceedings of the 9th national online meeting.roskehofstrand, r.j., and k.r. paap1986cognitive networks as a guide to menu organization: an application in the automated cockpit. ergonomics 29(11):13011311.salvaggio, j.l.1989the information society: economic, social, and structural issues. hillsdale,n.j.: lawrence erlbaum.seidler, k.s., and c.d. wickens1992distance and organization in multifunction displays. human factors 34:555569.shneiderman, b.1987designing the user interface: strategies for effective humancomputer interaction. reading, mass.: addisonwesley.snowberry, k., s.r. parkinson, and n. sisson1983computer display menus. ergonomics 26(7):699712.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information access and usability2191985effects of help fields on navigating through hierarchical menu structures. international journal of manmachine studies 22:479491.stonier, t.1983the wealth of information: a profile of the postindustrial economy. london,england: methuen london in association with thames television international.vigil, p.1985computer literacy and the two cultures revisited. pp. 240242 in c.a. parkhurst,ed., proceedings of the american society for information science (asis) 48thannual meeting. white plains, n.y.: knowledge industry publications, inc.vincente, k.j., and r.c. williges1988accommodating individual differences in searching a hierarchical file system. international journal of manmachine studies 29:647668.wickens, c.d.1992engineering psychology and human performance, 2nd ed. new york: harpercollins.wickens, c.d., s. todd, and k. seidler1989threedimensional displays: perception, implementation, and applications. universityof illinois institute of aviation technical report arl8911/cseriac891. alsocseriac soar 89001, aamrl, december. wrightpatterson air force base,ohio. savoy, ill.: aviation research laboratory.wiener, e.1989errors and error management in high technology aircraft. in proceedings of the7th meeting on aeronautic and space medicine, june, paris.williams, h.p., m.p. tham, and c.d. wickens1992resource management and geographic disorientation in aviation incidents: areview of the asrs database. technical report arl923/nasa922. savoy:university of illinois, aviation research laboratory.wilson, s.r., n. starrschneidkraut, and m.d. cooper1989use of the critical incident technique to evaluate the impact of medline. finalreport air646009/89fr; nlm/ope90/01. palo alto, calif.: american institutes for research in the behavioral sciences.zorpette, g.1989the main event. ieee spectrum 26(1):28.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research2208emerging technologies in work designpaul a. attewell, beverly m. huey, neville p. moray,and penelope m. sandersonintroductionthe last 15 years have seen dramatic changes in the competitive situation of many sectors of the u.s. economy and also in the levels of investment in and deployment of new technologies. these developments presentnew challenges for human factors specialists. they raise issues about howto design jobs to make sure that the latest technologies fulfill their promiseof raising industrial productivity and competitiveness. in addition, theystimulate conceptual questioning about the proper relationship of humans,machines, and systems. experiences, both good and bad, with emergingtechnologies have stimulated new philosophies of design, have highlightedgaps in our research knowledge, and have suggested new avenues for human factors research. in this chapter we examine the implications of recenttechnological and economic changes for job design and for research in thehuman factors community.the economic and technological contextover the last two decades, the world economy has been rapidly shiftingfrom a structure in which a few geographic centers dominated world tradeto a more complex, multicentered structure. the rapid expansion of worldtrade has been accompanied by the emergence of new industrial powers andthe erosion of dominance of older centers (national research council, 1990).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design221in the united states, this was experienced, during the 1980s, as a crisis ofcompetitiveness (presidentõs commission on industrial competitiveness, 1985).in many industries, u.s. firms lost substantial domestic market shares toforeign imports, and a similar loss occurred in export markets.industrial technology is viewed by many as critical for success in thisenvironment of intensified competition, and a backwardness in utilizingadvanced technologies in manufacturing has been identified as one cause ofthe earlier u.s. decline (jaikumar, 1986; national academy of engineering,1988; adler, 1991). out of these concerns came several policy recommendations for u.s. firms: among these were that u.s. firms make changes intraditional product development processes, accelerate the implementation ofnew technologies, adopt strategies of continuous improvement, and embracepractices that encourage employee involvement. more recently, the federalgovernment has embraced total quality management (tqm), not only as astrategy for itself but also as a requirement for its industrial suppliers.the recommendations and diagnoses of several commissions emergedjust as many u.s. firms were implementing a host of interlinked organizational changesñfrom outsourcing to delayering to using highperformancework teamsñwhile making substantial technological investment, most notably in computers, communications, and robotic technologies. the implementation of this mix of technological and organizational change was farfrom smooth. although there are examples of increased productivity, thereare also troubling indications that some technology investments have failedto boost productivity to the extent expected (adler, 1991; attewell, 1994;computer science and telecommunications board, 1994).the problems of design, implementation, and operation of new technologies have therefore moved to center stage. human factors specialistsare faced with technologies that are complex in purely engineering termsbut whose effectiveness also appears to depend on teamwork and a host ofother organizational innovations (national research council, 1986; adler,1991; national academy of engineering/national research council, 1991).job designers therefore face a dual task: to design jobs to take advantage ofnew technologies while fitting these jobs into new organizational structuresand strategies.the changing goals of job designearly in this century frederick taylor (1911) and the gilbreths ([1917]1973) were the first to argue that job design should be undertaken in asystematic manner, drawing upon scientific knowledge of human motor andcognitive capacities, of fatigue, and of attention span. later, the sociotechnical systems perspective added the idea that effective work designemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchmust take into account the interactions among individuals in the workplaceas well as the interplay of human and machine.drawing upon these insights, various methodologies have developedfor analyzing jobs to discover their constituent tasks, and rules of bestpractice have emerged about how to combine tasks most effectively, whereto draw boundaries between jobs, and how to join jobs together.however, the principles and practices of job design have not remainedconstant over the last half century, in part because the goals of design haveshifted. different design philosophies or theories focus on optimizing different aspects of work. over time, design philosophies have shifted asdifferent goals or dimensions of work rise and fall in importance. thispoint can best be illustrated by a brief historical review of the major approaches to job design and a consideration of some new goals of workdesign that have emerged or have at least become more salient in recentyears.taylorism or scientific management dominated job design prior to worldwar ii. as a theory of design, it was centrally concerned with the optimization of physical effort in order to increase speed of production. its variousoffshoots, such as time and motion study, sought to eliminate superfluousmovement through design of both the job and its attendant machinery (jigs,machine tools, feeding mechanisms, etc.). but taylorist attempts to optimize on physical effort and speed had important consequences for otheraspects of the job:¥there was a separation of òindirect laboró (planning, preparation,maintenance, quality control) from direct labor.¥jobs were subdivided as far as possible, so that each job encompassed a narrow range of repetitve tasks. this was intended to enhancework speed and reduce the time needed to learn the job.¥worker discretion was as far as possible eliminated in favor ofòone best wayó (the designerõs way) to accomplish the tasks (knights et al.,1985).the introduction of the assembly line, intended to optimize the efficiency and flow of production, led to further changes in job design. jobswere designed around the need for continuous (uninterrupted) production.machine tools became highly specialized, and feed and conveying operations were automated whenever possible. assembly line jobs encompassedonly a few repetitive tasks requiring minimal discretion or knowledge. theemphasis was on speed, simplicity, and stamina. the resulting work designphilosophy, an extension of taylorism, is often called òfordism.ótaylorism and fordism were fairly successful as theories of work design, in terms of their professed goals. but they eventually came underemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design223great criticism because they unintentionally degraded important aspects ofwork and, therefore, undermined other goals of production. from the 1950sonward, sociologists demonstrated that taylorized assembly line jobs wereboring yet physically demanding, leading to stress, low worker motivation,frequent absenteeism, and labor conflict (walker and guest, 1952; kornhauser,1965). ultimately, this led to the emergence of a new work design movement, the human relations approach (mcgregor, 1960), which stressed avery different goal for job designñimproving job satisfaction or psychological fulfillment as a means of increasing workersõ motivation.this goal implied very different design principles:¥to encourage meaningful work and a sense of achievement, multiple tasks should be grouped into a single job in such a way that an individual could gain a sense of completion.¥task variety and job rotation are desirable.¥some choice over the sequencing of work, methods, and speedshould be left to the employee.the human relations approach to work design expanded from the 1950son and became linked to a movement within job design known as the òquality of work lifeó movement. the approach remains especially salient wherehigh levels of worker motivation (high initiative, good judgment, and carefulness) are important requirements of production processes.qualitythe very success of fordism in maintaining the high speed of the assembly line led, in many cases, to chronic problems with the quality ofproducts. alienated automobile assembly line workers who were requiredto work at a fast pace had a tendency to allow poorly constructed cars to goforward even when there were obvious flaws. workers would take shortcuts that enabled them to keep a fast pace but that could undermine thequality of the product.with intensified international competition from betterquality importedgoods in the 1980s, the inferior quality of some u.s.made goods became amajor worry. attaining and maintaining high standards of quality consequently became a central preoccupation in many u.s. manufacturing firms(deming, 1986). this in turn has influenced job design. quality testing hasbeen reintegrated into many machine operatorsõ and assembly line workersõjobs: instead of a separate qualitytesting staff at the end of the productionprocess, assembly line and other workers have been encouraged to òbuildquality inó and prevent bad work from going forward. there has been arenewed emphasis on job rotation (even during a single day) and on payingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchworkers for developing maintenance and repair skills. some productionjobs have been broadened to include cleaning oneõs machine and surrounding areas, under the logic that this increases a sense of ownership and pridein oneõs work.a commitment to highquality products places new or increased performance demands on production employees. there is a greater need forrelatively intangible skills such as taking responsibility and showing goodjudgment: for example, many of todayõs assembly line employees are empowered to pull the òandon cordó that brings the assembly line to a halt ifthey see a quality problem. this was not the case in taylorist or fordist jobdesigns. other new skills are intellectual, such as the substantial statisticaland conceptual skills expected of workers who participate in quality circles.cole (1979) delineates the mathematical knowledge required for statisticalcontrol procedures, including familiarity with elementary probability theory,statistical variance, and quasiexperimental approaches to diagnosing sourcesof error.the growth of the total quality management movement has resulted inan increased respect for the intellectual contributions of shopfloor andoffice workers. in many workplaces they are encouraged to join qualitycircles to look for ways to improve production processes and to save resources. they may also be trained in group problemsolving techniques andin teamwork more generally.in addition to changing the work lives of many employees, tqmõsemphasis on quality has highlighted certain gaps in the human factorsõscientific knowledge base. one important kind of quality flaw stems fromoperator error. yet we know surprisingly little about the causes and sourcesof human error and even less about designing jobs and processes to reducethe frequency and seriousness of errors. research is also needed to integrate the knowledge base on human error into design principles for machinery, displays, work procedures, and communications processes. this is oneof several challenges that emerging technologies and the current economicclimate pose for human factors research.workplace health and safetyanother equally important goal of work design, made more prominentby recent technological developments, is the maintenance and improvementof workplace health and safety. recent concerns over workplace safety andoccupational health reflect occupational safety and health administrationlegislation in the united states and, in scandinavia and elsewhere in europe, the influence of trade unions, which have targeted workplace health asa major issue (butera and thurman, 1990). employees are demanding saferworkplaces; legislation has declared that to be their right and has placed anemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design225obligation upon employers to provide safe jobs. in the united states, burgeoning health insurance and disability costs related to workplace illnessesprovide an additional powerful impetus for employers to attend to theseproblems; this will ultimately result in demands for safer, healthier workplaces via betterengineered and designed work (see chapter 4).designing jobs and work processes with health and safety in mind buildson traditional ergonomic concerns. machine guards, good lighting and airquality, and concerns about protection from noise, lifting and stretching,fatigue and attention span, and legibility of signs and displays are all longstanding human factors issues. they will remain basic to design for tomorrowõsworkplaces. but the range of factors to be considered in work design willprobably need to be broadened to include other, more social and psychological stressors in the workplace.consider, for example, the recent upswing in musculoskeletal disordersfound among employees who work at computer terminals. in certain u.s.industries, such as telephone companies and newspaper offices, epidemiologists have documented recent miniepidemics of both wrist pain and neckand upperback problems, socalled òrepetitive strain disorders.ó such complaintsmay affect from 20 to 40 percent of workers in certain workplaces. theproblems span a spectrum from severe conditionsñsuch as carpal tunnelsyndrome, which can be so painful that sufferers are unable to work andtherefore often resort to surgeryñto less dramatic, but still consequential,intermittent pain, which can affect workplace productivity and employeemorale.the traditional ergonomic response to such repetitive strain disorders isto study and reengineer workplace machinery, utilizing our knowledge aboutvision, posture, hand motion, and other areas. thus, we have seen thedesign of better chairs, video display terminals, lighting, and keyboards,drawing upon the human factors knowledge base.however, while giving traditional ergonomic factors their due, the epidemiological research suggests that additional sociopsychological factorsmay be at work to create job stress that is in turn related to the physicalsymptoms of repetitive strain disorders. these disorders can be found evenin offices that have invested in ergonomically sound equipment. epidemiologists at the national institute of occupational safety and health andelsewhere have documented that a variety of job stressorsñfrom fear of jobloss to the variability of work, from the existence of deadlines to the natureof supervision and surveillanceñare related to these disorders in certainworkplaces. it will take considerable design ingenuity to minimize suchstressors.current design responses to repetitive strain disorders include enhancing workgroup dynamics and scheduling rest breaks and job rotation, aswell as designing better keyboards, monitors, and other equipment. unforemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtunately, there is little research that examines whether these responses areeffective in countering the spread of repetitive strain disorders. beyondstudying the efficacy of these particular interventions, there is a need forhuman factors specialists to orient research toward the intersection of ergonomic knowledge, sociotechnical factors, and epidemiology with the goal ofunderstanding the links between sociotechnical design, workplace stress,and worker health.intellectual work and teamworkintellectual workfor several decades the proportion of the labor force in whitecollarjobs has been growing, with managerial, professional, and technical occupations leading the way. as òknowledge workó has come to dominate theinformation economy, job design has had to embrace new concepts andapproaches especially suited to intellectual and informational jobs. becauseknowledge workers work at machines, most notably computers, traditionalergonomic concerns with seating, keyboards, and displays remain important. much attention has also been focused on such humancomputer interfaces as displays of information and cognitive maps. but beyond this,computing technologies have changedñand continue to changeñthe division of labor and the content of jobs, often in dramatic ways.before computerization, most information jobs in large firms were subject to taylorist design. in insurance offices, for example, paper flowedfrom department to department in a sequence: first to the claims examination department, then to the accounts payable department, then to the checkwriting department, then to bookkeeping. within each department, taskswere narrowly subdivided, routinized, and linked in a chain. each department typically kept its own databases and paper files. thus, a single business process, for example accounts payable or assessing an insurance claim,involved sending the originating paper through a long multistep multidepartment chain, each link of which consisted of a specialized clericalworker perfoming a narrow repetitive task. there tended to be backlogs ofwork in each department, and each department expected a substantial periodof time (e.g., one week) to clear a claim through its part of the process.taylorist design could efficiently process very high volumes of business items, but was slow because of the many handoffs from person toperson. a given claim or payment often took weeks to process from start tofinish, and there was no easy way to locate a particular piece once it hadentered the stream.interactive or realtime computing was widely adopted from the early1970s on, and it made this fine division of labor obsolete. realtime comemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design227puting allowed previously distinct databases to be linked. as soon as apiece of information was entered, all the relevant databases were instantlyupdated to reflect the new datum. a further consequence was that previously separate clerical or informational tasks could now be integrated. so,when an order arrived, a clerk could call up on the computer a database thatwould first determine the customerõs credit, that is, whether any bills wereoutstanding. if the buyer was found creditworthy, the software would presentinventory data to see whether the requested item was in stock. if sufficientstock was available the clerk could have a òpick slipó printed at the warehouse giving the order to ship the goods. at the same time the accountsreceivable database would note that the customer should be charged, and aninvoice would be prepared. and the companyõs books would be updated tonote the additional amount receivable. if the items were not in stock, theclerk could initiate an order for the shop floor to produce the items andcould even (via materials requirements planning, mrp software) set in motion orders for more raw material needed before production could commence.in sum, the interlinked databases allowed for a reintegration of previously fragmented tasks, each of which was previously a separate job in along clerical sequence. instead of simplifying steps, the new design logicwas to give each ordertaking clerk access to all of the steps and activitiesneeded to complete an order, to make a job coincide with the completerange of informational tasks associated with an order. new complementaritiesalso arose between data retrieval, customer service, and data entry. because databases were now easily accessible, it made sense to give computerclerks the role of intermediary between the information system and thecustomer. so a customer could phone and ask the clerk whether certaingoods were available for shipment, and if not, when they could be producedand delivered. at the same time, the clerk could enter data on the specficsof a new order, payment method, and shipping details. thus, onetimehighly specialized and routinized clerks became more multifaceted òcustomer service representativesó (attewell, 1992:7174).at first, job designs like these evolved spontaneously. but experienceswith interactive computer systems have become codified and today inform anew practice of job design known as òbusiness process reengineeringó or(more grandly) òreengineering the corporationó (hammer and champy, 1993).this approach looks for previously fragmented tasks to integrate; it òdelinearizesóand resequences tasks, creates new, broader jobs, and also restructures (typicallyreduces) managerial controls to fit the new, broader division of labor. proponents of the approach claim that it increases productivity, improves service, and enhances job satisfaction.while new information technologies have created many of these multifaceted clerical positions at the lower end of information work, they haveemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchalso stimulated change in higherpaid information work. todayõs managersuse management information systemsñstreams of production and financialdatañto survey and understand their areas of jurisdiction. this in turn canlead to rather different styles of managerial control and decison makingthan those found a generation ago (attewell, 1992), styles that are heavilydependent on quantitative data and computerized decision tools. this canhave both positive and negative consequences. studies of the use of decision tools such as spreadsheet models (e.g., kotteman and remus 1987;kotteman et al., in press) indicate that managers can become dependent onthe use of these techniques even when they fail to produce better (or evenadequate) decisions. in particular, the researchers cited above have foundthat managers systematically overestimate the effectiveness of these methods. they have coined the phrases cognitive conceit and the illusion ofcontrol to describe these effects.such studies indicate an emerging trend in human factors research toexamine trust in machines (and in computers and data) as well as the emotional and cognitive consequences of dependence on cognitive tools such ascomputers. (this is clearly related to the issue of human error discussedearlier.) we shall return below to ways these concerns have become reflected in job design and philosophies of appropriate levels of automation.teamworka rather different aspect of the impact of computer technologies onjobs involves the rising importance of teamwork in modern workplaces.teamwork among small groups of skilled individuals predates the diffusionof information technology: one thinks of physicannurse teams in a hospitaloperating room, the flight team in an aircraft cockpit, and the team ofsailors taking bearings and steering a ship into port. however, severalcommentators have argued that smallgroup teamwork of this kind has become increasingly widespread in the modern workplace, going beyond thetraditional professions and into new work domains. frequently, the tasksinvolved in knowledge work in modern workplaces are highly complex andtherefore benefit from coordinated teams of highly skilled individuals, oftenwith different specialties, working together (peters and waterman, 1983;savage, 1990; drucker 1993:8389; mills, 1991; see also hill, 1992).this increasing emphasis on teamwork presents a challenge to humanfactors researchers and the behavioral science community generally. first,there are lacunae in our basic knowledge of smallgroup dynamics. as arecent review (simpson and wood, 1993) put it: òdespite the widely recognized importance of groups, basic social processes underlying group dynamics have received scant and intermittent attention. this has been paremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design229ticularly true within social psychology.ó (however, see mcgrath, 1984, andhackman, 1987, for a more optimistic view.)second, the research literature on work groups in situñin real worksettings as distinct from laboratory experiments or simulated workgroupsñis sparse. there are, however, notable exceptions, for example, r. helmreichõsresearch on flight cockpit crew dynamics and on operating room surgicalteams.the potential importance (and practical difficulties) of applying humanfactors approaches to the job design of group work or teamwork can beillustrated by the example of software development, a steadily growing areaof employment in our postindustrial economy. most software developmentprojects are carried out by small teams of systems analysts, programmers,and coders. the work is creative, and for that reason uncertain: up to 25percent of projects fail, and cost overruns and missing deadlines are endemic (demarco and lister, 1987; see also computer science and telecommunications board, 1990).given the high cost of software development projects, great effortshave been made to increase the productivity of programming efforts. metricsof productivity and output have been developed (boehm, 1987). new programming languages and software tools abound; it is claimed that many ofthese increase productivity. unfortunately, differences in programming technologydo not explain observed differences in software engineering productivity(demarco and lister, 1987), and the introduction of new programming toolshas not solved problems with software productivity: several studies havefound that the most modern of computer aided software engineering (case)tools are associated with lower productivity (banker et al., 1991; orlikowsky,1988.) thus, the attention of researchers and job designers has been drawnto sociotechnical factors, most notably the processes of coordination anddivision of tasks among team members.perhaps because of the incompleteness of scientific research, one findsdramatically different approaches to job design in these settings. someauthorities, viewing coordination as the achillesõ heel of software teams,pursue design strategies aimed at removing ambiguity and complexity fromteamwork. tasks are decomposed, simplified whenever possible, and organized as modules to reduce the necessity of coordination or interactionamong team members. lines of authority are made as specific as possible,and standard operating procedures are spelled out. meetings are formalizedand scheduled regularly (boehm, 1987; brooks, 1987), and standardizedmethods of documentation and testing are prescribed. this approach hascome to be known as òstructured developmentó or simply as òprogrammingmethodologies.óone difficulty with this approach is that by creating formal structures toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchminimize the burden of coordination and communication among team members, designers may reduce necessary or fruitful commmunication, resultingin inferior performance. kiesler et al. (1994:226) argue that the most productive combination is moderate levels of formalization and structure combined with moderate levels of team communications. at either extremeñhigh structure or high communicationñteam productivity suffers.in contrast, those who take an ethnographically informed approach tojob design for software teams are quite hostile to using formalized methodologies to structure team dynamics and programming. demarco and lister(1987:114) give the following critique:a methodology is a general systems theory of how a whole class of thoughtintensive work ought to be conducted. it comes in the form of a fat bookthat specifies exactly what steps to take at any time, regardless of who isdoing the work, regardless of where or when. . . . methodology is anattempt to centralize thinking. all meaningful decisions are made by themethodology builders, not by the staff assigned to do the work. . . . theydo this by trying to force the work into a fixed mold that guarantees:¥a morass of paperwork,¥a paucity of methods,¥an absence of responsibility, and¥a general loss of motivation.demarco and lister (1987) turn elsewhere for factors that influenceeffective teamwork. they argue that software productivity requires deepthinking as well as communication. they find that modern workplacesrarely provide good environments for thinking, especially for òflow,ó a kindof thinking requiring extended periods of concentration and focus. in manyworkplaces there are frequent interruptions from phone calls and colleagues,and noise levels are highñphenomena inimical to flow. demarco andlister find, for example, that being able to silence oneõs phone makes asubstantial difference in productivity. teams do better if they have receptionists who shield them from interruption. demarco and lister make aseries of suggestions regarding the design of work spaces, noise reduction,recruitment of team members, and style of leadership, which include traditional human factors concerns as well as sociotechnical factors.software development is but one of the numerous contexts in whichteamwork is the preferred strategy for organizing work. but the contrastingprescriptions and beliefs about how to best design teamwork prove that theknowledge base and science behind job design of teamwork are at veryrudimentary stages. this is an area of great promise and great practicalimportance, but one in which relatively little has yet been accomplished.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design231advanced automationas information technologies become increasingly capable of performing a wide range of functions in both manufacturing and whitecollar work,attention has turned to the proper role of humans in the system. there aretwo extreme design philosophies (kantowitz and sorkin, 1987): (1) thehuman should be eliminated entirely from systems, or if that is not possible,the human role should be minimized (i.e., automate as much as is possible)and (2) the human operator should be involved as much as possible in thesystem, even if artificial tasks must be created to accomplish this. the firstphilosophy, which is technologydriven, is defined by decisions about whenand how to automate (air force studies board, 1982), which, in turn, define the role of the operator in the system.researchers have reported that system designers often believe that thegreater the degree of automation the better (bainbridge, 1982; boehmdaviset al., 1983; wiener, 1985; wiener and curry, 1980). however, this movesthe human further from direct contact with the system; this has been foundto sometimes result in negative consequences when the operator is requiredto intervene (air force studies board, 1982). new types of errors or accidents have often been created because automation has changed the nature ofthe humanmachine relationship in unforeseen ways (e.g., hirschhorn, 1984;moray and huey, 1988; nobel, 1984). a workshop on automation (boehmdavis et al., 1983) identified five problems associated with highly automated systems: (1) newly automated systems do not usually provide all theanticipated benefits; (2) when automated equipment fails, the system losescredibility; (3) automation usually increases training requirements; (4) designers often fail to anticipate new problems that will be created by theautomated systems; and (5) automation changes the role of the human fromactive controller to system monitor. numerous other researchers have alsoidentified both pros and cons of automation (bainbridge, 1982; wiener,1985; wiener and curry, 1980; parsons, 1985).thus, many researchers have come to the view that in order to achievehigh levels of productivity, quality, safety, and worker satisfaction and motivation, human and machine skills and intelligence must be integrated.there is a need to complement, not replace, human skills and abilities (havn,1990.) new technologies should be skillenhancing rather than skillreplacing (kidd, 1990).although there has been great investment in advanced automation androbotics in u.s. industry, it has not resulted in a dramatic u.s. lead inmanufacturing technology. one reason seems to be that in the united statesautomation has largely been seen as a chance to reduce the labor force;another reason is the belief that automated equipment is sufficiently intelligent in itself to be run by relatively unqualified, and hence cheap, labor.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchby contrast, in both europe and japan, there has been a tendency to integrate highly qualified labor (e.g., even graduate engineers) into the controlof automated manufacturing equipment.recently, both industrialists and academics (brodner, 1986; kellso, 1989;kuo and hsu, 1990; de greene, 1991) have claimed that the attempt tosubstitute machine for human intelligence in industry has failed, and theyhave called for a better understanding and implementation of a humanmachine symbiosis in manufacturing. in a classical paper, bainbridge (1983)pointed out the òironies of automationó: only those processes that are wellunderstood can be automated; those processes that are poorly understoodare then left to humans, so that progressively the humans face more andmore difficult tasks when systems falter or fail.it is now being realized that advanced automation places great demandson the human workforce and that automation should not amount to òdesigning the human out of the systemó (shaiken, 1984). the question is, rather,how the special characteristics of humans can be integrated into technological systems so that productivity is optimized from the point of view ofproduction level, quality, and safety (wall et al., 1987).sanderson (1989) pointed out a number of aspects of discrete manufacturing in which humans play a central role that is only imperfectly understood, even at the level of the individual operator. to support the integration of humans into manufacturing systems requires that designers, trainers,procedure writers, and all levels of management understand the nature ofthe skills of the human operator at many levels. this means understandingtraditional problems of interface design at the lowest level, through complex activities such as planning, scheduling, expediting, and maintenance,up to the most global level of policy setting by management. indeed, theconcept of macroergonomics has recently been introduced. this refers tothe extremely important role played by managerial and organizational factors in the efficiency of automated and hybrid systems, and to the dynamicsof groups, teams, and crews. it provides a topdown ergonomics to complement the traditional bottomup ergonomics of design.the european economic community (eec) has undertaken a massiveinvestment in the application of human factors to industrial and manufacturing systems of the future. this can be expected to give the europeans alarge lead in integrating human intelligence into manufacturing production,something that will have a great impact on their global competitiveness. inthe united states there are few signs of a change in thinking; many still seeautomation as nothing more than a way to employ inexpensive and relatively unskilled labor to run sophisticated machines. but all the indicatorsare that this will lead to a disastrous failure in competitive manufacturing.there are two main themes that arise from the considerations discussedabove. the first is a drive for research that will improve productivity andemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design233efficiency in industry. the second is a need for research toward a workclimate, culture, and environment that will be humane and fulfilling to theworkforce. thus, all levels of ergonomics will have to be studied. theseinclude the interface design for flexible manufacturing systems and computerintegrated manufacturing, as well as the role of humans in planningand scheduling, in design, in maintenance, and in supervisory control asapplied to discrete manufacturing systems. in addition, we need models ofhumans in discrete manufacturing situations, and a consideration of macroergonomic factors, both theoretical and applied, to support design and systems development.skill requirements in advanced manufacturingas automation advances, the workforce required to operate and maintain it splits into two job classes. one class requires a few highly skilledworkers. tasks for these workers are often intellectually challenging. theseworkers perform the hightechnology jobs called for in, for example, advanced flexible manufacturing technology. the other job class requiresmore workers but places few demands on them for specialized training andeducation. their jobs are generally unrewarding, either intellectually orfinancially. such jobs may remain in the overall job inventory even in thewake of complete automation.in the present state of the art, one problem is that, when systems falteror malfunction, humans are called on to perform tasks that may be beyondtheir capabilities. in such cases, a boring job may suddenly become extremely demanding. it is not clear what level or type of education will bestserve manufacturing industry so as to match the task to the human. if thesophistication of advanced machinery calls for highly qualified operators,how are the jobs to be designed so that such people will not be bored anddissatisfied during normal operation? what steps are needed to enable peoplewith a suitable level of education to be satisfied in operating a highly automated plant?although relatively few manufacturing jobs can give rise to severe hazards (in contrast to chemical industries, the nuclear industry, etc.), there arecertainly problems of both safety and economics when systems fail. it hasbeen said that plants may be designed on the assumption that they will bedown for maintenance and reprogramming for as much as 30 percent oftheir operating time, a situation that is clearly undesirable. we need toknow how to maintain operator skills so that time lost due to accidents andsystem faults is minimized. supervisory control can cause skills to be lostand leave operators unable to cope with abnormal conditions. our understanding of what makes operators intervene to take charge of a falteringautomated system is rudimentary (lee and moray, 1992), and the dynamicsemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchof trust between humans and their machines is far from adequate to defineallocation of function or to design systems that optimize their interaction(zuboff, 1988).hirschhorn (1984), adler (1986), and others have argued that even lowlevel jobs involving computers require greater responsibility on the part ofemployees. errors ramify rapidly through interconnected databases andinformation systems, and such errors are often hard to reverse. consequently, care and highquality work, with attention to detail, are especiallyimportant in these jobs. this again raises the issue of sources of error anderror prevention in computerrelated jobs. we need more empirical studiesof performance errors in a range of computerbased jobs in order to designjob procedures and whole job systems that prevent or minimize error.in transaction processing, continuousflow manufacturing, and severalother jobs using information technologies, computers are programmed totake care of routine cases, leaving human operators with a greater mix oftroubleshooting and handling exceptionsñemployees become monitors,maintenance people, and troubleshooters, rather than òdoers.ó this kind ofmonitoring work can require different skills: more recognition of patterns,more logical or abstract decision making, more learning from rare eventsrather than via frequent repetition (clark et al., 1988:chapter 4).thus, in addition to ergonomic concerns, human factors specialists whoseek to understand the demands of these jobs as an input into work designmust find new methods of measuring the cognitive workload and cognitiveskills of the jobs. some aspects of cognitive workload and skills are relatively well researched: information overload and competencies in absorbing numerical data and graphical representations. others are less well understood. for example, many people working with information systemsneed to visualize the logical structure of the system in order to understandthe implications of their own actions, their effects on others, and how todiagnose and correct mistakes. researchers are at an early stage in understanding system visualization as a skill and as an aspect of cognitive workload(see carroll and olson, 1987).as bluecollar work has become automated, fewer jobs are òhands onó;more and more involve the employee in monitoring production via dials,gauges, and so forth. as zuboff (1988) has explained, this often leads to aloss of data received directly through the physical senses, resulting in shiftsin skills and additional cognitive workload. machinists, for example, usedto depend heavily on tactile skills and sense of vibration when feeding andcutting on traditional machine tools. they cannot use the same senses nowthat programmable machine tools (òmachining stationsó) are automated andare surrounded by heavy metal hoods. however, some machinists havedeveloped hearing skills to sense when a cutting or milling procedure isgoing wrong. even though their machines are muffled by hoods, they seemable to identify slight changes in tone in what seems to outsiders to be aemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design235very noisy machineshop environment. these clues enable them to stopjobs that are about to go wrong (attewell, 1992; zicklin, 1987).this example demonstrates that skill changes resulting from new technologies can be quite subtle. a simple task analysis would undoubtedlynote that the automated machinist needs new programming skills, but mightwell miss the tactiletoaural shift. researchers have hardly begun to describe and make an inventory of these higherlevel cognitive skills, let alonebegun to design job systems with them in mind.summarythe widespread introduction of information technologies and automation introduces a number of significant problems that affect employment,the nature of work, the configuration of the workplace, the performance ofworkers, and the wellbeing of the workforce.although it was once believed that automation would increase unemployment in the united states, this has generally not been the case. sometraditional jobsñparticularly those with low skill and knowledge demandsñhave declined as functions have been automated; however, new jobs havebeen created. this has raised a number of areas that human factors researchers have the knowledge to contribute to. examples include:¥making technology more humancentered;¥designing systems to make proper use of unique human capabilitiesand designing aids to support task performance;¥making work meaningful (e.g., acceptable workload levels; reducing boredom, fatigue, and job stress; giving a sense of control overthe work process); and¥attempting to satisfy the need for autonomy, education, and training.research is needed to address such questions as the following: howcan we monitor and enhance worker trust in automation? how can operators be kept in the loop so that they can respond when their skills areneeded? how can we monitor and measure human performance to detectsymptoms of stress and performance impairment? how do we avoid operator skill obsolescence from the use of rapidly advancing technologies? whatare the effects of individual differences in cognitive style on worker performance with automated systems?conclusionwe have argued that computer technologies and the shift to an information economy present a considerable challenge for those involved in workdesign and for those researchers in human factors and related disciplinesemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchwho try to provide a scientific basis for work design. although a number oftopics and areas of research have been raised in this chapter, four centralthemes stand out:first, more systematic and detailed descriptive research about the skillsñespecially the higherlevel cognitive skillsñthat are used by todayõs hightechnology workers is an indispensable base for future design of jobs andtechnologies. the kinds of task and skill inventories used in the past havenot adequately captured these kinds of cognitive and organizational skillsñleaving designers to òfly blind.ósecond, further research is needed on performance and error characteristics of emerging technology jobs. we must find out what causal mechanisms or features underlie observed differences in performance, especiallyin errors and error rates, so that work systems can be designed to avoiderror where possible and so that errors that cannot be avoided can at leastbe more easily identified and remedied.third, research must investigate informal learning processes and skillacquisition among those working with new technology; this is a relativelyneglected but important research topic. insights gathered from such research should be used both to plan formal training procedures and to improve ease of onthejob learning.finally, additional research is required to identify the full range ofstressors within emergingtechnology workplaces and their consequencesfor employee performance, morale, and health. some of these stressors willbe ones that ergonomics is well equipped to study. others will necessitateadding sociopsychological studies to traditional human factors methodologies.in the long run one might think that the increase in highly intelligentcomputers, robotics, and microelectronics will continue to displace humanoperators. yet in europe and japan this does not seem to be the case. inrecent years, factories built in the united states by foreign companies havereached high levels of productivity with surprisingly little automation androbotics. and one manufacturer who opened a stateoftheart car assemblyplant stated that only about 30 percent of operations are worth automating.beyond that, automation is relatively costineffective, and it is better to usehuman skills appropriately. if that is the case, human factors and management psychology may be as important as automation engineering in ensuring high productivity. but there is little understanding of these factors, andwhat understanding there is comes largely from foreign experience, whichfor cultural reasons may not be transplantable to the united states.the challenge of automation to the human factors community in futureyears is to learn how to adapt automation to people in ways that are bothhumancentered and productive. humancentered technology is being actively pursued in japan and europe. until about five years ago, little of thisemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design237approach was practiced in the united states, but a still timely researchquestion is how to produce humancentered designs in the context of americanculture.referencesadler, p.1986new technology, new skills. california management review 29(fall):928.1991capitalizing on new manufacturing technologies: current problems and emergenttrends in u.s. industry. pp. 5988 in national academy of engineering/nationalresearch council, people and technology in the workplace. washington, d.c.:national academy press.air force studies board1982the effectiveness of the air force nondestructive inspection management. panelon nondestructive inspection, committee on mechanical reliability, assembly ofengineering, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.attewell, p.a.1992skill and occupational change in u.s. manufacturing. chapter 3 in p. adler, ed.,technology and the future of work. new york: oxford university press.1994information technology and the productivity paradox. pp. 1353 in d.h. harris,ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel onorganizational linkages, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.bainbridge, l.1982displays as a source of task load. ergonomics 25(4):335.1983ironies of automation. pp. 129135 in g. johannsen and j.e. rijnsdorp, eds.,analysis, design and evaluation of manmachine systems: proceedings of theifac/ifip/ifors/iea conference, badenbaden, federal republic of germany,2729 september 1982. new york: pergamon.banker, r.d., s.m. datar, and c.f. kemmerer1991a model to evaluate variables impacting the productivity of software maintenanceprojects. management science 17:118.boehm, b.w.1987improving software productivity. ieee software society 20:4357.boehmdavis, d.a., r.e. curry, e.l. wiener, and r.l. harrison1983human factors of flightdeck automationñnasa/industry workshop. ergonomics 26:953961.brodner, p., ed.1986proceedings of the ifac workshop on skillbased automated manufactoring. karlsruhe,west germany: ifac.brodner, p.1986skillbased manufacturing vs òunmanned factoryó: which is superior? international journal of industrial ergonomics 1:145153.brooks, f.p.1987no silver bullet: essence and accidents of software engineering. ieee computersociety 20:1018.butera, f., and j. thurman1990automation and work design. a study prepared for the international labouroffice. new york: northholland.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcarroll, j.m., and j.r. olson, eds.1987mental models in humancomputer interaction. committee on human factors,national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.clark, j., i. mcloughlin, h. rose, and r. king1988the process of technological change. new york: cambridge university press.cole, r.e.1979work, mobility, and participation: a comparative study of american and japanese industry. berkeley: university of california presscomputer science and technology board1990scaling up: a research agenda for software engineering. national science foundation. communications of the acm 33:281293.computer science and telecommunications board1994information technology in the service society. national research council. washington,d.c.: national academy press.de greene, k.b.1991emergent complexity and personmachine systems. international journal of manmachine studies 35(2):219234.demarco, t., and t. lister1987peopleware: productive projects and teams. new york: dorset house.deming, w.e.1986out of the crisis. cambridge, mass.: mit press.drucker, p.1993postcapitalist society. new york: harper.gilbreth, f.b., and l.m. gilbreth[1917] 1973 applied motion study. easton, pa.: hive publishing.hackman, j.r.1987the design of work teams. pp. 315342 in j.w. lorsch, ed., handbook of organizational behavior. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prenticehall.hammer, m., and j. champy1993reengineering the corporation: a manifesto for business revolution. new york:harper and row.havn, e.1990designing for cooperative work. pp. 3542 in w. karwowski and m. rahimi,eds., ergonomics of hybrid automated systems ii. new york: elsevier.hill, g.w.1992group versus individual performance: are n + 1 heads better than one? psychological bulletin 91:517539.hirschhorn, l.1984beyond mechanization. cambridge, mass.: mit press.jaikumar, r.1986postindustrial manufacturing. harvard business review 63(november/december):6976.kantowitz, s.h., and r.d. sorkin1987allocation of functions. pp. 355369 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of humanfactors. new york: john wiley and sons.kellso, j.r.1989cim in action: microelectronics, manufacturer charts course towards true systemsintegration. industrial engineering 21:1822.kidd, p.t.1990information technology: design for human involvement or human intervention?pp. 417424 in w. karwowski and m. rahimi, eds., ergonomics of hybrid automated systems ii. new york: elsevier.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emerging technologies in work design239kiesler, s., d. wholey, and k.m. carley1994coordination as linkage: the case of software development teams. pp. 214239in d. harris, ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel on organizational linkages, committee on human factors, nationalresearch council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.knights, d., h. wilmott, and d. collinson1985job redesign: critical perspectives on the labor process. brookfield, vt.: gowerpublishers.kornhauser, a.1965the mental health of the industrial worker. new york: wiley.kotteman, j., and w. remus1987evidence and principles of functional and dysfunctional decisionsupport systems.international journal of management science 15(2):135144.kotteman, j., f.d. davis, and w. remusin presscomputerassisted decisonmaking: performance, beliefs and illlusion of control.in organizational behavior and human decision processes. new york: academic press.kuo w., and j.p. hsu1990update: simultaneous engineering design in japan. industrial engineering 22:2328.lee, j.d., and n. moray1992operatorsõ monitoring patterns and fault recovery in the supervisory control of asemiautomatic process. pp. 11431147 in proceedings of the human factorssociety 36th annual meeting. santa monica, calif.: human factors society.mcgrath, j.e.1984groups: interaction and performance. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prenticehall.mcgregor, d.1960the human side of the enterprise. new york: mcgraw hill.mills, d.q.1991rebirth of the corporation. new york: john wiley.moray, n.p., and b.m. huey, eds.1988human factors research and nuclear safety. panel on human factors researchneeds in nuclear regulatory research, committee on human factors, nationalresearch council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national academy of engineering1988the technological dimensions of international competitiveness. committee ontechnology issues that impact international competitiveness. washington, d.c.:national academy press.national academy of engineering/national research council1991people and technology in the workplace. washington, d.c.: national academypress.national research council1986human resources practices for implementing advanced manufacturing technology. manufacturing studies board. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1990the internationalization of u.s. manufacturing: causes and consequences. manufacturing studies board. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nobel, d.f.1984forces of production: a social history of industrial automation. new york:alfred a. knopf.orlikowsky, w.j.1988information technology in postindustrial organizations. unpublished phd dissertation. stern school of management, new york university.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchparsons, h.m.1985automation and the individual: comprehensive and comparative views. humanfactors 27(february):99111.peters, t., and r. waterman1983in search of excellence. new york: warner books.presidentõs commission on industrial competitiveness1985global competition: the new reality. washington, d.c.: u.s. governmentprinting office.sanderson, p.m.1989the human planning and scheduling role in advanced manufacturing systems: anemerging human factors domain. human factors 31(6):635666.savage, c.1990fifth generation management. burlington, mass.: digital press.shaiken, h.1984work transformed: automation and labor in the computer age. new york:holt reinhart winston.simpson, j., and w. wood1993where is the group in social psychology? an historical overview. in s. worchell,w. wood, and j. simpson, eds., group process and productivity. newbury park,calif.: sage press.taylor, f.1911the principles of scientific management. new york: harper and row.walker, c., and r. guest1952man on the assembly line. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.wall, t.t., c.w. clegg, and n.j. kemp1987the human side of advanced manufacturing. new york: wiley.wiener, e.l.1985beyond the sterile cockpit. human factors 27:7589.wiener, e., and r.e. curry1980automation in the cockpit: some generalizations. in proceedings of the annualmeeting of the human factors society, october. santa monica, calif.: humanfactors society.zicklin, g.1987numerical control machining and the issue of deskilling: an empirical view.work and occupations 14:452466.zuboff, s.1988in the age of the smart machine: the future of work and power. new york:basic books.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2419transportationherschel w. leibowitz, d. alfred owens, and robert l. helmreichintroductionthe transportation field comprises vehicles ranging from submarines tospacecraft and technologies that span the iron age and the computer age.human factors issues are important because individuals must interact withthe large, complex systems of modern forms of transportation. safety iscritical, as most citizens utilize several modes of transportation, and transportation disasters are highly publicized. investigations of transportationmishaps typically invoke contributory human factors issues, thus enhancingresearch opportunities.the range of areas within transportation illustrates the expanded definition and role of human factors research. traditional ergonomic issues clearlyinform the design of vehicles and transportation systems. operationally relevant human factors research encompasses cognitive, perceptual, and engineering psychology, as well as organizational, social, personality, educational, and crosscultural disciplines. levels of analysis range from theindividual to the group to the organization to the culture; many researchquestions cut across disciplinary boundaries and demand a multidisciplinaryapproach.rather than document the full array of transportation research questions, we will focus on opportunities for behavioral research in two areasrepresentative of the broad scope of human factors: vehicular traffic safetyand aviation safety. in the first area, we discuss traditional concerns withemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe individual and the machine, while in the second we describe the role ofteam performance and training in a hightechnology environment. the human factors research relevant to aviation includes organizational, social andpersonality, educational, and crosscultural psychologyñas well as the moretraditional cognitive, experimental, and engineering concerns. many of theresearch issues raised here are not limited to vehicular and air domains, butapply in whole or part to other domains of transportation, including maritime and rail operations and space flight.vehicular traffic safetyin dealing with traffic safety, the human factors community has theopportunity to contribute to the solution of a major public health problem.in the united states, motor vehicle accidents are the leading cause of deathfor people between the ages of 1 and 38 and are responsible for more deathsthan all other causes combined between the ages of 15 and 24 (nationalsafety council, 1993). currently 1.7 million disabling injuries and 43,000fatalities occur annually. because traffic accidents take a disproportionatetoll on the younger population, the average number of years of life lost perdeath is 2 and 3 times higher than for cancer and heart disease, respectively,and the mortality cost per death is 3.7 and 6.2 times higher.on the basis of mortality costs, sivak (1993) has estimated that theunited states invests 15 times more heavily in research on cardiovasculardisease and nearly 24 times more for cancer. perhaps this discrepancy inexpenditures occurs because traditionally traffic safety has been viewedñalong with other issues of transportationñas a matter of commerce andtechnology. certainly, our modern transportation systems exemplify thegreat benefits of technology for commerce. however, they also have majorconsequences for public health and welfare; these consequences arise notfrom the machinery per se but from the interaction of human users andtechnological systems. it is at this interface that human factors researchcomes into play.a central requirement for progress in this area is the development of acoherent theoretical framework for addressing the task of driving. we mustdevelop a theory of driving behavior that is both empirically grounded andecologically valid. present theoretical frameworks often consist of commonsensejudgments (e.g., òspeed killsó) or abstract flow charts that have only limitedempirical support. one approach to traffic safety that is rapidly gainingattention is the attempt to use computational technology. this is based onthe assumption that because computers are faster and more reliable thanhumans, they can eliminate or reduce costly human errors. designing systems to assist or automate driving is a fascinating challenge and may ultiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation243mately justify the investment of massive resources (green and brand, 1992).however, the successful development of such systems requires a fuller understanding of the fundamental characteristics of driving (owens et al.,1993).researchers seeking a useful understanding of proficient driving andtraffic safety skills should pursue multiple levels of conceptualization. theymust address the regulatory difficulties that have persisted in licensing,training, and evaluating drivers as well as the problems associated with newtechnological systems. many of these issues are widely recognized andrepeatedly investigated, but systematic analyses are lacking. it is doubtfulthat useful general theories will follow from a focus on specific regulatoryquestions or from basic research on isolated or narrowly defined aspects ofhuman performance. rather, progress in understanding driving behaviorwill require coordination and integration of work at multiple levels of analysis,ranging from assessment of individual performance through specification ofbroad behavioral and informational requirements of the driving task to social aspects of communication among motorists in a changing traffic environment.the theoretical requirements are challenging, and they offer excitingopportunities for gaining basic insights into human behavior in complexsystems. the resulting agenda, however, should not be purely theoretical.indeed, theory can receive an invaluable impetus from systematic attentionto immediate practical problems. if investigators of current problems aimfrom the start to integrate their findings into a larger account of proficientdriving performance in a complex traffic environment, their research will bedoubly fruitful.screening and licensinglicensing examinations are universally administered. in the unitedstates, they are typically based on an invehicle road test, a visual examination, and a series of questions testing the applicantõs knowledge of drivingregulations. the central problem with driver licensing is the poor predictive power of current test procedures. this issue is gaining in importanceas a consequence of the 1990 americans with disabilities act, which requires that exclusionary regulations be justifiable. we need to base licensing decisions on valid predictors of safe driving. several states have already begun to relax visual acuity requirements as part of graduated licensingprograms. human factors research will be critically important in paving theway to valid and fair licensing procedures. at the same time, developmentof more reliable and efficient test procedures can contribute to the development of a comprehensive theory of driving.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchinvehicle testing and the possible benefits of simulationthe current driving test typically evaluates the ability to negotiate avehicle at low speeds on a specially constructed test track involving numerous turns and traffic signals. such tests rarely, if ever, involve conditionsunder which accidents are most likely to occur, for example, under longterm demands, high speeds, competition for attention, emergencies, nighttime, or adverse weather driving conditions. if candidates for a drivinglicense are to be tested under more realistic conditions, the method of choiceis a driving simulator (mcknight and stewart, 1990). simulators are stillexpensive so they will probably be used only in selected cases. this situation appears to be changing, however, as increasingly sophisticated videoand computing systems emerge at dramatically reduced costs. such simulators may offer the most practical method to evaluate drivers under conditions that correspond more closely to those encountered in the driving environment. although driving simulators have been available for many years,few are interactive, that is, with the visual environment changing to conform with vehicle movements. interactive displays are the rule in aviationsimulators, but making them available for driving simulation will requirethe development of less expensive display equipment.a major problem in all simulators is the coordination of visual andvestibular simulation. a moving vehicle stimulates the vestibular system.in a fixedbase simulator, however, only the visual component of motion isavailable; the resulting mismatch between the visual and vestibular (and toa lesser extent proprioceptive) systems can induce nausea. this phenomenon, simulator sickness, has been of interest in aviation, but primarily forsimulations of highperformance aircraft. simulator sickness sometimescauses complex symptoms similar to motion sickness and has been reportedto produce disorientation inside and outside the simulator. it is not yetclear how great a problem this will be for driving simulators; this must beevaluated as test simulators are developed. one possible solution is toimpart motion to the operator (moving base simulator), but this would entailconsiderable additional expense.current computational technology is proceeding at a dazzling pace andit is not unreasonable to entertain the possibility of having driving simulators with realistic interactive displays and at a reasonable cost in the notdistant future.vision testingit is often said that the driving task is 90 percent visual. while theoriginal source of this proposition is obscure, most would agree that goodvision is necessary. the problem is that we do not yet know what goodemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation245vision means in the context of driving. the conventional standard, whichcalls for a corrected visual acuity of 20/40, is not empirically justified andmay be virtually irrelevant. the ineffectiveness of present visual testingprocedures was dramatically demonstrated by burg (1967, 1968, 1971),who correlated the results of both standard and nonstandard visual testswith the frequency of accidents for 17,000 drivers. of all the tests employed, only dynamic visual acuity, a test not included (to our knowledge)in any licensing procedure currently in use in the united states, correlatedwith accidents, and even there the correlation was weak.the basis for this low predictive power is probably related to the discrepancy between visual demands encountered during testing and those encountered while driving. visual acuity tests evaluate only the threshold ofresolution for highcontrast optotypes, that is, the ability to read fine printin bright illumination. such tests have proven to be valuable for prescribing reading glasses. however, driving usually depends on large fields ofrelatively coarse visual structure, and it frequently requires recognizing lowcontrast objects under low (mesopic) illumination. therefore, it should notbe surprising that research shows little or no correlation between standardacuity tests and accidents.there is, however, a growing body of literature, both empirical andtheoretical, suggesting that tests of peripheral vision, contrast sensitivity,and motion perception may be more useful. johnson and keltner (1983)obtained visual fields on 10,000 eyes and determined that individuals withbinocular scotomas were more likely to be involved in accidents. testingof visual fields on a large scale will require the development of automatedperimetric devices. this area is being actively investigated, not becausevisual fields are critical for driving but because visual field examinationscan detect early visual pathology.another promising approach is to assess vision for moving targets. burg(1971) found that dynamic acuity, which requires the observer to resolve amoving optotype, was the only subtest related to accidents. because motionis pervasive outside the laboratory, both the driver and the stimuli of interest are moving. the introduction of a gaze stability requirement for licensureis a logical step toward greater ecological validity.one should also note that most critical visual stimuli encountered during driving have low luminance contrast. during the past several decades,the vision community has accumulated impressive evidence that contrastsensitivity is more informative than visual acuity for highcontrast optotypes,especially in predicting performance for visual tasks other than reading.for example, an observer with incipient cataracts can demonstrate normalacuity even though his or her ability to recognize lowcontrast objects hasbeen severely impaired. several inexpensive contrastsensitivity tests arenow available.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchin view of the poor predictive ability of the static optotypes now beingused in visual testing, and the empirical and theoretical evidence for theimportance of both a contrastsensitivity criterion and motion, the development of a contrastsensitive test of dynamic spatial vision is both wantedand wanting.perhaps the most significant concomitant of normal aging is the loss ofability to receive light. with age the pupil of the eye becomes progressively smaller. typically, the maximum pupil diameter changes from 8 mmin youth to 4 mm in old age, a fourfold reduction in pupil area and, therefore, in light transmission. in addition, with increasing age, the opticalmedia gradually become less transparent. on the average, the effectivelight transmitted to the retina is reduced by a factor of 2 every 15 years.since the accident rate per mile driven is approximately 3.5 times higher atnight than during the day, some test of nighttime vision is clearly to berecommended.despite these facts, and despite the extensive literature and instrumentation on night vision (developed primarily during world war ii), to ourknowledge no tests of night vision are currently in use, and, except forstudent drivers, there is no proscription for driving at night. what is neededis a test of nighttime vision that can be shown to be related to drivingperformance under low illumination levels. whether this should evaluaterecognition vision, visual guidance, or both is an empirical question. onthe basis of information currently available, it would appear reasonable torestrict night driving for some individuals. such graduated licensing regulations will require that reliable and valid testing procedures be developed.the possibility of innovative tests of driving proficiency should also beconsidered. based on the pioneering work of gibson (1950, 1966, 1968), ithas recently been suggested that the ability to guide a vehicle based onoptical flow is critical in driving (e.g., warren et al., 1991; royden et al.,1992; crowell and banks, 1993). with the lowcost computers and displaysavailable, such tests, if they demonstrate predictive power, are now feasible. other visual abilities that might be considered include distance perception, ability to judge closing rates, glare sensitivity, velocity perception,and the ability to handle divided attention. the low predictive power ofpresent procedures is a cogent argument for utilizing the wealth of information already available about vision and vision tests to develop new andbetter procedures.alcoholalcohol is universally recognized as a major contributor to traffic accidents (shinar, 1978). it has been estimated that approximately 50 percentof automobile accidents involve alcohol (evans, 1991). depending on statedriving laws, the critical level of blood alcohol, above which the driver isemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation247assumed to be legally intoxicated, is on the order of 0.08 or 0.10 mg per100 mg. however, the behavioral data do not support a fixed bloodalcoholcriterion as a threshold of impairment. there is extensive evidence thatmany individuals are impaired at bloodalcohol levels that are half the values being used (moskowitz, 1985). in addition, the limited performancedata available demonstrate strikingly high intersubject variability (wilsonand plomin, 1985). some people with bloodalcohol levels below the current legal limits frequently perform less well on dynamic contrast sensitivity tests than others whose levels would classify them as legally intoxicated(andre et al., 1992). data are urgently needed to resolve this dilemma. ifthere is a bloodalcohol level that does not impair performance, it must besupported by performance data. alternatively, the combination of drinkingand driving should be prohibited and the legal limit set at the measurementerror of the evaluation procedure.attention and automaticitya major problem in human performance is vigilance, that is, the need toremain alert during a repetitive task that induces drowsiness and lack ofattention. the deficit may be general or may involve a narrowing of theeffective field of attention. there are marked individual differences in theòuseful field of viewó (ufov); these are correlated with accident recordsand, therefore, have significant implications for driving proficiency (balland owsley, 1992). recent studies indicate that restriction of the field ofattention or ufov poses a serious problem for older drivers. this important finding raises several research questions about how drivers allocateattention. what are the effects of fatigue, expectation, traffic demands,experience, and age? to what extent or in what mode is the ufov testrelated to specific components of the driving task (ball et al., 1993)? therelationship of the ufov test to driving performance provides yet anotherexample of the need for theoretical development. much needs to be learnedabout the relevant attentional and automatic processes in driving.lack of alertness seems to be an obvious factor in transportation safety.depending upon the state of the driver, reaction times can vary from lessthan 1 second to 2.5 seconds or more (e.g., summala, 1981; triggs andharris, 1982). unfortunately, it is difficult for drivers to monitor their ownstate of alertness, particularly during prolonged driving. a system thatwould inform drivers of waning alertness would be extremely valuable.training new driversunderstanding the skills involved in driving will provide insights abouthow these skills are acquired. the effectiveness of current driver training isemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchproblematic, and it is important to learn better ways of teaching the skillsinvolved in driving.we suspect that the basic problem stems from the hierarchical nature ofthe driving task. the operational componentñstarting, steering, and stopping a vehicleñis relatively easy to learn and, once it has been learned,gives the novice driver the feeling of being in control. new drivers can alsolearn much of the òknowledgeó (i.e., rules of the road) in a short time.indeed, such rulebased knowledge is strongly emphasized in most drivertests. however, the driving task involves much more than vehicle controland familiarity with rules: for example, perceiving and anticipating theactions of other motorists and the potential of other roadway hazards. theidentification and teaching of such abilities should be the focus of research.misestimated riskwe suggested above that the fundamental skills involved in driving areeasy to acquire and that accidents may arise from failure to perceive andcompensate for risk. in effect, the driver is aware of the danger and has theability to take the necessary precautions but does not always anticipate orrecognize the relevant hazards (leibowitz and owens, 1986). the higheraccident rate among young drivers and the effects of alcohol, which typically increase risktaking behavior, are consistent with this observation.wilde (1988) has proposed that drivers adjust their risk level so as to compensate for engineering innovations in driver safety such as seat belts (riskhomeostasis). in recent years, there has been an increase in the researchliterature devoted to risktaking behavior, and its application to driving isclearly indicated (wagenaar, 1992).displaysin contrast to the extensive research in aviation, relatively little attention has been given to displays for vehicles. it has been suggested thatdisplays that convey information to the driverñsuch as stopping distance,momentum, and distance to road obstructionsñwould be useful. it has alsobeen proposed that display information be optically superimposed on theroad ahead so as to reduce the need for scanning the instrument panel(weihrauch et al., 1989; okabayashi et al., 1989). (òheadsupó displays arenow common in military aircraft.) such proposals should be empiricallytested. an adequate theory of driving will help specify the types of information that are most useful for safe driving. it will also help determinewhen the information is useful and what format of presentation (displaydesign) is most effective (weintraub and ensing, 1992).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation249aginga common thread relevant to all of these problems is the effect of ageon driving skills (barr and eberhard, 1991; eberhard and barr, 1992). it iswell known that some major abilities relevant to drivingñsuch as nightvision, smooth pursuit eye movements, and reaction timeñall decline systematically with age and that the elderly frequently experience difficultywith cluttered environments. it is also well established that individual differences in aging are pronounced and that age per se is not an unequivocalpredictor of performance. furthermore, to a great extent, the aging driverprobably compensates behaviorally for perceptual and cognitive deficiencies, thus minimizing or delaying costs to safety.given the increasing longevity of our population and the central role ofmobility as a factor in the quality of life, research in this area is particularlycritical (waller, 1991). again, we see the need for a comprehensive theoryof driving behavior that will enable clearer delineation of the specific skillsand situations in which older drivers are most likely to face difficulties. aswe noted earlier, we already have valuable information about some agerelated changes (e.g., night vision and the ufov), but we do not clearlyunderstand the impact of such changes on safe driving (e.g., to what extentthe older driver can or does compensate). in order to evaluate the capabilities of elderly drivers and provide appropriate advice and restrictions, weneed a scientific foundation for graduated licensing criteria. in effect, forall of the categories mentioned above, special attention should be given tothe role of aging.intelligent vehicle highwayefforts are currently being directed toward the application of sophisticated control systems that would take over some of the driverõs responsibilities. for example, the difficulty of estimating distance and velocity isassumed to account for the frequency of accidents involving a vehicle turning left in the face of oncoming traffic. to prevent such errors, it has beenproposed that each vehicle be equipped with a system that senses how farthe vehicle is from other vehicles and that informs the driver when it isunsafe to attempt a left turn. assuming such systems are technically feasible, the critical question is whether drivers accustomed to observationoutside the vehicle would divert their eyes from the road in order to obtaininformation from a display. the application of sophisticated informationsystems assumes that the driver will be willing to trust and act on suchinformation. solving these problems will require extensive human engineering testing to determine the optimum method of presenting the informaemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.250emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchtion, for example, headsup displays and auditory warnings. the humanfactors community has had extensive experience with similar problems inaviation, but they are by no means resolved. for example, ground proximity warning systems provide urgent auditory warning of impending flightinto terrain, but in many instances, crews have disregarded the warning andhave flown into the ground. it is critical that human factors analysis beincorporated in these programs (weintraub and ensing, 1992; ervin, 1993;owens et al., 1993).legal applicationsa potentially fruitful area for research is the interaction between thelaw and transportation. specifically, many laws require operators of vehicles to accomplish tasks that are not within their capabilities. this leadsto unnecessary litigation and appellate reviews and creates a disrespect forlaws. if statutes such as the assured clear distance ahead rule and regulations governing the use of alcohol were examined in relation to the behavioral sciences literature on human capabilities and limitations while operating a vehicle, the findings could lead to more rational laws and codes(leibowitz et al., submitted for publication). efforts directed at this problem represent a potentially valuable contribution.general commentsthe automobile plays a critical role in the quality of life in the unitedstates as well as in other technologically advanced countries. without themobility it provides, the lives of many millions would be severely degraded.for this reason, legislatures have been reluctant to impose restrictions ondriving licenses. from the data presently available, it is not readily apparent whether the unprecedented costs in human suffering and economic lossthat our society tolerates as the price of mobility are justifiable. however,there is no doubt that measures to reduce this burdenñwhether they involvetraining, engineering innovations, alternative sources of transportation, orlicensing restrictionsñmust be based on behavioral data.team performance and aviation safetyin stark contrast with automobile travel, commercial aviation is thesafest form of mass transportation. traditional ergonomics has played asubstantial role in the development of all modern transport aircraft andremains an integral part of the design process (wiener and nagel, 1988).commercial aviation remains one of the few vocations in which retirementat a fixed age is still required. thus, agerelated accidents are not a currentemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation251problem, and, similarly, little evidence has been found to suggest that alcohol and drugs pose major safety problems. (these problems do exist, however, in general aviation.)despite the focus on human factors in aviation, more than twothirds ofthose accidents and incidents that do occur in the system include humanerror/human factors as causal elements (lautman and gallimore, 1987; cooperet al., 1980). although the total number of casualties is small relative tothose produced by the automobile, aviation accidents are highly visible andelicit strong demands for action. the aviation community has responded tothese data with both research and training addressing the human factorsidentified in accidents and incidents. these activities reflect a broaderconception of human factors as it intersects social, personality, and organizational psychology. the results of these interventions, occurring worldwide and known generically as cockpit or crew resource management (crm)training, represent one of the success stories of applied psychology andhuman factors. the programs have been shown to produce significant changesin the behavior and attitudes of flight crews and have been identified aspreventing or mitigating serious accidents in both civil and military aviation(diehl, 1991; helmreich and foushee, 1993; helmreich and wilhelm, 1991;wiener et al., 1993). despite the progress that has been made in crm, anumber of major research questions remain. in the following sections, wedescribe the crm approach to aviation human factors and the open issuesrequiring research and committed action.human factors training approachesflight crews operate within a system in which the individual functionsas part of a team that functions within an organization that, in turn, isembedded in a regulatory and ambient environment. all components of thesystem influence group dynamics and the outcomes of a particular flight.as with many aspects of driver training, it is not clear that all relevant andneeded training is provided or that the most appropriate aspects of performance are being evaluated. the federal aviation administration definespilot training specifications in the united states; these include extensivetraining in emergency procedures and technical maneuvers, many of whichare seldom encountered in operational flight. historically a singlepilotmentality has prevailed in regulation, which has ignored the need to perform effectively the team tasks that are required to pilot a modern transportin complex air space. for example, to maintain licensure, air transportpilots must currently undergo a proficiency check that focuses on individualtechnical expertise as demonstrated by execution of fixed maneuvers.crm training has evolved into a systematic approach to group communications, team coordination, leadership, decision making, and conflict resolution.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.252emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researcheffective training is based on diagnosis of organizational norms and problems, organizational restructuring (where needed), and experiential trainingthat focuses on the development of specific behavioral skills (federal aviation administration, 1993; byrnes and black, 1993; taggart, 1994). alsointegral to this approach is continuing (recurrent) training and reinforcement of effective behaviors, usually through the use of structured simulation (butler, 1993). the critical difference between crm training in aviation is the focus on the group rather than the individual as the unit ofbehavior and evaluation.research needs in aviation and team performanceintegrating technical and psychological trainingalthough crm training for flight crews has shown demonstrable, positive effects, it has not been successfully integrated with traditional technicalinstruction. the value of integrated instruction for complex technical operationsñso that, for example, training in maintaining control after losingan engine on takeoff is integrated with training in the coordination, communication, and decision making required to deal with such a contingencyñiswidely recognized, and recently implemented federal aviation regulationswill require such integration (federal aviation administration, 1990; helmreichand foushee, 1993). the accomplishment of this goal, however, will provide a continuing challenge for human factors specialists.a larger challenge will be found in the integration of human factorsconcepts with initial pilot training. to date, the emphasis has been onadding human relations skills to the repertoires of already qualified pilots, aprocess that often requires unlearning old behaviors and changing traditional practices. while the international civil aviation organization, thecomponent of the united nations that regulates worldwide civil aviation,has introduced a requirement for human factors training as a condition oflicensure, this does not equate to demonstrating and evaluating the humanfactors aspects of primary flight activities. a fully integrated curriculumthat stresses interpersonal, as well as individual, skills from the outset shouldresult in betterprepared pilots.understanding the impact of culture on team performanceone finding that emerged from research into the effectiveness of crmtraining was the existence of differential reactions to training in differentorganizational and national settings (helmreich and foushee, 1993; helmreichand wilhelm, 1991). many of the differences could be traced to the particular views that organizational cultures and subcultures held regardingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation253appropriate roles and behaviors. in addition, comparative data on the impact of crm training from various national cultures are in accord withhofstedeõs (1980, 1991) conceptualization of the dimensions of nationalculture, particularly differences in individualism/collectivism and in attitudes toward authority defined as power distance (merritt and helmreich, inpress). for example, a training emphasis on the importance of the groupand its maintenance is highly congruent with values in collectivist cultures,such as many south american and asian nations, but less readily acceptable in more individualistic societies, such as the united states and ireland.similarly, an approach that stresses reducing status differentials betweenleaders and team members and the need for juniors to question the actionsand decisions of leaders when they threaten safety is compatible with u.s.and australian notions of egalitarianism, but mystifying to those from cultures, such as china and malaysia, that rank high on hofstedeõs powerdistance dimension in the reluctance of subordinates to question the actionsof leaders. crm training has not been successfully exported from oneculture to another without consideration of differing values; this shows theimportance of cultural issues even for supposedly standardized tasks, suchas managing the flight of a transport aircraft. one challenge for humanfactors is to understand how cultures, both national and organizational, influence attitudes and behaviors related to safety and efficiency and to adapttraining to reflect cultural issues. it should be of great concern to themanufacturers of aircraft that are marketed throughout the world.optimizing curricula and instructional methodsrelated to the influence of culture on attitudes and receptivity to instruction is a need to more precisely define which issues need to be stressedin human factors training and how best to deliver instruction. in general,human factors specialists have concluded from experience that curriculaneed to have high levels of specificity, to avoid overreliance on psychological concepts and jargon, and to be experiential rather than didactic. even inthis area, however, cultural values may influence responsiveness. culturesthat place a high value on instruction by authority figures may be lessreceptive to group discussion and more favorably influenced by more authoritative presentations. overall, the goal for human factors is to definecurricula that are relevant, are understandable, and can be presented in away that can be understood in the context of individual values.improving the evaluation of group and system performanceit is axiomatic that behavior cannot be successfully taught unless instances of the desired behavior are reinforced and that reinforcement cannotemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchoccur unless the behavior can be precisely evaluated. although the evaluation of individual technical performance in aviation has a long and successful history, this focus has stifled concern with developing more sophisticated approaches to the evaluation of group behavior and performance. earlyattempts to improve grouplevel evaluation in aviation illustrated the difficulties of such assessments and the reluctance of operational personnel toexpand the scope of evaluation (gregorich and wilhelm, 1993; butler, 1993;taggart, 1994). a more reliable and valid methodology for assessment ofgrouplevel phenomena should be widely beneficial, not only in aviationbut also in other endeavors involving grouplevel tasks.also needed are improved methodologies for analyzing and understanding human error at the group and system levels. the study of complexdeterminants of error in technological environments has advanced significantly in recent years (perrow, 1984; rasmussen, 1993; reason, 1990).detailed analyses of aircraft accidents, in which pilot error is clearly theproximal cause, typically uncover an array of contributing factors that influenced the decision making and group dynamics on the flight deck. forexample, the crash of a canadian airliner on takeoff during a snowstormresulted from the crewõs flawed decision to take off with ice contaminatingthe wings. however, the findings of a commission of inquiry that investigated all aspects of the aviation system isolated a number of contributingfactors at the regulatory, organizational, and group levels that created anenvironment with inadequate safeguards against a fatal decision (helmreich,1992; moshansky, 1992). a taxonomy of human factors problems that canbe applied to the analysis of accidents and incidents would be invaluable forresearchers and for those charged with safety (jones, 1993).automation and the òelectronicó crew memberas increasingly sophisticated computer systems characterize the flightdecks of modern aircraft, crews face the new dilemma of how to integratean òelectronicó crew member into team operations. when many activitiesare shifted from human to computer control, issues of maintaining competencies, vigilance, and awareness arise, and shifts may occur in the dynamics of crew interaction. defining a coherent, researchbased philosophy ofautomation is a critical task that involves human factors experts participating in the design and manufacture of aircraft as well as in the organizationsthat operate them (billings, 1989; wiener, 1993). the philosophy of automation needs to address what should be automated as well as how automation should be accomplished. the principle that what can be automatedshould be automated has not demonstrated marked success in reducing human error or workload, but has resulted in enormous capital expenditures.an excellent discussion of issues of automation design is found in the reemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation255port of an extensive investigation of the fatal flight into terrain of a highlyautomated aircraft in 1992 (minist‘re de lõ…quipement, des transportes, etdu tourisme, 1993). a philosophy of automation also needs to address theuse of automated systems: when they should be used and when controlshould revert to the human operator. at the user level, this needs to beincorporated into training and organizational norms.recent research suggests that there are large cultural differences inattitudes regarding the acceptance and use of automated systems, including,for example, willingness to disengage automated systems and revert to human control when conditions change (e.g., sherman and law, 1994). human factors specialists and airframe manufacturers must recognize that humancomputer interfaces are highly varied and culturally determined; theycan then undertake research to define these differences and training strategies to deal with them.advanced technology aircraft are now operated with a crew of twopilots. however, crews are augmented with relief pilots for extremely longintercontinental flights. extended routine cruising raises questions of maintaining proficiency, combatting fatigue and complacency, and transferringcontrol among extended crews. many of these issues have not been systematically addressed in research.dealing with training failuresthe success of human factors training in aviation is diminished to someextent by the fact that the concepts and behaviors taught are not universallyaccepted, even within a particular organization or culture. in all programsevaluated, a small subset of individuals fails to respond positively to training efforts, and some may even become less accepting of and more resistantto team coordination (chidester et al., 1990a, 1990b; helmreich and wilhelm,1989, 1991). these failures in training are necessarily of concern becausethose who actively reject strategies to enhance performance are likely topose the greatest threat to safety. one source of resistance may lie inpersonality characteristics of those who react negatively. for example,chidester et al. (1990a, 1990b) found that those lacking in attributes associated with effective interpersonal behavior were more prone to reject training that stressed the importance of interpersonal communication. given theunlikelihood of effecting basic changes in personality except by extendedpsychotherapy, improved selection in terms of performancerelated personality traits may be the last line of defense against ineffective crew coordination and teamwork. however, the human factors community should exhaustall avenues of research to determine if there are means of remediation forthose deficient in interpersonal communication skills.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.256emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchextending the concepts beyond the cockpit doorhuman factors research in aviation has grown from its original focus onenhancing communication and coordination among the basic flight teaminto an awareness that many of the problems in the system reside in interfaces between teams and other components of the aviation system, including, for example, air traffic control and ground operations (taggart, 1993,1994). new strategies and associated research will be required to developand validate training methodologies that effectively address intergroup aswell as intragroup coordination and cooperation.extending human factors training intoother domainsit is becoming clear that the human factors approaches encompassed bycrm in aviation apply more generally to endeavors in which teams function with technology under demanding conditions (helmreich et al., 1993).for some years, the national transportation safety board (ntsb) has beenadvocating the extension of crm from the cockpit to the bridge of maritime vessels (e.g., national transportation safety board, 1993). more recently, the medical profession has noted similarities in human factors problems in the operating room and in the cockpit and has begun to adapttraining and evaluation strategies from aviation (ewell and adams, 1993;howard et al., 1992; helmreich and schaefer, 1994). similar issues shouldexist in control rooms of nuclear power plants, petrochemical operations,and other manufacturing enterprises (helmreich et al., 1993). it is essentialthat the human factors community avoid trying to export training from onedomain to another in a simplistic manner; the pitfalls of such an approachwere discovered in attempts to move training across national boundaries.the characteristics and cultures of each domain must be investigated andunderstood before common concepts can be applied effectively.maritime operationsa few examples may illustrate extensions of human factors concernsfrom aviation to seafaring. although events play out at a much slower pacethan in an automobile or aircraft, ships are operated by teams interactingwith technology in a regulated environment. in the majority of marinedisasters, as in aviation, human error is also implicated. automation is alsobecoming a common shipboard characteristic, associated with large decreasesin personnel and again raising issues of vigilance and reliance on computersolutions. issues of national culture are also of great importance in maritime operations, and many ships are operated by multinational crews foremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation257economic reasons. the traditional culture of the sea, in which the captain isthe unchallenged (and frequently autocratic) master, can inhibit the effective communication and utilization of available resources, especially humanones. team interface issues have also been implicated in a number ofmarine accidents, specifically flawed communications between pilots andmasters while operating in restricted waters (e.g., national transportationsafety board, 1993).as noted, the ntsb has concluded that many of these problems couldbe alleviated through effective human factors interventions and the adoptionof approaches successfully employed in aviation. this will, however, require a substantial research endeavor to define common and divergent factors and to design human factors programs that will be accepted within thegeneral maritime and specific organizational cultures involved.conclusionsthe field of transportation provides rich opportunities to expand thescope of human factors in areas for which outcomes have major consequences. optimizing the interface between individuals and groups withcomplex technology and systems requires a multidisciplinary approach thatembraces the full range of concerns of human factors specialists. concernwith a particular problem, whether vehicular or aviation safety, should notblind researchers to concepts that transcend problem areas and that reflectmore broadly on human capabilities and limitations. at the same time,research and solutions must be sensitive to the characteristics of the particular endeavor.referencesandre, j.t., r.a. tyrrell, m.e. nicholson, m. wang, and h.w. leibowitz1992measuring and predicting the effects of alcohol on contrast sensitivity for staticand dynamic gratings. investigative ophthalmology and visual science (arvoabstract) 33(4):1416.ball, k., and c. owsley1992the useful field of view: a new technique for evaluating agerelated declines invisual function. journal of the american optometric association 63:7179.ball, k., c. owsley, m. sloan, d.l. roenker, and j.r. bruni1993visual attention problems as a predictor of vehicle crashes among older drivers.investigative ophthalmology and visual science 34(11):31103123.barr, r.a., and j.w. eberhard1991safety and mobility of elderly drivers, part i. special issue. human factors33(5):497603.billings, c.e.1989toward a human centered aircraft automation philosophy. pp. 18 in proceedingsof the fifth international symposium on aviation psychology. columbus: ohiostate university.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.258emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchburg, a.1967the relationship between vision test scores and driving record: general findings. department of engineering report no. 6724. los angeles, calif.: university of california.1968the relationship between vision test scores and driving record: additionalfindings. department of engineering report no. 6827. los angeles, calif.:university of california.1971vision and driving: a report on research. human factors 13(1):7987.butler, r.e.1993loft: fullmission simulation as crew resource management training. pp. 231259 in e. wiener, b. kanki, and r. helmreich, eds., crew resource management.san diego, calif.: academic press.byrnes, r.e., and r. black1993developing and implementing crm programs: the delta experience. pp. 421443in e. wiener, b. kanki, and r. helmreich, eds., crew resource management. sandiego, calif.: academic press.chidester, t.r., r.l. helmreich, s.e. gregorich, and c.e. geis1990apilot personality and crew coordination: implications for training and selection.international journal of aviation psychology 1:2342.chidester, t.r., b.g. kanki, h.c. foushee, c.l. dickinson, and s.v. bowles1990bpersonality factors in flight operations, vol. 1. leader characteristics and crewperformance in fullmission air transport simulation. nasa technical memorandum no. 102259. moffettfield, calif.: nasaames research center.cooper, g.e., m.d. white, and j.k. lauber, eds.1980resource management on the flightdeck: proceedings of a nasa/industry workshop. nasa cp2120. moffett field, calif.: nasaames research center.crowell, j.a., and m.s. banks1993perceived heading with different retinal regions and types of optic flow. perception and psychophysics 53(3):325337.diehl, a.e.1991the effectiveness of training programs for preventing aircrew òerror.ó in proceedings of the sixth international symposium of aviation psychology. columbus:ohio state university.eberhard, j.w., and r.a. barr, eds.1992safety and mobility of elderly drivers, part ii. special issue. human factors34(1):165.ervin, r.1993bringing human factors expertise to the conceptualization of activesafety technology.paper presented at the umtri human factors festival. ann arbor: university ofmichigan transportation research institute.evans, l.1991traffic safety and the drive. new york: van nostrand reinhold.ewell, m.g., and r. adams1993aviation psychology, group dynamics and human performance issues in anesthesiology. pp. 499504 in proceedings of the seventh international symposium onaviation psychology. columbus: ohio state university.federal aviation administration1990advanced qualification program. washington, d.c.: federal aviation administration.1993crew resource management training. advisory circular ac 12051a. washington, d.c.: federal aviation administration.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation259gibson, j.j.1950the perception of the visual world. boston, mass.: houghton mifflin.1966the senses considered as perceptual systems. prospect heights, ill.: wavelandpress.1968what gives rise to the perception of motion? psychological review 75:335346.green, p., and j. brand1992future incar information systems: input from focus groups. sae technicalpaper no. 920614. warrendale, penn.: society of automotive engineers.gregorich, s.e., and j.a. wilhelm1993crew resource management training assessment. pp. 173198 in e. wiener, b.kanki, and r. helmreich, eds., crew resource management. san diego, calif.:academic press.helmreich, r.l.1992human factors aspects of the air ontario crash at dryden, ontario. in v.p.moshansky, ed., commission of inquiry into the air ontario accident at dryden,ontario: final report. ottawa, ontario: minister of supply and services, canada.helmreich, r.l., and h.c. foushee1993why crew resource management? empirical and theoretical bases of human factors training in aviation. in e.l. wiener, b.g. kanki, and r.l. helmreich, eds.,cockpit resource management. san diego, calif.: academic press.helmreich, r.l., and h.g. schaefer1994team performance in the operating room. pp. 225254 in m.s. bogner, ed.,human error in medicine. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.helmreich, r.l., and j.a. wilhelm1989when training boomerangs: negative outcomes associated with cockpit resourcemanagement programs. in r.s. jensen, ed., proceedings of the fifth internationalsymposium on aviation psychology. columbus: ohio state university.1991outcomes of crew resource management training. international journal of aviation psychology 1(4):287300.helmreich, r.l., e. wiener, and b.g. kanki1993the future of crew resource management in the cockpit and elsewhere. pp. 479501 in e. wiener, b. kanki, and r. helmreich, eds., crew resource management.san diego, calif.: academic press.hofstede, g.1980cultureõs consequences: international differences in workrelated values. beverlyhills, calif.: sage.1991cultures and organizations: software of the mind. maidenhead, england: mcgrawhill.howard, s.k., d.m. gaba, k.j. fish, g. yang, and f.h. sarnquist1992anesthesia crisis resource management: teaching anesthesiologists to handle critical incidents. aviation, space, and environmental medicine 63:763770.johnson, c.a., and j.l. keltner1983incidence of visual field loss and its relation to driving performance. archives ofophthalmology 101:371375.jones, s.g.1993human factors in incident reporting. pp. 567572 in proceedings of the seventhinternational symposium on aviation psychology. columbus: ohio state university.lautman, l.g., and p.l. gallimore1987control of the crewcaused accident. airliner magazine, apriljune:17. seattle,wash.: boeing commercial airplane.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.260emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchleibowitz, h.w., and d.a. owens1986we drive by night. psychology today 5458.leibowitz, h.w., d.a. owens, and r.a. tyrrellthe assured clear distance ahead rule: implications for traffic safety and thelaw. (submitted for pulication)mcknight, a.j., and m.a. stewart1990development of a competency based driver license testing system. final reportfor the california department of transportation. landover, md.: national publicservices research institute.merritt, a.c., and r.l. helmreichin presshuman factors on the flightdeck: the influence of national culture. journal ofcrosscultural psychology.minist‘re de lõ…quipement, des transportes, et du tourisme1993rapport de la commission dõenqu’te sur lõaccident survenu le 20 janvier 1992pr‘s du mont sainte odile (bas rhin) a lõairbus a.320 immatricule fggedexploit” par la compagnie air inter. paris, france: minist‘re de lõ…quipement,des transportes, et du tourisme.moshansky, v.p.1992commission of inquiry into the air ontario accident at dryden, ontario: finalreport, vols. 14. ottawa, ontario, canada. minister of supply and services.moskowitz, h., m.m. burns, and a.f. williams1985skills performance at low blood alcohol levels. journal of studies on alcohol46(6):482485.national safety council1993accident facts, 1993 edition. itasca, ill.: national safety council.national transportation safety board1993grounding of the uk passenger vessel rms queen elizabeth 2 near cuttyhunkisland, vineyard sound, massachussetts. ntsb/mar93/01. washington, d.c.:national transportation safety board.okabayashi, s., m. sakata, j. fukano, s. daidoji, c. hashimoto, and t. ishikawa1989development of practical headsup display for production vehicle application.sae technical paper series no. 890559. warrendale, penn.: society of automotive engineers.owens, d.a., g. helmers, and m. sivak1993intelligent vehicle highway systems: a call for usercentered design. ergonomics36(4):363369.perrow, c.1984normal accidents: living with high risk technologies. new york: basic books.rasmussen, j.1993deciding and doing: decision making in natural context. in g. klein, j. orasanu,r. calderwood, and c. zsambok, eds., decision making in action: models andmethods. norwood, n.j.: ablex.reason, j.1990human error. cambridge, england: cambridge university press.royden, c.s., m.s. banks, and j.a. crowell1992the perception of heading during eye movement. nature 360:583585.sherman, p.j., and j.r. law1994are there differences for standard vs. automated aircraft? withinairline comparisons of aircraft types. pp. 110115 in proceedings of the 14th biennial meeting ofapplied behavioral sciences symposium. colorado springs, colo.: united statesair force academy.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation261shinar, d.1978psychology on the road. new york: wiley.sivak, m.1993some speculations about how to determine trafficsafety priorities. unpublished presentation at the umtri human factors festival, ann arbor, michigan.university of michigan transportation research institute, march.summala, h.1981driver/vehicle steering response latencies. human factors 23:683692.taggart, w.r.1993how to kill off a good crm program. the crm advocate 93(1):1112.1994crew resource management: achieving enhanced flight operations. in n. johnston,n. mcdonald, and r. fuller, eds., aviation psychology in practice. brookfield,vt.: ashgate.triggs, t.j., and w.g. harris1982reaction time of drivers to road stimuli. report no. 0867461470 for commonwealth department of transportation, australian office of road safety.wagenaar, a.c.1992risk taking and accident causation. pp. 257281 in j.f. yates, ed., risktakingbehavior. new york: john wiley & sons.waller, p.f.1991the older driver. human factors 33(5):499505.warren, w.h., jr., d.r. mestre, a.w. blackwell, and m.w. morris1991perception of circular heading from optical flow. journal of experimental psychology: human perception and performance 17(1):2843.weihrauch, m., t.c. goesch, and g.g. meloeny1989the first head up display introduced by general motors. sae technical paperno. 890288. warrendale, penn.: society of automotive engineers.weintraub, d.j., and m. ensing1992human factors issues in headup displays: the book of hud. wrightpattersonair force base, ohio: crew systems ergonomics information center.wiener, e.1993crew coordination and training in the advancedtechnology cockpit. pp. 199230in e. wiener, b. kanki, and r. helmreich, eds., crew resource management. sandiego, calif.: academic press.wiener, e., b. kanki, and r. helmreich, eds.1993crew resource management. san diego, calif.: academic press.wiener, e.l., and d.c. nagel1988human factors in aviation. san diego, calif.: academic press.wilde, g.j.s.1988risk homeostasis theory and traffic accidents: propositions, deductions and discussion of dissension in recent reactions. ergonomics 31(4):441468.wilson, j.r., and r. plomin1985individual differences in sensitivity and tolerance to alcohol. social biology 32(34):162184.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research26210cognitive performance under stressj. frank yates, roberta l. klatzky, and carolynn a. youngthe media have given considerable attention to the stress in contemporary society. for instance, the topic was the cover theme of a time magazine issue in 1983 (june 6). within the past few years, there have beennumerous highly publicized incidents in which u.s. postal service employees have attacked and killed their supervisors and coworkers. the òheadlineó segment on a recent abc news 20/20 program was devoted to theseevents. the program speculated that job stress, including the stress associated with the postal serviceõs efforts to improve its highly automated sorting systems, was a significant contributor to the violence.the current focus on stress extends beyond the popular press. scholarly analyses of several prominent tragedies have cited stress as a factor:¥wickens (1992) conjectures that stress may have impaired the performance of a control room operator on duty during the nuclear reactoraccident at three mile island, making the situation worse than it might havebeen otherwise. wickens suggests that stress may have played a similarrole in the downing of an iranian airliner by the crew of the u.s. missilefrigate vincennes, who thought they were under attack by a military aircraft.¥in march 1989, air ontario flight 363 crashed and burned on takeoff from dryden, ontario. the pilot, copilot, a flight attendant, and 21passengers were killed. the immediate cause of the accident was snow andemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress263ice on the wings. helmreich (1990) performed a human factors study of theincident. he concluded that time pressure and other stressors quite likelyinduced the pilots to make faultyñand ultimately fatalñdecisions aboutdeicing and departure.¥in every armed conflict, military personnel sometimes mistakenlyfire on their own confederates. there were numerous instances of suchòfriendly fireó among american troops in the persian gulf war of 1991.military analysts acknowledge a host of causes of these incidents, includingcognitive ones like poor situational awareness (u.s. army, 1992a, 1992b);these causes are also thought to include factors commonly acknowledged asforms or concomitants of stress, such as anxiety.the stress literature is not restricted to highprofile occurrences likethose just described. there is considerable published work on the stressesof everyday life, includingñor perhaps especiallyñin the ordinary workplace (manuso, 1983). in 1988, the national research council published ahighly influential report by its committee on techniques for the enhancement of human performance (druckman and swets, 1988). the committeedid a critical review of research on a host of performancerelated topics,ranging from motor skills to paranormal phenomena. subsequent work bythe committee (druckman and bjork, 1991) extended the range of topicseven further. the 1988 report (p. 115) acknowledged that ònone of thetopics . . . has received more attention than the management of stress.óthis impression seems accurate; the scholarly literature on stress is enormous. the american psychological associationõs psycinfo database listsover 35,000 entries under the keyword stress. using the joint keywordquery stress and performance, a recent search directed toward topics moreclosely associated with human factors yielded 2,565 entries.everyone seems to acknowledge that stress is a serious problem, andthe research community has appeared to respond by devoting a great deal ofenergy to solving that problem. why, then, is the topic being proposed asan area of additional emphasis in human factors research? there are several responses to this question, which we will develop more fully below.briefly, however, the thrust of our argument is not that we need to increasethe sheer volume of stress research (although that may well be true), butthat future research should direct more attention to particular cognitive aspects of stressperformance interactions, aspects that have managed to escape close scrutiny. (by convention, the term cognition refers to acts ofperception and knowing.) a hint of this oversight is suggested by a searchof the psycinfo database using the query stress and cognition. this searchproduced only 223 items, a yield of fewer than 9 items per year over the196794 coverage of the database. in their comprehensive survey, mrossemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchand hammond (1989) have also noted the sparseness of the stresscognitionliterature.a good case also can be made that stress and the significance of itsconsequences will increase over the coming years:¥global economic competition has increased dramatically over thepast couple of decades, and it shows little sign of slackening in the nearfuture. thus, both public organizations, such as the u.s. postal service,and private organizations will undoubtedly find themselves severely challenged simply to survive. these challenges are virtually guaranteed tocause every person in those organizations to experience greater stress. forinstance, polls suggest that there is an emerging sense among the public thatjob security is rarer now than in the past and that this condition will last along time (church, 1993).¥economic and technological developments have led to greater interdependence among individuals and organizations, often accompanied bycentralization. this implies that an action by any element in the contemporary workplace has widerñand hence more seriousñconsequences than inthe past (see also driskell and salas, 1991b). take the case of financialmarkets. on a dollar volume basis, the bulk of the activity in these marketsis undertaken by the managers of large institutions, such as pension funds,not by individual investors (siconols, 1992). hence, as the market crash of1987 demonstrated, buying and selling by a remarkably small number ofpeople can have dramatic and farreaching effects. so, to the extent thatstress influences those individualsõ choices, its ramifications extend far beyond their personal welfare and affect most people.¥the potential effects of stress on cognition are further amplified bythe changing nature of work itself. in almost every arena, todayõs jobsplace greater emphasis on cognitive than on motor performance. for example, as noted by hartzell (1992), at one time a good helicopter pilot hadto exercise extraordinary manual control. these days, however, a goodpilot depends more on the ability to select appropriate procedural sequences,which in turn are executed by computercontrolled devices.¥there is also the role of new technology itself. for instance, it isnow possible for employers to continuously monitor the performance ofworkers such as telephone operators and telemarketers. there is some evidence that this practice itself exacerbates the stress experienced by workers(e.g., rogers et al., 1990).a perspectivehans selye (1956) is the scientist who first called special attention tothe concept of stress in humans. selye (1983) noted that the bodyõs physiemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress265ological reactions to an injury or intense emotion can be divided into thosethat are peculiar to the particular stimulus in question and those that appear inresponse to any noxious stimulus. he called the latter constellation of responses the general adaptation syndrome (gas). it includes three stages(selye, 1983:45): (a) an òalarm reaction,ó representing a ògeneral call toarms of the bodyõs defensive forces,ó including changes in body temperature,blood pressure, and hormonal secretions; (b) a òstage of resistance,ó in whichthere is adaptation to the stressor and the reduction or even disappearance ofthe elements of the alarm reaction; and (c) a òstage of exhaustion,ó when thecompensatory measures in the resistance stage deplete the available resources.selye essentially equated stress with this nonspecific physiological responsepattern. for some time, most work on stress and psychological functioningcontinued to emphasize this biological, responseoriented characterization ofstress. thus, for instance, broadbent (1963) and others sought to account forstress effects in terms of fluctuations in arousal.the concept of stress has evolved over the years. stress researchers arefar from unanimous in their use of the term (see, e.g., everly and sobelman,1987:chapter 1). and this situation has prompted at least some authors tosuggest that the very concept of stress has outlived its usefulness (e.g.,hammond and doyle, 1991). nevertheless, there is reasonable consensusabout the meaning of the expression in work on cognition, and we willinterpret it here according to that consensus (see hancock and warm, 1989).therefore, by stress we mean an individualõs reactions to apparent significant threats to his or her welfare, reactions that often entail heightenedemotion (see keinan et al., 1987; yates, 1990). as articulated by novaco(1988:4), a threat is a selfperceived imbalance between the demands madeon a person and the resources he or she can apply to satisfying those demands. that is, the person doubts his or her ability to meet the challengeimposed by the circumstances. several implications of this stress conception can be highlighted with the aid of figure 10.1.to start with, stress is a response to situational conditions. if theseconditions induce the perception of threat, they achieve the status of stressorsñi.e., òthat which causes stressó (selye, 1983:9).the personal circumstances element in figure 10.1 calls attention tothe fact that identical conditions can have different threat implications atdifferent times. that is, a given individualõs varying resources, physicaland otherwise, alter that personõs vulnerability. a problemsolving taskthat is daunting when one is exhausted at dayõs end is òno sweató after agood nightõs sleep.the personal characteristics feature highlights two kinds of stable individual differences. first are the differences in peopleõs abilities to respondto challenges. second are differences in the intensity with which peopleexperience (or anticipate) the losses that would ensue should they fail toemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.266emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchfigure 10.1 a schematic representation of stress and its connections with otherentities.situationalconditions(stressors)threatreactions(stress)personalcircumstances,characteristics,appraisalscognitionotherfactorsmeet a challenge. these differences are well illustrated in the discussion ofmedical devices used in the home in chapter 4. even a trained outpatient islikely to see himself or herself as less competent at using the equipmentthan a professional and is thus more likely to experience stress in an emergency. and since the patientõs own health or lifeñnot someone elseõsñisat stake, stress should be even more intense.the personal appraisals element in figure 10.1 is an acknowledgmentthat ignorance or special sensitivity to situational conditions can preclude orexacerbate the experience of threat (lazurus and folkman, 1984; patersonand neufeld, 1987). as an extreme case, if a surgical attendant is completely oblivious of a cardiac monitorõs malfunctioning, he or she will perceive no threat to the patientõs survival and hence experience no stress.finally, the other factors part of figure 10.1 is a recognition that, invirtually any situation, the cognitive activities in question will be affectedby other things besides stress. and the effects of these factors may or maynot be independent of stress effects. lighting quality has an obvious influence on machine assembly performance. but within bounds, that influencemay or may not differ for people who are subjected to large rather thansmall amounts of stress.the conceptual framework depicted in figure 10.1 is minimal. nevertheless, it does provide a useful perspective for the ensuing discussion, andit will be elaborated in the context of that discussion.managing stresscognition effectshuman factors as a discipline focuses on the interactions between thepeople and the artifacts that together compose humantechnology systemsemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress267for accomplishing various tasks. thus, a nuclear power plant has a humanfactors problem if displays of reactor status induce high probabilities ofoperator error, and an anesthesiology protocol has poor human factors features if it encourages physicians and technicians to administer inappropriatedosages of gas. typical activities that people undertake in humantechnology systems have both cognitive and noncognitive aspects. implicit in theearlier discussion is the assumption that stress often has adverse effects onthe cognitive elements of those activities. this is a common and plausibleassumption, but there may be conditions under which stress has beneficialinfluences on cognition. indeed, several theories imply what some of thoseconditions might be (e.g., easterbrook, 1959; yates, 1990:chapter 13). wethus submit that a major theme in human factors research should be deepening our fundamental understanding of stresscognition relationships. acomplementary aim should be the development of practical techniques forcounteracting negative effects and exploiting positive ones.a prerequisite: methodological advancesconsider an experiment by rothstein (1986). on any given trial in thatexperiment, the subjectõs task was to predict a criterion variable, c. thesubject was shown vertical bars labeled a and b. the heights of these barsserved as numerical cues for c, which was statistically related to a and b ina particular way. for instance, in one condition, the optimal rule for predicting c might have the formcõ = f(a) + g(b),where f and g are specific linear or invertedu functions. via a block ofsubjectcontrolled trials with feedback, each subject first learned to predictthe criterion to a satisfactory level of accuracy. half of the subjects thenperformed test trials under time pressure. on each trial, the subject had topredict c from a and b within a deadline of six seconds. one of rothsteinõsconclusions was that time pressure induced the subjects to apply more widelydifferentiated weights to the cues. so, if a subject initially tended to predictc according to a rule similar toc* = f*(a) + g*(b),then time pressure altered that rule to one more likec* = 2f*(a) + g*(b)orc* = f*(a) + 2g*(b).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.268emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthe tentative generalization was that time pressure tends to make judgmentpolicies less evenhanded.rothsteinõs (1986) results are interesting in themselves. but we highlight his experiment here because in one important respect it is typical oflaboratory studies of stress and cognition. recall that the consensus definition of stress requires a person to doubt his or her ability to meet a taskdemand. missingresponse data suggest that rothsteinõs sixsecond timelimit did indeed engender such doubt. however, another stress requirementis that the affected person should recognize task failure as a significantthreat to his or her welfare. for average college students (as were rothsteinõssubjects), failing to complete any assigned intellectual task is probably anego threat. but in rothsteinõs study, that seemed to be the only plausiblethreat; subjects were simply òrequiredó (p. 85) to respond within the timelimit. therefore, in terms of threat, the stressfulness of rothsteinõs timepressure was probably minimal. rothstein did not explicitly apply the termstress to his time pressure conditions. nevertheless, his manipulations wereactually quite representative of how researchers have often sought to inducestress in controlled settings.the problem illustrated by this example is that the stressors used inlaboratory studies are essentially benign (almost a contradiction in terms);they constitute almost no threat to the subject. from an ethical, as well as astrictly legal, perspective (in the united states, at least), this is how itshould and must be. after all, no responsible researcher would want to riskcausing the serious harm implicit in the òsignificant threató element of thestress construct.standard informed consent protocols have another consequence, too.not only must the potential consequences of a subjectõs actions be mild; theconditions confronting the subject cannot be surprising. as numerous stressspecialists (e.g., levine, 1988) have noted, uncertainty, including completeunexpectedness, is a critical element in many truly stressful situations. as afanciful example, consider the popular science fiction film alien. perhapsthe filmõs most terrifying moment occurs shortly after the protagonists conclude that their embryonic extraterrestrial tormentor had inexplicably butsurely disappeared, leaving them safe and secure. then, with shockingsuddenness, they learn that the monster has been with them all along. it hadbeen maturing parasitically within a crew memberõs body. everyone wouldagree that the crewõs stress levelñto say nothing of the audienceõsñis thenmuch higher than had the alien been the usual, gardenvariety, godzillatype monster.most experimentalists are surely aware that the stress levels they induce in the laboratory are far milder than those in the realworld situationsto which they wish to generalize. so, implicit in their work is the hopefulassumption that, although the effects of laboratory stressors are markedlyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress269weaker than those of severe natural stressors, they are qualitatively thesame. but not all stress investigators are so optimistic. take the situationin which the stakes in a realworld decision problem can be a significantstressor in themselves (janis and mann, 1977). the prospect of losing a 50cent bonus because of a bad decision in a laboratory experiment might seemso inconsequential that the subject can treat the decision task as simply anexercise in pure reasoning, on a par with solving a math problem. butsuppose the situation entails the possibility of losing a daughterõs life because of choosing the wrong medical treatment (see ritov and baron, 1990).mann (1992) speculates that the very nature of the decision process is fundamentally different in this kind of distinctly stressful circumstance.right now it is impossible to say whether what we have learned fromlaboratory studies of stress and cognition does, in fact, generalize to moreextreme levels of the stressors involved. but, as was implied above, we doknow that those experiments can tell us virtually nothing about the role ofuncertainty in stress effects. there is yet another limitation: the fact thatexperiments are shortterm affairs. acute stressors are present only briefly,whereas chronic stressors are sustained for extended periods (e.g., on longspace flights or submarine tours of duty). for the most part (there areexceptions, of course), human factors and basic cognition researchers haveexperimentally examined the contemporaneous effects of acute stressors on,for instance, task performance in the presence of noise or extreme temperatures (see hancock, 1986b). in contrast, clinical psychologists and otherhealth care providers (e.g., newberry et al., 1987) have more often addressed the longterm consequences of extended stress exposure, consequences that might occur in contexts completely removed from the locus ofthe stressor. posttraumatic stress syndrome, such as combat fatigue, isperhaps the bestknown example (levine, 1988). as suggested by the workof cohen (1980; cohen and spacapan, 1978), the effect of chronic stresscan present surprises. these surprises seem inaccessible via standard laboratory techniques.given the above observations, it is essential that human factors investigators of stress and cognition seek to create ethical yet effective means of studying the influences of stressors that more closely approximate those in realworld humantechnology systems. indeed, it is plausible that a major reasonfor the very sparseness of the stress and cognition literature is that researchersoften find it prohibitively difficult to create appropriate conditions.how might this methodological research challenge be approached? numerousavenues could be explored. one point of departure is to note that the issuesare similar to those that confront investigators in education and medicine.in these fields, the stakes can be the difference between a childõs academicsuccess and failure or even between life and death. (should this childparticipate in a new, experimental learning method? should this patientemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.270emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchreceive a new drug or a placebo?) methodologists and ethicists in education and medicine have responded to the challenge with numerous innovations (e.g., cook and campbell, 1979). human factors researchers woulddo well to see whether some of those innovations can be adapted to thedemands of stress research. at a minimum, human factors methodologistsmight find it instructive to examine the process by which their counterpartsin education and medicine have addressed analogous dilemmas.it is impossible to anticipate which, if any, research strategies developed in education and medicine warrant close examination for emulation instress and cognition research. however, a good case can be made forinvestigating the feasibility of methods that entail central roles for twospecific techniques: (a) the analysis of naturally occurring incidents and (b)the study of simulations, including competitive games.incident analyseshelmreichõs (1990) inquiry into the air ontario crash at dryden is agood illustration of incident analysis. the investigator sifted through theavailable records of a significant, catastrophic event, trying to reconstructconditions that may have led or contributed to it. among those conditionswere ones that fit prevailing stress theories. it so happened that, because ofhis previous work, helmreich was aware of stress effects and hence wouldhave been on the lookout for their possible involvement in the drydenincident. this might not always be the case whenever incident analyses areroutinely performed (e.g., in highrisk domains such as aviation, nuclearpower, and surgery). we therefore recommend that protocols for regularlycommissioned incident analyses (e.g., by the nuclear regulatory commission, the federal aviation administration, and various surgery review boards)be designed so that the possible role of stress can be evaluated critically.among the inherent weaknesses of fullblown mishap analyses are theirexpense and the (fortunate) rareness of the incidents. one variation on theincident analysis approach relies on statistical explorations of richer (butnecessarily less detailed) routine archival data and could thus circumventthese drawbacks. an example of the requisite kind of information source isthe database maintained by the national aeronautics and space administrationõsaviation safety reporting system (asrs). this is an archive of reportssubmitted by individuals throughout the u.s. civilian aviation system. suchreports, which are recorded anonymously, describe any conditions or activities the reporter thinks might be hazardous. williams et al. (1992) successfully analyzed asrs reports about incidents involving resource management and geographic disorientation. there is nothing to preclude similaranalyses of stressedrelated incidents.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress271another variation on incident analysis entails embedding experimentsor quasiexperiments (cook and campbell, 1979) within naturally occurringactivities that are likely to be stressful, but to which certain individualshave already voluntarily committed themselves. one example (which wasnot considered particularly successful by the investigators themselves) wasa study by idzikowski and baddeley (1983) of the reactions of inexperienced public speakers prior to delivering colloquium papers. another widelycited pair of studies were those in which fenz (1974; fenz and jones, 1972)traced arousal patterns in parachutists preparing to make jumps. the embedding studies that have perhaps been least susceptible to subject selfselection biases are those that tested ways of teaching surgery patients tomanage the stress associated with their impending operations (e.g., langeret al., 1975).incident analyses have been performed for years (see, e.g., woods,1993). the reports resulting from such analyses, as well as the manualsthat sometimes guide them, suggest a remarkable degree of methodologicalsophistication and thoroughness. for example, the national transportationsafety boardõs investigatorõs manual prescribes in great detail who is toparticipate in the investigation of airplane crashes and what their roles shouldbe. an especially attractive feature of the manual is a checklist of humanperformance factors that should be examined; for example, life habit patterns, training, and control design. there has been some discussion ofcritical issues underlying incident analyses (e.g., reason, 1990). nevertheless, it appears that the scholarly literature on such issues is surprisinglyscant. the rarity of relevant reports highlights both an opportunity and aneed for methodological developments to which human factors stress researchers could be major contributors.in collaboration with practicing incident analysts from diverse backgrounds, human factors specialists should aggressively seek to extend thepublic literature on incident analysis techniques. there are numerous specific issues such a literature should address, as our illustrations have highlighted. take the case of helmreichõs (1990) examination of the air ontariocrash at dryden. we conjectured that helmreichõs awareness of stresstheories probably sensitized him to the possible role of stress in the crash.but critics might say that such awareness actually threatens the integrity ofincident analyses. for example, research has shown (e.g., chapman andchapman, 1967) that clinical psychologists who hold theories that certainsigns ought to be indicative of patientsõ true conditions tend to see òillusorycorrelationsó between those signs and conditions even when in reality noconnections exist. a strong literature on incident analysis methods wouldaddress techniques for precluding such validity threats.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.272emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchsimulationsin any simulation, the aim is to duplicate some, but not all, of theessential features of a particular experience (see jones et al., 1985). forinstance, flight simulators are used in pilot training mainly because they aremuch cheaper to build and operate than real aircraft; they closely approximate the behavior of an aircraft but not its costs. the present researchrecommendation is that the same approach be attempted in the domain ofstress and cognition. that is, an effort should be made to develop stresssimulators as research tools that would induce realistic stress reactions butwould not actually expose subjects to the threat of serious harm that is anessential element of stress.passable stress simulators should in principle be more difficult to construct than physical simulators. history has shown that a functional flightsimulator needs to emulate only the physical response to an operatorõs manipulation of a control device (including what is seen through the cockpitwindshield). the details of actually building such a simulator might bequite involved, but the underlying physical (and perceptual) principles arewell known. the builder of a stress simulator, however, must bring aboutpsychological illusions; the subject should feel stress without actually beingsubject to the hazards that are normally a prerequisite for it. unfortunately,what we know about stress principles is not enough to guide us in creatingthose illusions in a systematic way. thus, to the extent that stress simulators are feasible, they must emanate from researchersõ intuitions and everyday experiences.one starting point for developing stress simulators might be commonplace activities that appear to already approximate what we would like thesimulators to do. several examples come to mind: (a) films, (b) amusementpark rides, (c) roleplaying exercises, and (d) competitive games. we canall recall encounters with one or more of these activities in which we experienced what felt like serious stress. (think of your most memorable horrormovie, fun house, or roller coaster ride.) at one level of consciousness, wewere fully cognizant that we were in no real danger; otherwise, we wouldnever have agreed to participate. however, that assessment was temporarily suspended and put completely out of mind. effectively, we allowedourselves to be encapsulated within a small, insular world where gutwrenchingthreats abounded.it is unclear exactly what makes an effective horror movie, for instance.and perhaps that is the genius of artistry. but it should be possible tosystematically review good and poor films, rides, roleplaying exercises,and the like in order to glean hints of techniques that could be mimicked inbuilding useful stress simulators. for example, one plausible working hyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress273pothesis is that a good simulator must insulate the subject from externalstimulation that would encourage thoughts like, òthis is only a game,ó òirealize that nothing bad can actually happen to me,ó or òin the larger schemeof things, this just doesnõt matter.óin the abstract, the kinds of stress simulators suggested here seem almost farfetched or frivolous. they are not, however. instantiations ofsimilar ideas already exist and have proven their value. take the case ofroleplaying. armstrong (1987) has reviewed research (including some ofhis own) about forecasting the outcomes of conflict situations, such as unionnegotiations. he specifically compared the relative accuracy of forecastsgenerated by expert opinion and those that relied on role plays of the conflict situations. forecasts based on roleplaying tend to be far better.or take competitive sports. there is an active subarea of sports psychology that focuses on stress and performance among athletes (see jonesand hardy, 1990). work in this area should be examined not only formethodological ideas but also for possible generalizations of its substantivefindings beyond the domain of sports.there is currently considerable activity in the development of virtualreality technology. much of that work is proceeding at a breakneck pace inthe private entertainment industry, to the point that several virtual realitygames and òridesó are currently available to consumers in special arcadesand amusement parks (corliss, 1993). one perspective on these developments is that they are expected to be so lucrative precisely because theypromise to be so much better than competing technologies (e.g., conventional video games and films) at simulating extreme stressors. we suggestthat their potential as stress and cognition research platforms be thoroughlyexplored. should the anticipated commercial success of virtual reality entertainment devices be realized, researchers might also find themselves witha readymade volunteer subject pool analogous to the skydivers studied byfenz (1974) and his colleagues. in fact, researchers might even want toexplore developing research simulators that are in fact ògamesó includedamong other games in commercial arcades and parks. decision researchershave sometimes tested the generalizability of behavioral decisionmakingprinciples in the highstakes, realworld environment of las vegas casinos(e.g., goodman et al., 1979; lichtenstein and slovic, 1973).one paradoxical complication of stress simulation should be acknowledged and addressed by stress research methodologists and ethicists. ourdiscussion has emphasized the simulation of stress without the real dangerof direct physical harm. for instance, in a simulator, there is no chance of asubjectõs being killed in a highspeed crash. but to the extent that realstress is induced, there is still the potential for psychological and indirectphysical harm from the stress itself (see, e.g., cox, 1988). in the vernacuemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchlar, the simulation might òscare the subject out of his wits.ó screeningsubjects on appropriate risk factors is one seemingly reasonable approach tosuch possibilities (e.g., shanteau and dino, 1993).stresshandling approacheswe have noted that existing stress and cognition theories suggest thatthere are conditions in which stress can be expected to enhance performance. however, the overarching theme of our recommendations for substantive research is that human factors investigators should develop practical means for counteracting or handling adverse stresscognition interactions.five approaches to solving human factors stress problems can be distinguished:approach 1: eliminate or weaken the stressor.approach 2: reduce stress reactions by the current system participants.approach 3: select system participants who are stress resistant if notstress immune.approach 4: train system participants to function effectively even whenstressed.approach 5: design system features and procedures so that system goalsare achieved despite the presence of high stress levels among system participantsñstressproofing, as it were.to varying degrees, all five of these approaches are discernible in thestressrelated literature (most of which does not explicitly address humanfactors). nevertheless, some of themñapproaches 1 and 2, in particularñare emphasized more than others. in fact, approaches 1 and 2 can be seenas the standard strategies for dealing with stress. the underlying idea isthat if stress is a bad thing, get rid of it. in approach 1, the work situation isdesigned to minimize the presence and intensity of stressors, for instance,by eliminating noise or altering workload schedules (see chiles, 1982). inapproach 2, an effort is made to change how system personnel react tostressors. a classic example of this approach is òstress inoculation training(sit)ó (meichenbaum, 1985). when a person is inoculated against an infectious disease (e.g., chicken pox), he or she is exposed to mild forms ofthe disease with the expectation that the body will develop the ability toresist the more severe natural forms of that disease. similarly, a key element of sit is that an individual is exposed to progressively more intenseforms of a stressor and is assisted in developing tools for managing thatstressor, to the point that stress reactions no longer occur.the logic of stresselimination approaches is not unreasonable. however, as noted by druckman and swets (1988), it is impossible to eliminateemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress275or even reduce stress all the time. no matter what we do, some crises willinevitably occur. we should not simply concede defeat and allow nature (inthis instance, dysfunctional stresscognition interactions) to take its course.approaches 3 to 5 are specific tacks for engineering effective system performance no matter what circumstances might arise. we will now makeresearch recommendations for each of these strategies.selecting stressresistant personnelimplicit in the conceptual scheme of figure 10.1ñand consistent withcommon experienceñis the assumption that individuals tend to differ inhow stressful they find particular circumstances and how well they performunder those conditions. also as suggested by the conceptual scheme, partof the reason for this variation is that people have different competencies.thus, operator a is less stressed by task demands than operator b becausehe or she knows the job better; it constitutes no threat. the more interesting situation is that in which equally competent individuals differ in theirstress reactions. our conceptual scheme implies that this could occur foreither of two reasons. first, these individuals might appraise situations andtheir competencies differently; the stressed person could see tasks as moredemanding and his or her skills as weaker, thereby anticipating less adequate performance. alternatively, individuals might vary in the intensitywith which they feel the pain of task failure. such appraisal and reactivitydifferences are a major focus of work on decision and motivation processes(see arkes, 1982; yates, 1990). consider, for example, why not all consumers choose the same car or why not all students pursue their studiesvigorously.fortunately, stress and cognition researchers have begun seeking tounderstand the nature of individual differences and the bases for them (seehockey et al., 1986, especially section iv: òindividual differences, adaptation, and copingó). however, for our purposes, the essential issues aresomewhat different. in particular, the primary question is whether and howwe can accurately and economically predict which individuals are likely tobe unaffected by severe stressors in given situations.consider air traffic control. to the lay observer, the responsibilitiesand the pace of air traffic control seem crushingly stressful. airplanesappear to converge on airports unceasingly, and a single mistake could befatal for hundreds of people. there is some evidence that air traffic controlspecialists (atcss) do exhibit unusually high stress symptoms (e.g., cobband rose, 1973), but the literature is by no means unanimous on this conclusion (crump, 1979; smith, 1985). numerous studies indicate that atcssdo experience stress levels comparable to those of other workers but theyregard stress as among the least of their concerns. it is conceivableñinemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.276emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchfact, plausibleñthat the stress resistance of the individuals who composethe corps of working atcss is higher than that of the initial pool of trainees. somehow, because of selfselection and dismissals for correlated factors, stressprone trainees leave the program. this natural filtering processmight be an effective way to choose stressresistant participants for a system in which stressors are inevitable. however, that process is undoubtedlyexpensive and perhaps risky and inefficient. it thus seems appropriate thata priority for stress and cognition researchers is to explore other ways toidentify people who are stress resistant.do people, in fact, exhibit behaviors that could be used to predict stressresistance? perhaps so. for instance, there are indications that atcss arereliably distinct from the general population with respect to several easilyassessed personal characteristics, such as low trait anxiety and tendenciestoward nonconformity (smith, 1985). research in the more general personality literature reveals other encouraging signs (but see driskell and salas,1991b). for example, allred and smith (1989) have shown that individualswho score high on socalled hardiness scales tend to find pleasant andinviting challenges in what others regard as unpleasant stressors (see alsokobasa, 1979). parkes (1986) similarly found that extraversion scores amongnurses were correlated with their reactions to work stressors. finkelmanand kirschner (1980) have reported data consistent with their proposal thatlaboratory measures of information processing, such as delayed digit recall,could be used as specific predictors of stress resistance in humantechnology contexts such as air traffic control. and work reviewed by reason(1988) indicates that stress vulnerability is correlated with simple questionnaire reports of everyday òcognitive failures.ó we previously recommendedthe development of various forms of stress simulators, such as competitivegames and virtual reality experiences. if that effort succeeds, then it seemsonly natural that performance in the simulations be examined for their ability to predict individualsõ performance in the work situations of ultimateinterest: if trainee smith thinks clearly in tight game situations, is it reasonable to expect him or her to do the same when a catastrophe strikes theworkroom?training for stressful conditionskeinan and friedland (1984) performed an interesting experiment inwhich israeli military personnel served as subjects. the focal task requiredthe subject to search a page for randomly dispersed instances of a designated digit, say, ò3.ó at the end of the session, the subjectõs skill at thetask was evaluated by performance on three criterion trials. (surprisingly,there are actually better and worse ways of performing such tasks.) aftereach of the first two test trials, the subject received a 1.5 ma shock to hisemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress277fingers. the five conditions in the experiment were distinguished accordingto the context in which the subject was trained to perform the task. duringhighfidelity training, the subject received a 1.5 ma shock after 4 of the 10training trials. in lowfidelity training, these shocks were of 0.2 ma intensity. shocks of 0.2, 0.75, 1.0, and 1.5 ma intensity were administered insuccession during graduatedintensity training. shocks at these same levelsof intensity were administered in random sequence during randomintensitytraining. finally, subjects in a nostress condition received no shocks during training. figure 10.2 shows the mean numbers of correct target identifications, by condition, during the three criterion trials and the last threetraining trials. we recommend that a priority for future research be thedevelopment of procedures for training personnel to perform well even under stressful conditions (see also means et al., 1993). keinan and friedlandõsresults speak directly to how such development might proceed.first, note that the performance of the group trained under no stress wassuperior to that of any other group. moreover, the performance of thegraduatedfidelity and randomintensity subjects was especially poor. thissuggests that stress can be expected to interfere significantly with skillacquisition (but see christianson, 1992, for a contrasting view). moreover,7060504030highlowgraduatedrandomnonefidelityfidelity fidelityintensitytraining stresstrainingtrialscriteriontrialsfigure 10.2 mean number of correct target identifications as a function of training session stress. source: keinan and friedland (1984:table 1).correct target identifications (mean number)emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.278emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchit seems that the worse the stress, the worse the interference. (consistentwith previous discussions about stress effects, the apprehension and uncertainty in the graduatedfidelity and randomintensity conditions should amplify the associated stress.) the implied conclusion is that personnel shouldbe trained to perform required tasks under relaxed conditions. this contrasts with the strategy behind the various stress conditions in the keinanand friedland experiment. in that view, training should be most effectivewhen it occurs under conditions similar to those in which trainees musteventually perform.keinan and friedlandõs results indicate that we should expect a relaxedtraining approach to yield some performance decrement when a stressor iseventually encountered. (observe that criterion performance was worsethan terminal training performance for the nostress group.) but there mightbe a way to preclude this decrement. a plausibly effective hybrid trainingstrategy would train in basic skills under relaxed conditions and then allowtrainees to òoverlearnó those skills under stressful conditions. yet anotherpotentially effective strategy would be to concede that skill acquisition isslower under stress, but insist that it simply needs to be extended for alonger period of time. neither of these strategies was tried directly bykeinan and friedland, but these and others should be high on the researchagenda.leaving aside the use of electrical shock, research like that of keinanand friedland is clearly the logical starting point for the kind of work that isrequired to inform the development of techniques for training people toperform well under stress. but as we have suggested, this work needs to beextended in various ways. there are also numerous matters of detail. thekeinan and friedland experiment addressed only one training issue: whenand in what form should stress be introduced into a training regimen? consider some of the other issues, which are closely tied to fundamental questions about stress and cognition.task type: well defined versus free formvisual search similar to that required of keinan and friedlandõs subjects is clearly an important part of many duties in humantechnology systems. however, there are many other activities in which such welldefinedtasks play a minimal role. in fact, we can expect that in crisis situations(e.g., during catastrophic weather conditions or equipment breakdowns) therequired tasks will be anything but well defined; instead, they will be freeform in the extreme. as was argued above, the inherent uncertainty in suchunique situations can be expected to intensify the stress that is experienced(harris, 1987). a close examination of the stress literature suggests thatalmost all experimental stress research has studied performance on wellemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress279defined tasks. therefore, our beliefs about stress influences, including thoseindicated by keinan and friedlandõs results, might not be as generalizableas we would like. future studies should determine whether or not this is thecase.strategic versus reactive stress effectsthe notion of controlled versus automatic information processing iswidely recognized (schneider and shiffrin, 1977; shiffrin and schneider,1977). this notion is different from the distinction between strategic andreactive stress responses but is related to it. in a strategic response, theindividual executes a deliberate plan for coping with stressful conditions.for instance, faced with a stringent time limit for making a choice, a decision maker might rationally elect to alter the decision process, giving temporal priority to those aspects of the options that are deemed most important(e.g., ben zur and breznitz, 1981). the decision maker realizes that theremight be insufficient time to deliberate all the factors he or she wouldideally weigh and thus concludes that he or she must ignore some of them(see also payne et al., 1988). in contrast, a reactive response is automatically evoked by a stressor; the individual cannot help himself or herself.an example is suggested by janis and mannõs (1977) theory of decisionbehavior. this theory proposes that the nature of the decision process isconditioned by the intensity of the stress involved. when stress is at itszenith, the theory suggests that the decision maker enters a stage of hypervigilancecharacterized in part by the kind of loss of control associated with purereactivity (see also janis et al., 1983).it seems that the nature of stress performance training should be dictated by whether a stressful situation tends to evoke strategic or reactiveresponses. if responses tend to be strategic, then we might want to focus onthings like incentives for selecting one type of action rather than others.such tactics would be ineffective when responses are normally reactive. inthe latter case, we would have to òreprogramó the subject to spontaneouslyperform different actions given appropriate conditions, a process that mustrely on seemingly countless repetitions. a good analogy is what occurs insports training. tennis coaches sometimes have their students repeat amaneuver over and over again. that way, when the corresponding conditions occur during a tense match, the player does the right thing withouthaving to think; it just happens. thus, part of the stress training researchagenda should be directed toward distinguishing which stress responses arestrategic and which are reactive. a related issue that must be addressed isdeciding which responses an organization might want to be strategic ratherthan reactive, or vice versa.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.280emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchspecific countermeasuresexactly what should personnel be trained to do when performing theirduties under stress? suppose that an operator is instructed to do a, then b,and then c under normal conditions. on one hand, we might expect stressto induce the operator to deviate from the abc routine when he or sheought to adhere to it. if so, training must be directed to maintaining thatadherence. but how? on the other hand, an emergency might require thatideally the operator act differently from what would be appropriate undernormal conditions. how should the operator be taught to respond mostadequately to the altered circumstances? to the best of our knowledge,these kinds of essential issues have not been directly addressed, and clearlythey must be. one way researchers might proceed is to begin with whatprevious research has taught us about adverse stresscognition interactions.stressperformance training protocols can then be pointedly designed tocounteract those interactions, as we will illustrate below.we noted previouslyñand hence this call for more researchñthat thestress and cognition literature has always been sparse. nevertheless, thatliterature indicates consensus about several fundamental principles that wehope will be verified by future work (see, e.g., hamilton and warburton,1979; hockey, 1983, 1986; hockey and hamilton, 1983). for instance,there seems to be general agreement that stress tends to reduce shorttermmemory (stm) performance. it is not clear how and why this occurs (seealso christianson, 1992). there might be a reduction in sheer capacity.alternatively, capacity might remain constant, but must now be dividedbetween a focal task and other tasks, such as monitoring the stressor (cohen,1978; reason 1988). it is important for stress researchers to determine thebasis for this decrement in stm performance. suppose that worsened stmperformance is due to attention being shared with monitoring and managingthe stressor. it should be easier to recover the attention if that stressor is anambient stressor than if it is a task stressor. an ambient stressor (e.g., heat,noise, close confinement) is one whose presence is independent of the personõstask performance, whereas the opposite is true of a task stressor (e.g., timepressure or high performance stakes) (yates, 1990).regardless of the basis for the reduction of stm performance withstress, there are direct training implications. for example, suppose a taskanalysis indicates that an operatorõs duties require him or her to performmental operations that rely heavily on stm (e.g., operations like thoserequired in the decision algorithms zakay and wooler, 1984, trained theirsubjects to perform). then the operator should be taught to distrust his orher ability to carry out those operations unaided when under duress; instead,the operator might use paper and pencil and doublecheck.another consensus conclusion is that stress reduces the scope of peremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress281ceptual attention (baddeley, 1972), a phenomenon sometimes called tunneling. thus, stress reduces the range of elements in the environment a personsees or hears. an adjustablebeam spotlight provides a useful metaphor forperceptual narrowing. the claim is that stress reduces the width of thebeam. a plausible alternative hypothesis is that the width of the beamremains constant but the beam simply develops a more erratic sweep (seekeinan, 1987; keinan et al., 1987).as in the case of stm, there are several fundamental issues that need tobe resolved. assuming that perceptual narrowing does indeed occur, alongwhat gradient does it proceed? as noted by yates (1990), in the context ofdecision making, at least three different gradients have been proposed in theliterature. in the easterbrook (1959) hypothesis, attention is restricted according to the objective, functional significance of various items of information for decision quality. the thesis implicit in the work of ben zur andbreznitz (1981), however, says that attention is reduced according to thepersonal evaluative significance of various features of the choice alternatives. and then there is the idea that (in one form, originated in drivetheory) stress reduces attention according to the inverse of the probabilitiesof information being taken into account under nonstressful conditions (seezajonc, 1968). another attentionnarrowing question concerns memory.much of the information used in cognitive tasks is retrieved from memory.does stress induce retrievalnarrowing phenomena analogous to perceptualrestrictions?the ultimate resolution of finegrained theoretical issues like perceptualnarrowing gradients will indeed have practical implications. nevertheless, stress training designers need not wait for a complete understanding ofthe theoretical issues. as suggested in the case of stm decrements, trainees might be warned that perceptual narrowing is likely to occur. but if theexperience of debiasing in judgment and decision making is a guide (seefischhoff, 1982), this is unlikely to decrease inappropriate narrowing to anygreat extent. instead, the trainee must be given specific prescriptions andmust be taught when and how to apply them, or perhaps even òconditionedóto implement them essentially automatically. exactly what those prescriptions might be will depend on the designersõ ingenuity.there have been some indications that stress alters peopleõs reliance oninformation from different sources. for instance, wickens et al. (1989) citeevidence that stress encourages people to depend more heavily on information retrieved directly from longterm memory (ltm), presumably at theexpense of information that is perceived directly from the environment orsynthesized anew in stm (see also klein, 1989). it is as if stress increasesthe significance of a personõs prior experiences. perhaps this is why, independently of competency differences, stress is sometimes found to havegreater effects on performance for novices than for experts (baddeley, 1972;emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.282emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhancock, 1986a). greater dependence on ltm might be advantageous insome stressful situations. however, the kind of rigidity it implies mightwell be dysfunctional in crisis situations involving novel circumstances (e.g.,a breakdown in a mechanism that has never broken down). there is at leastsome evidence that stress does in fact reduce certain forms of creativity thatare required in such circumstances (shanteau and dino, 1993; voss, 1977).once again, training designers must be inventive in devising ways to counteract these effects.stressproofing humantechnology systemsour final recommendation is similar to the previous one, but it appliesto humantechnology systems rather than to individual participants. specifically, we suggest that researchers seek to develop system features and routines that allow the systems to achieve their goals even when participantsare stressed. this should begin with an effort to understand how stressorsaffect both individual and group behavior. we have already discussed someof what is known about stress and cognition interactions at the individuallevel, including the fact that the literature is so sparse. for various reasonsthe literature on stress at the group level is even more limited (see davis etal., 1992; park, 1990). thus, researchers who take up the challenge posedby this final proposal will need to make contributions to fundamental understanding of the problem as well as to practical innovations.the reactions of the individual are key to the design of systems thatfunction well in stressful circumstances. in our previous discussion, wesuggested that training efforts be directed toward equipping system participants with personal skills to counteract the adverse effects of stress oncognition. the system could also be redesigned in a way that gives participants tools and procedures to counteract those effects. for example, recallthat one effect of stress is to restrict the range of attention and considercrisis situations, such as the medical emergencies involving outpatientsõoperating sophisticated equipment discussed in chapter 4. a specially constructed expert system might force operators to explicitly acknowledge thatthey have reviewed checklists presented to them by the system.or consider the creativity limitations we should expect in crises, whencreativity is at a premium. although the kinds of options that would occurto any single individual during stress are likely to be restricted, differentindividuals should be expected to generate somewhat different ideas. thus,systems might be designed so that under stressful conditions, proceduresrequire that inputs from multiple participants be elicited and synthesized.(òtwo heads are better than one,ó and so on.) not surprisingly, such activities can be done in ways that are more of a hindrance than a help (see hill,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress2831982). fortunately, however, there is a literature that discusses how suchgroup òprocess lossesó can be avoided (e.g., dennis and valacich, 1993).as we have indicated, stress influences on group processes have beenstudied less extensively than we might like. nevertheless, the literature thatdoes exist suggests that stress is likely to alter communication and perhapsauthority patterns among humantechnology system participants and thatnot all of those changes are for the better (e.g., driskell and salas, 1991a;gladstein and reilly, 1985). for instance, janis (1972) has proposed thatstress is a major antecedent of the dysfunctional form of organizationaldecision making called ògroupthink.ó in groupthink, a policymaking groupbecomes so preoccupied with achieving concurrence that other aspects ofthe decision task suffer from sometimesfatal neglect. as researchers attempt to develop the kinds of stressresistant systems envisioned, they shouldinclude features that anticipate and circumvent such dysfunctional socialpatterns.summaryas we noted at the outset, there are numerous indications that the stressesexperienced by the people involved in humantechnology systems have intensified in recent years and are likely to continue doing so for some time inthe future. human roles in these systems increasingly place greater demands on cognitive than on, say, motor activities. this implies that goodhuman factors design will increasingly rely on our understanding of theconnections between stress and cognition. an examination of the literaturereveals that the requisite knowledge base is surprisingly skimpy, given broadbased interest in stress. we concluded that a major contributor to this stateof affairs is probably the inherent difficulty of inducing significant stress insubjects while protecting those subjects from the potential harm inherent inthe stress construct.our analysis implied that a prerequisite for meeting the challenge is thedevelopment of better methods of doing stress and cognition research. hence,our first class of research recommendations is methodological. perhapsmodeling their efforts on those of methodologists and ethicists in educationand medicine, human factors investigators should seek to develop techniques that are practically and ethically feasible yet capable of revealinghow significant stress does indeed affect cognition. any and all promisingapproaches should be explored. but we argued that two especially promising methodological avenues should have priority. one of them relies onanalyses of naturally occurring incidents involving stressful conditions, suchas accidents. the other uses various forms of simulation, including competitive games and virtual reality technologies.we concluded that the pressing needs for substantive research on stressemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.284emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchand cognition are most productively conceptualized in terms of alternativeapproaches for handling adverse effects of stress on cognitive performance.three particular approaches seem to demand special attention:¥selecting stressresistant personnel. the critical assumption underlying this approach is that people differ reliably in their tendencies to perform cognitive tasks well or poorly under stressful conditions. the aim ofthe research recommended in this area is identifying easytoassess predictors of such individual differences.¥training people for stressful conditions. a fundamental yet unresolved training issue that needs to be addressed is when and in what formstress should be introduced into training programs. other recommendationsaddress questions that need to be resolved in order to provide specific guidance to stress trainers: how, if at all, do stress effects on cognition dependon whether the cognitive task is well defined as opposed to free form?which cognitive responses to stress are strategic and which are reactive,and what are the implications of the distinction? what specific countermeasures for such adverse stress responses as diminished shortterm memoryperformance are effectiveñand why?¥stressproofing humantechnology systems. most discussions ofstress have emphasized the behavior of individuals. however, a good casecan be made that much is to be gained by designing humantechnologysystems, including protocols for social interactions, so that the systemsfunction well even during times of heightened stress. our broad recommendation is that human factors researchers seek out principles that would inform such design objectives. specific recommendations call for the development of expert systems and organization schemes that compensate foranticipated human difficulties, such as restricted attention and reduced creativity.the practical challenges posed by research on stress and cognition areformidable and have undoubtedly contributed to the paucity of such work inthe past. however, there is reason to be optimistic that developments alongthe lines suggested here will meet with greater success than in the past.that work promises more than immediate practical benefits. it should alsolead to significant advances in our understanding of fundamental principlesof cognition and stress.referencesallred, k.d., and t.w. smith1989the hardy personality: cognitive and physiological responses to evaluative threat.journal of personality and social psychology 56:257266.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress285arkes, h.r.1982psychological theories of motivation, 2nd ed. monterey, calif.: brooks/cole.armstrong, j.s.1987forecasting methods for conflict situations. pp. 157176 in g. wright and p.ayton, eds., judgmental forecasting. chichester, england: wiley.baddeley, a.d.1972selective attention and performance in dangerous environments. british journalof psychology 63:537546.ben zur, h., and s.j. breznitz1981the effect of time pressure on risky choice behavior. acta psychologica 47:89104.broadbent, d.e.1963differences and interactions between stresses. quarterly journal of experimentalpsychology 15:205211.chapman, l.j., and j.p. chapman1967genesis of popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations. journal of abnormal psychology 72:193204.chiles, w.d.1982workload, task, and situational factors as modifiers of complex human performance. pp. 1156 in e.a. alluisi and e.a. fleishman, eds., human performanceand productivity. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum.christianson, s.a.1992emotional stress and eyewitness memory: a critical review. psychological bulletin 112:284309.church, g.j.1993jobs in an age of insecurity. time november 22:3239.cobb, s., and r.m. rose1973hypertension, peptic ulcer, and diabetes in air traffic controllers. journal of theamerican medical association 224:489492.cohen, s.1978environmental load and the allocation of attention. pp. 129 in a. baum, j.e.singer, and s. vallins, eds., advances in environmental psychology. hillsdale,n.j.: erlbaum.1980aftereffects of stress on human performance and social behavior: a review ofresearch and theory. psychological bulletin 88:82108.cohen, s., and s. spacapan1978the aftereffects of stress: an attentional interpretation. environmental psychology and nonverbal behavior 3:4357.cook, t.d., and d.t. campbell1979quasiexperimentation: design and analysis issues for field settings. chicago,ill.: rand mcnally.corliss, r.1993virtual, man! time 1(november):8083.cox, t.1988psychobiological factors in stress and health. pp. 603628 in s. fisher and j.reason, eds., handbook of life stress, cognition and health. new york: wiley.crump, j.h.1979review of stress in air traffic control: its measurement and effects. aviation,space, and environmental medicine 50:243248.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.286emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchdavis, j.h., t. kameda, and m.f. stasson1992group risk taking: selected topics. pp. 163199 in j.f. yates, ed., risktakingbehavior. chichester, england: wiley.dennis, a.r., and j.s. valacich1993computer brainstorms: more heads are better than one. journal of applied psychology 78:531537.driskell, j.e., and e. salas1991agroup decision making under stress. journal of applied psychology 76:473478.1991bovercoming the effects of stress on military performance: human factors, training, and selection strategies. pp. 183193 in r. gal and a.d. mangelsdorff, eds.,handbook of military psychology. chichester, england: wiley.druckman, d., and r.a. bjork, eds.1991in the mindõs eye: enhancing human performance. committee on techniquesfor the enhancement of human performance, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.druckman, d., and j.a. swets, eds.1988enhancing human performance: issues, theories, and techniques. committeeon techniques for the enhancement of human performance, national researchcouncil. washington, d.c.: national academy press.easterbrook, j.a.1959the effect of emotion on cue utilization and the organization of behavior. psychological review 66:183201.everly, g.s., jr., and s.a. sobelman1987assessment of the human stress response. new york: ams press.fenz, w.d.1974arousal and performance of novice parachutists to multiple sources of conflict andstress. studia psychologica 16:133144.fenz, w.d., and g.b. jones1972the effect of uncertainty on mastery of stress: a case study. psychophysiology9:615619.finkelman, j.m., and c. kirschner1980an informationprocessing interpretation of air traffic control stress. human factors 22:561567.fischhoff, b.1982debiasing. pp. 422444 in d. kahneman, p. slovic, and a. tversky, eds., judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. new york: cambridge university press.gladstein, d.l., and n.p. reilly1985group decision making under threat: the tycoon game. academy of managementjournal 28:613627.goodman, b., m. saltzman, w. edwards, and d.h. krantz1979prediction of bids for twooutcome gambles in a casino setting. organizationalbehavior and human performance 24:382399.hamilton, p., and d. warburton, eds.1979human stress and cognition. chichester, england: wiley.hammond, k.r., and j.k. doyle1991effects of stress on judgment and decision making, part ii. final report forcontract no. daal0386d001. research triangle park, n.c.: u.s. armyresearch office.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress287hancock, p.a.1986athe effect of skill on performance under an environmental stressor. aviation,space, and environmental medicine 57:5964.1986bsustained attention under thermal stress. psychological bulletin 99:263281.hancock, p.a., and j.a. warm1989a dynamic model of stress and sustained attention. human factors 31:519537.harris, j.h.1987prior task experience and psychological stress: an investigation. pp. 4553 in j.h.humphrey, ed., human stress: current selected research, vol. 2. new york:ames press.hartzell, j.1992armynasa aircrewaircraft integration (a3i) program. presentation (in october) to the committee on human factors, national research council, atlanta, ga.helmreich, r.l.1990human factors aspects of the air ontario crash at dryden, ontario: analysis andrecommendations to the commission of inquiry. pp. 319348 in v.p. moshansky,ed., technical appendices to the final report of the commission of inquiry intothe air ontario crash at dryden, ontario.hill, g.w.1982group versus individual performance: are n + 1 heads better than one? psychological bulletin 91:517539.hockey, g.r.j., ed.1983stress and fatigue in human performance. chichester, england: wiley.hockey, g.r.j.1986changes in operator efficiency. in k. boff, l. kaufman, and j. thomas, eds.,handbook of perception and performance, vol. ii. new york: wiley.hockey, r., and p. hamilton1983the cognitive patterning of stress states. pp. 331362 in g.r.j. hockey, ed.,stress and fatigue in human performance. chichester, england: wiley.hockey, g.r.j., a.w.k. gaillard, and m.f.h. coles, eds.1986energetics and human information processing. dordrecht, netherlands: martinusnijhoff.idzikowski, c., and a. baddeley1983waiting in the wings: apprehension, public speaking and performance. ergonomics 26:575583.janis, i.l.1972victims of groupthink. boston, mass.: houghton mifflin.janis, i.l., and l. mann1977decision making. new york: free press.janis, i.l., p. defares, and p. grossman1983hypervigilant reactions to threat. pp. 142 in h. selye, ed., selyeõs guide tostress research, vol. 3. new york: scientific and academic editions.jones, j.g., and l. hardy, eds.1990stress and performance in sport. chichester, england: wiley.jones, e.r., r.t. hennessy, and s. deutsch, eds.1985human factors aspects of simulation. working group on simulation, committeeon human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.288emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchkeinan, g.1987decision making under stress: scanning of alternatives under controllable anduncontrollable threats. journal of personality and social psychology 52:639644.keinan, g., and n. friedland1984dilemmas concerning the training of individuals for task performance under stress.journal of human stress 10:185190.keinan, g., n. friedland, and y. benporath1987decision making under stress: scanning of alternatives under physical threat.acta psychologica 64:219228.klein, g.a.1989recognitionprimed decisions. advances in machine systems research 5:4792.kobasa, s.c.1979stressful life events, personality, and health: an inquiry into hardiness. journal ofpersonality and social psychology 37:111.langer, e.j., i.l. janis, and j.a. wolfer1975reduction of psychological stress in surgical patients. journal of experimentalsocial psychology 11:155165.lazarus, r.s., and s. folkman1984stress, appraisal, and coping. new york: springer.levine, s.1988stress and performance. background paper prepared for the committee on techniques for the enhancement of human performance, national research council,washington, d.c.: national academy press. available through the nationalacademy pressõs publicationondemand program.lichtenstein, s., and p. slovic1973responseinduced reversals of preference in gambling: an extended replication inlas vegas. journal of experimental psychology 101:1620.mann, l.1992stress, affect, and risk taking. pp. 201230 in j.f. yates, ed., risktaking behavior. chichester, england: wiley.manuso, j.1983the equitable life assurance society program. preventive medicine 12:658662.means, b., e. salas, b. crandall, and t.o. jacobs1993training decision makers for the real world. pp. 306326 in g.a. klein, j. orasunu,r. calderwood, and c.e. zsambok, eds., decision making in action: models andmethods. norwood, n.j.: ablex.meichenbaum, d.1985stress inoculation training. new york: pergamon.mross, e.f., and k.r. hammond1989annotated bibliography for cognition and stress. report no. 295. center forresearch on judgment and policy. boulder: university of colorado.newberry, b.h., d.r. baldwin, j.e. madden, and t.j. gerstenberger1987stress and disease: an assessment. pp. 123151 in j.h. humphrey, ed., humanstress: current selected research, vol. 2. new york: ames press.novaco, r.w.1988stress reduction programs. background paper prepared for the committee ontechniques for the enhancement of human performance, national research council.washington, d.c.: national academy press. available through the nationalacademy pressõs publicationondemand program.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cognitive performance under stress289park, w.w.1990a review of research on groupthink. journal of behavioral decision making3:229245.parkes, k.r.1986coping in stressful episodes: the role of individual differences, environmentalfactors, and situational characteristics. journal of personality and social psychology 51:12771292.paterson, r.j., and r. neufeld1987clear danger: situational determinants of the appraisal of threat. psychologicalbulletin 101:404416.payne, j.w., j.r. bettman, and e.j. johnson1988adaptive strategy selection in decision making. journal of experimental psychology: learning, memory, and cognition 14:534552.reason, j.1988stress and cognitive failures. pp. 405421 in s. fisher and j. reason, eds., handbook of life stress, cognition and health. new york: wiley.1990human error. new york: cambridge university press.ritov, i., and j. baron1990reluctance to vaccinate: omission bias and ambiguity. journal of behavioraldecision making 3:263277.rogers, k.j.s., m.j. smith, and p.c. sainfort1990electronic performance monitoring, job design and psychological stress. pp. 854858 in proceedings of the human factors society 34th annual meeting. santamonica, calif.: human factors society.rothstein, h.g.1986the effects of time pressure on judgment in multiple cue probability learning.organizational behavior and human decision processes 37:8392.schneider, w., and r.m. shiffrin1977controlled and automatic human information processing: i. detection, search, andattention. psychological review 84:166.selye, h.1956the stress of life. new york: mcgrawhill.1983the stress concept: past, present, and future. pp. 120 in c.l. cooper, ed., stressresearch. new york: wiley.shanteau, j., and g.a. dino1993environmental stressor effects on creativity and decision making. pp. 293308 ino. svenson and a.j. maule, eds., time pressure and stress in human judgmentand decision making. new york: plenum.shiffrin, r.m., and w. schneider1977controlled and automatic human information processing: ii. perceptual learning,automatic attending, and a general theory. psychological review 84:127190.siconols, m.1992individual investorsõ holdings of u.s. stocks fall below 50% of total market forthe first time. the wall street journal 13(november):c1.smith, r.c.1985stress, anxiety, and the air traffic control specialist. pp. 337358 in i.g. sarasonand c.d. spielberger, eds., stress and anxiety, vol. 9. new york: hemispherepublishing.time1983june 6 issue.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.290emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchu.s. army1992afratricide: reducing selfinflicted losses. call newsletter 92(april):4. fortleavenworth, kans.: u.s. army combined arms command.1992bfratricide risk assessment for company leadership. call handbook 92(march):3.fort leavenworth, kans.: u.s. army combined arms command.voss, h.g.1977the effect of experimentally induced activation on creativity. journal of psychology 96:39.wickens, c.d.1992engineering psychology and human performance, 2nd ed. new york: harpercollins.wickens, c.d., a. stokes, b. barnett, and f. hyman1989the effects of stress on pilot judgment in a midis simulator (u). armstrongaerospace medical research laboratory report no. aamrltr88057. wrightpatterson air force base, ohio: army aerospace medical research laboratory.williams, h.p., m. tham, and c.d. wickens1992resource management and geographic disorientation in aviation incidents: areview of the asrs data base. aviation research laboratory report no. arl923/nasa922. savoy: university of illinois.woods, d.d.1993processtracing methods for the study of cognition outside of the experimentalpsychology laboratory. pp. 228251 in g.a. klein, j. orasunu, r. calderwood,and c.e. zsambok, eds., decision making in action: models and methods. norwood,n.j.: ablex.yates, j.f.1990judgment and decision making. englewood cliffs, n.j.: prentice hall.zajonc, r.b.1968social facilitation. science 149:269274.zakay, d., and s. wooler1984time pressure, training and decision effectiveness. ergonomics 27:273284.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.29111aiding intellectual workjohn d. gouldintroductionnearly all human intellectual work is aided by technology. in the nextdecade, new technology will make possible many new potential aids. themain thrust of this chapter is to structure the problem of aiding intellectualwork in such a way that human factors researchers can contribute towardthe development and evaluation of electronic systems that will indeed aidtheir users.the problemthe problem focused on in this chapter is how to carry out humanfactors research aimed at augmenting human intellectual work with electronic aids. aids include artifacts or tools, as well as procedures, techniques, organizational structures, and facilitated, encouraged communication patterns. most human intellectual work tends to be mentally demanding,with a priority on timeliness and with a high premium on getting the òrightinformationó (i.e., not just the right answer to a question asked, but information that is relevant to questions that should have been asked but werenot).today, all human intellectual work is augmented to some degree. electronic aids for intellectual work include ubiquitous, simple òsinglefunctionó tools, some of which are largely electronic versions of establishedemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.292emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchbooks (e.g., dictionaries, thesauruses, foreign language translators) and someof which are more (e.g., calculators, spelling verifiers). there are spreadsheets for businesspeople, highlevel programming languages and tools forcomputer application developers, cadam and very largescale integrated(vlsi) tools for hardware designers, and conferencing systems for groupwork. to help users transfer learning from one computer application toanother, software developers have attempted to standardize user interfacestyles (e.g., apple corporationõs macintosh style and ibmõs cua style).many jobs simply could not be performed without electronic aids (e.g.,work related to forecasting, reservations, large databases, simulations, andmuch medical practice).aiding intellectual work performance is a broad topic. several domainshave been addressed by recent national research council committees andare not explicitly covered here. one report summarized evidence on whetherhuman performance is enhanced through techniques that have their roots inacademic research, as well as techniques that have their roots in commercialenterprise. the various techniques used to enhance human performanceinclude training, pain management, stress management, expert guidance,meditation, selfhelp subliminal audiotapes, selfassessment techniques, mindaltering drugs, and sportspsychology techniques to aid performance underpressure (see druckman and bjork, 1991; druckman and swets, 1988).another national research council report (ferber et al., 1991) discusseshow human intellectual work performance can be affected by the linkagesbetween work and such family and personal areas as finances, marital status, child care, the need to support elderly relatives, marital stress, illness,and working at home. other studies have reviewed intellectual work aidsfor (a) people with special needs (e.g., sensory and motor impairments,communication difficulties) (see chapter 3) and (b) students in primary,secondary, and collegiate schools.why is aiding intellectual work important?there are three main reasons for understanding how to better aid humanintellectual work.it increases productivity and creativityproductivity is a national problem: many studies report that the productivity of the u.s. labor force is relatively stagnant. some widely usedelectronic aids have not helped much. nevertheless, there is the belief,supported by informal evidence, that electronic aids, if developed with users and their work organizations in mind, do enhance productivity and creativity and can allow people to work in new ways. for example, usingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work293electronic spreadsheets, business professionals routinely run òwhat ifó analysesin seconds, a task that previously took hours or days or that would simplynot have been done a few years ago. a variety of intellectual workers usesimulations to provide quick studies of situations that previously could bestudied only by actually building an object itself (if indeed it could bebuilt). scientists move single atoms, study their effects, and produce newcombinations with awesome possibilities. with new visualization systems,engineers and scientists can see how wings are affected by wind or how athunderstorm forms and thus develop an understanding that cannot be gainedfrom studying the thermodynamics and the underlying isolated equationsthemselves. powerful visualization machines have led to a change in thedesign of drugs: òscientists use graphics workstations to visualize a proteinin three dimensions and determine which drugs will fit best into its activesites. such visualization is so powerful that no pharmaceutical researcherwould try to do the job without itó (pool, 1992). an entire new field(experimental mathematics) and a way of thinking for mathematicians hasdeveloped based upon these new visualization tools (pool, 1992).it is socially responsiblethe abilities of people to cope with increasing intellectual work demands and their resulting selfimages are affected by tools they are given(e.g., see the section below on òorganizational impact of a new technologyó; see also kraut et al., 1989). some workers are deficient in problemsolving skills, spelling, composing, calculating, language skills (includingsecond language problems), giving instructions, and so forth. intellectualaids have the potential to reduce these deficiencies. intellectual aids alsohave the potential to help people deal with problems outside work (e.g.,financial planning, finding support groups, interacting with their children),and these, in turn, impact on their work lives (ferber et al., 1991). humanfactors researchers can help identify which intellectual tasks, if aided, couldlead to the most benefits (for individuals and society), and they can helpidentify aids that can effectively help people with specific intellectual deficiencies compensate for what is latent or missing.our expanding technology makes it easier to dorapid advances in electronic technology provide opportunities to improve existing intellectual aids, create effective and unforeseen new ones,and reduce costs, thereby bringing heretofore expensive aids to larger audiences. the productivity and creativity of individuals and work groups canbe dramatically affected, in unforeseen ways, by the faster, cheaper processors with larger storage that are becoming available. in the next decade, theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcosts of electronic storage and of computer processing are expected to continue decreasing at about the same rate as they have been (about 10 to 20times per decade). the speed of computer processing is expected to continue increasing at about the same rate as it has been (about 10 to 20 timesper decade). communications bandwidth is expected to grow even moredramaticallyñabout 100 times during the next decade.human factors special interestthe evaluation and creation of intellectual aids draw on a variety ofdisciplines involved in human factors work, including assessment, cognitivescience, applied and experimental psychology, work science, social science,organizational theory, and systems theory. it is the humancentered focusand the assessment and system development methodologies pioneered bythese disciplines that provide the potential contributions.three recommended human factorsresearch needs and strategiesthree human factors research efforts are recommended to improve human intellectual aids. although they differ in emphasis, the three researchneeds overlap, as do their respective research strategies and methodologies.several studies used as examples to illustrate one human factors researchstrategy can, from a different angle, be used to illustrate one of the otherresearch strategies.assessing existing intellectual aidstoday, little experimental and formal empirical evidence exists as tothe impact of various electronic aids on individual worker and organizational productivity. human factors research should be directed at empirically and experimentally assessing the value of existing intellectual aids,particularly as related to individual and organizational productivity.exploring the nature of the tasks to be aidedthe fundamental nature of the intellectual tasks to be aided must beunderstood. stated differently, the characteristics of aids that will improveworker and organizational productivity and workersõ quality of life must bediscovered. human factors research should empirically study ongoing intellectual work to identify which work tasks are òaidable,ó the cognitivecharacteristics of these tasks, and the characteristics that the aids shouldhave. there exist a variety of human factors methodologies that can beemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work295used to conduct empirical investigations of intellectual work in creativejobs and work organizations in order to understand what types of intellectual aids would be valuable. these methods include serious observationalvisits to work locations, task analyses, interviews, and thinkingaloud protocols.participating in interdisciplinary effortsthe disciplines that underlie human factors research are necessary toimprove existing intellectual aids and to create new useful ones. but theyare not sufficient. human factors researchers should participate in seriousinterdisciplinary efforts with other scientists and engineers. this is necessary both because human factors researchers have the potential to make acontribution and to help ensure that human factors research has a significantimpact. this chapter provides frameworks for thinking about how to address these three research needs, suggestions for following the recommendedresearch strategies, and examples of existing research.research need and strategy 1:assess existing aidsit is important to know the effectiveness of the various intellectualwork aids. it would seem reasonable to assume from observation that, toaugment their intellectual work, people are successful in using some aids(e.g., actuarial tables) but not others (e.g., whatever aids many mutual fundmanagers used in the last decade). although free enterprise market forcesand differential commercial success of various intellectual work aids wouldseem to be a good indicator of their effectiveness, this may not always bethe case. the experimental results that do exist sometimes question thevalue of the generally accepted intellectual aid studied (see the examples ofstudies below; see also attewell, 1994).future human factors research should assess existing, ubiquitous intellectual aids to learn how well, if at all, they aid human intellectual performance and productivity; to understand more deeply how they affect peopleõsminds and the productivity of their work organizations; and to use the results as insights in defining new aids that would be valuable. in addition toincreasing productivity, knowledge about the effectiveness of intellectualwork aids might help identify their common characteristics that have longterm positive effects (e.g., making workers more productive, improving thequality of work life). these discoveries might center on characteristics ofthe aids themselves or on characteristics of the processes used to developthem. for example, a number of questions might be asked about aid development processes. what design processes lead to the best aids? do theemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.296emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchsystem design processes recommended by human factors people lead togood aids (e.g., iterative design, usercentered design; see helander, 1988)?if so, then are there more case study data in support of these design anddevelopment processes? if not, then these recommended processes can bemodified.experimental assessment of intellectual aids could help identify thecognitive implications of widely used aids. for example, does a calculatorlead students to become poorer at basic math skills, as is often suspected, orbetter at math skills, which one could argue on the basis of accurate feedback? intellectual aids can have surprising, unpredictable effects and intellectual implications. a personal example is presented here: prior to theavailability of copiers, i used to make notes and know a relatively smallnumber of journal articles in detail; now i have a more peripheral knowledge of a larger number of journal articles and, when i need to know anydetails, i rely on remembering the existence and location of the copies that ihave stacked in my office. experimental studies of existing aids wouldfocus energy on tasks for which the aids are designed to help, rather than onconvenient lab or toy tasks that are often used in psychological investigations. this may lead to developing new methodology and a worthwhiletheory about the work under study. it also can lead either to the identification of ways to improve an aid or to ideas about the design of new aids.figure 11.1 summarizes key points to be kept in mind when designingexperiments or empirical field studies to assess an existing intellectual aid.although a few readers may think that some of these points are obvious,many of us are familiar with studies that fail to follow òobviousó suggestions.examples of studiesa few studies are described here to illustrate how to successfully assessa potential aid.composing aidscomposing by dictation in the 1970s dictation was often used to produceoffice correspondence. vendors and employers encouraged their professional employees to compose letters and memos this way; office dictationsystems, including hardware, software, and required procedures, were beingdesigned, purchased, and used. there were several generally accepted notions about dictation at that time, as summarized in figure 11.2. to testthese commonly held views, in a series of about 20 laboratory experiments,participants were given a specific topic on which to compose a letter and aspecific composition method with which to do it. they composed similaremerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work297key methodological points in assessing existing aids¥try to pick a ubiquitous, important task and a ubiquitous, important aid.¥continually ask the question: does this aid do what it claims to do? doesit do it in the short run and in the long run?¥figure out how the task can be studied experimentally in the laboratory orempirically in the field. often shortterm laboratory experiments are not asinformative as longerterm empirical studies conducted in context.¥in laboratory experiments, include appropriate experimental controls, e.g.,have participants do the same work with and without the aid (if this is possible).in empirical field studies, strive to do comparative studies of multiple groups orlongitudinal studies of the òaidedó group, especially if newly òaided.ó¥use tasks, equipment, material, procedures which relevant users and vendors would agree, a priori, provide a fair evaluation and could lead to theiraltering their behavior depending upon the outcome.¥design experiments so that results generalize to intended users (e.g., useappropriate people as experimental participants) and to a useful range of variation in the intellectual task under study (e.g., if it is querying a database makesure enough different types of queries are studied).¥choose meaningful dependent variables, including performance ones andattitudinal ones.¥try to identify and understand theoretically the underlying mental processes involved in the tasks and use of the aid.¥provide limits of generalization of the results in the study report.¥suggest how to improve the aid studied, or the possible use of alternativeones.¥prior to starting the experimental work, write conclusions sections thatvary depending upon what is found. show them to a few friends and get theirreaction. this will help you determine whether it will be possible to draw anyconclusions from the study design under consideration.figure 11.1 key points in designing experiments to assess existing intellectualaids.letters with each method studied. their performance and behavior weremeasured while they composed, and the quality of their work was measuredin various ways.the results showed that, contrary to what was generally supposed, itdoes not take a long time to learn to dictate with dictating equipment (gould,1978a). eight college graduates who had never dictated spent part of oneday learning to dictate to a machine. the next day, they dictated fourbusiness letters and handwrote four similar business letters. the experimental results showed that they dictated and wrote letters in about the sametime and with about the same resulting quality. quality was rated by judgeswho viewed typed copies of the letters and who did not know which methodwas used to compose them.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.298emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcommon notions about dictation in the 1970s1.òdictating requires a long time to learn.ó2.òeventually, dictating is much faster than writing. that is, potential maximum output rates, as measured informally, are 200 words per minute(wpm) and 40 wpm, respectively.3.òdictating may be qualitatively superior to writing because the higher potential output rate permits faster transfer of ideas from limited capacityworking memory, thus reducing forgetting through interference or decay.ó4.on the other hand, handwriting was thought to have òan advantage overdictating because it is easier to review and modify.ófigure 11.2 hypotheses about different composition methods in the 1970s. source:gould (1980:101).a second key result was that, contrary to what was generally supposed,(figure 11.2), people experienced at using dictation equipment did not dictate several times faster than they wrote. indeed, eight business executiveswho dictated regularly for years dictated routine business letters about 60percent faster than they wrote them (p < .001), and they dictated morecomplex letters (e.g., essays on the bicentennial celebration, on the issue ofcapital punishment, on their favorite teacher) about 25 percent faster thanthey wrote them (p < .01) (gould, 1978b). these experienced dictatorsdictated routine business letters about 20 percent faster than did novicedictators (p < .05), and they dictated more complex letters in about the sametime as did the novice dictators. dictated and handwritten letters, whentyped, were rated as similar by judges blind as to the method of composition and the experience of the authors. part of the aid assessment strategyrecommended in this chapter is to develop a theoretical understanding ofusersõ tasks and to relate the results of experiments to that understanding.these dictation studies found that the reason people do not dictate fivetimes faster than they write, even though they can say words five timesfaster than they can write them (40 wpm vs. 200 wpm), is that the generation component of composition (i.e., the actual moving of oneõs hand ormouth) takes only a small fraction (25 percent or less) of the total time.planning (i.e., pausing and thinking) takes twothirds of the total time.a third key result was the discovery that inexperienced dictators feel ittakes them longer to learn to dictate than it actually does because they thinkthe quality of their dictation is poorer than it actually is. novice dictators,just after composing a letter, rated their dictated letters as significantlypoorer than their written letters (gould and boies, 1978). upon receiving atyped copy of their dictated and written letters and incorporating proofreading and editing changes, they elevated the ratings of their dictated letters tothose of their handwritten letters. experienced dictators, on the other hand,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work299rated their dictated and written letters equivalently at both stages. judgeslater rated the quality of the final versions of the dictated and written lettersas equivalent.a fourth key result had to do with the justemerging method of composing by speaking òvoice documents,ó which recipients listen to (ratherthan read). experimental results showed speaking to be a much fastermethod of composing than dictating or writing. authors could use syntax,phraseology, and organization that they had learned over the years to beappropriate for listening but not necessarily for reading. in addition, incontrast to dictating, authors did not have to give typing instructions, whichis potentially a cognitively disrupting òsecondaryó task (gould, 1980). thisinformation on voice documents had an impact on technology. in the middle1970s, researchers at ibm had begun work on a òsuper dictating system,óone that allowed users to apply great editing power to their aural documents. the results of the research project described here were a key factorin ibmõs decision to shift the emphasis away from a super dictation systemand toward a voice messaging system (gould and boies, 1983). since then,voice messaging has grown dramatically as an industry (e.g., voice mail,telephone answering machines, etc.), whereas dictation has declined.composing with text editors in the 1970s, office professionals beganusing text editors to compose their own memos and documentsñand tocreate the final text versions without the aid of secretaries. this trend ledto research in the late 1970s to experimentally assess the productivity ofprofessionals using text editors to compose documents (gould, 1982), themethod of composition that has since become dominant in much americanindustry. in the first study, 10 professionals, who regularly used a computerbased, mainframe, lineoriented text editor to compose their own correspondence and longer documents, composed four letters with a texteditor(t letters) and four letters with handwriting (w letters). a secretary typedeach w letter, and then the participants revised and proofread the typedcopy.the results questioned the productivity advantage of using the lineoriented text editors of the 1970s. the basic result was that participantsspent significantly more time composing t letters (29.5 minutes) than theydid composing w letters (19.2 minutes) (p <.001). there was no differencein the judged quality and effectiveness of the t and w letters (based uponratings by judges afterwards). participants made many more modificationsto t letters (41.3) than to w letters (8.5). there was no difference in thelength of t and w letters, and there were no observable differences in thestyle of t and w letters. the report concluded that no productivity advantages were found for professionals who composed their own letters withtheir own text editor.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.300emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthese results seemed questionable to some, particularly because of thelack of differences in quality between the t letters, with all their additionalmodifications, and the w letters. a few years later, card et al. (1984)repeated this study, using the same tasks, materials, and procedure, butusing a òdisplayorientedó editor (called bravo) rather than a lineorientededitor. again, participantsõ t and w letters were of the same length andwere judged to be of the same quality and style. again, participants madeseveral times more modifications to t letters than to w letters, and againthese did not lead to higher quality in the t letters. however, in thisexperiment the composition times for the two methods were about equivalent (mean times for t and w, respectively, were 22.8 and 21.7 minutesversus 29.5 and 19.2 minutes in the gould study). that is, the mean timefor t letters was reduced to about that of w letters. besides extending thefindings to other editors, an important point for this chapter is that resultsshowed that experiments aimed at assessing aids can lead to cumulativeknowledge.comment note how these experiments reflect the recommended methodological points of figure 11.1. important aids were studied. participantswere experienced with all methods of composition. this helps generalization to the intended audience. appropriate tasks, that is, letters rather than,for example, sentences or minor utterances, were used. a variety of lettertypes were studied, which leads to greater generalization of the results.meaningful dependent variablesñtime and effectivenessñwere measuredin a variety of ways. in real work, these variables reflect productivity.since the goal of communication is often to persuade, having judges selectthe most persuasive letters in some of the studies was better than simplyjudging spelling, syntax, and stylistic considerations. the experimentalresults were repeatable, extendable, and cumulative.some of the work had an impact on composing technology. humanfactors research should not just question the value of existing aids but,whenever possible and perhaps aided by theory, find something that is agood replacement. speaking documents as a method of composition was soidentified.each report contained a theoretical explanation of the results, a seriousdiscussion of limitations, and a pointed conclusion paragraph. for example,the gould (1982) report on textediting systems pointed out that only onetext editor was studied; that even though there were no other experimentaldata on the use of text editors in composing tasks, it was known that thetext editor used can affect the speed of routine secretarial editing tasks(roberts, 1979); that lineoriented editors can lead to longer editing timesfor very simple editing tasks than displayoriented editors (card et al., 1979);that the results are limited to onetotwopage letters, typical of those comemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work301posed in industry; that these were not letters in which participants weredeeply egoinvolved or did an extensive number of drafts.missing from these studies, however, was a serious discussion, basedupon interviews with participants afterwards, about why they were not going to modify their behavior after learning about the results. in other words,a powerful dependent variable in assessment studies is to try to take someòaidó away from people and see how much they resist this or fight to get itback. related to this is the observation that many developers do not, evenwhen appropriate, themselves use the aid that they are making for others touse.everyday aidsnorman (1988) analyzed the way many òeverydayó aids (e.g., doorknobs, vcrs, stoves, faucets, automobile controls) work in his popularbook on the subject. the book is valuable for its motivational, theoretical,and methodological content. it is largely anecdotal, empirical, and analytical (rather than experimental) in its approach. it shows an excitement to getstarted, a motivation to focus on existing aids. it articulates theories ofmental mechanisms involved in using common aids. it correctly describeshow successful artifact design proceeds. the book finds fault with manyexisting implementations of intended aids, but sometimes points to successful ones as well. normanõs methods can be extrapolated to aiding intellectual work.behavioral and motivational effects of automationone work setting that has become increasingly automated is the flightdeck of modern jet transports. many intellectual tasks, such as flight planning and navigation, have been delegated to flight management computers,with the tasks of flying becoming increasingly centered on entering dataand monitoring electronic displays. this, of course, has been done to òaidóthe crew and improve airline safety. but some researchers have raisedquestions about unintended consequences of this automation, such as complacency, overreliance on malfunctioning automated systems, reduced job satisfaction, changes in authority relationships, and loss of skills. one recentstudy found no differences in technical performance (errors) between crewsflying an automated version and those flying a standard version of the sameaircraft on a simulated flight involving mechanical malfunctions and diversions from planned routing (wiener et al., 1991). there are probably manybroad, longerterm issues surrounding the impact of using òelectronic colleaguesó that go beyond performance results from laboratory studies.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchorganizational impact of a new technologythe studies described above have focused more on individuals than ongroups and more on outcomes than on processes. the next study showshow to focus on all four. methodology derived from experimental psychology is not the only way to assess the effect aids have on productivity.empirical field studies, especially if they are aimed at organizations ofpeople, rather than just individuals, can provide another powerful approach.while lacking some of the control of laboratory experiments, empiricalfield studies can assess whether individual productivity, measured in thelaboratory, translates into organizational productivity and can also take intoaccount contextual variables.kraut et al. (1989) studied what happened to productivity and quality ofworking life when a large company introduced a computerized record system to replace a microfiche record system in their customer service department. managementõs goal was to increase efficiency and cut labor costs.customer service representatives, who were the highestpaid nonmanagement employees in the company, were the primary contact between thecompany and customers. they attempted to solve customersõ problems,collect overdue bills, and sell new company services.kraut et al. studied 10 customer service offices, collecting survey datafrom each (a) prior to the introduction of the new technology, (b) onemonth after its introduction, and (c) three months after its introduction.this approach allowed pre/post comparisons within an office. each monththe new system was introduced into another office. thus, kraut et al.started studying each office at successive monthly intervals (e.g., office 1 innovember, office 2 in december, etc.). this òlagged, timeseriesó designalso allowed comparison among offices in various stages of automation.managementõs main goal was realized. productivity of service representatives, as estimated by the service representatives themselves (moreobjective data were not available), increased by 50 percent. they reportedthat their jobs got easier. however, they also reported (kraut et al., 1989:230)that their jobs:became less satisfying, less interesting, and generally of poorer qualityfollowing the introduction of the computerized record system. furthermore, contact with work colleagues became a less frequent and less satisfying component of service representativesõ work life. . . . interview datasuggest[ed] that these changes resulted partly from changes in social interaction, based upon new seating arrangements, new privacy panels, andservice representativesõ limited physical movement that came from coordinating information through a database rather than through word of mouthand transfer of documents.the supervisors of these service representatives, on the other hand,emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work303reported their jobs became much more difficult after the introduction of thecomputerized system. they reported that they now worked harder. evaluation became more timeconsuming, largely because obtaining the relevantdata from the new system was harder than before. overflow work could nolonger be done at home; it now had to be squeezed into business hours.supervisors no longer felt expert in the details of the work that servicerepresentatives did, although service representatives reported that their supervisors were good sources of information and responded well to pressureand uncertainty during the transition.comment this study by kraut et al. (1989) is a valuable example of how toconceptualize the issues, design an empirical study of the organizationalimpact of a new technology, and summarize the experience. it demonstratesthe value of being guided by a general theoretical view of human work thattakes into account a multiplicity of factors. the results showed that thenew systemõs effects depended on workersõ jobs, the tasks they performed,and the types of offices in which they worked. the study illustrates thatimpact on productivity is not the only key measurement of an aid. òbotheconomic and social theory as well as a rich case study literature suggestthat while information technology may increase productivity it can degradethe work lives of those who use itó (kraut et al., 1989:220). quality ofwork life can sometimes be neglected in formulating a study, because nearlyall human factors people work for management (not labor); this has powerful consequences, often subtle, on the goals of the work.in developing and refining group aids, it is important to consider notonly how they affect group processes and team efforts, but also how theseaffect individual motivation, skills, and job satisfaction in the long term andhow they shape organizational cultures and norms. these goals wouldprobably require that even longer studies be carried out.group work aidsattempts to aid collaborative group work have taken many forms, including new systems, technologies, facilities, and procedures (and the toolsand infrastructure to create them) and have been aimed at many tasks, including collaborative writing, design, problem solving, consulting, and programming. the emphasis has been upon tools for interactive, realtime work,although there have been some attempts to help people who are separated intime as well as in space.a combination of experimental laboratory work and empirical field studiesto assess various aids for group work is a valuable human factors approach.one such approach was carried out by judy and gary olson (olson et al.,1992:91) at the university of michigan:emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.304emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchour research strategy began by understanding group work in the field wherewe noted important baseline features of group work and gathered ideasabout how various kinds of technology can help. we have now moved tothe laboratory to study specific phenomena such as how technologies changethe flow of activities in meetings or affect the quality of the work. fromthese laboratory studies, we will move back to the field, assessing the useof these new technologies in the full organizational context. this strategyhas the benefit that we are informed by actual practice and can eventuallytest ideas in the field, but also puts the burden on us to construct laboratorysituations that mirror the field in important ways.in one experiment, olson et al. (1992) compared the work processesand performance of small groups whose members were mainly businessdegree holders with business experience. some groups used a group editorthat allowed all participants to see and edit the same document at the sametime, and other groups used paper and pencil, whiteboards, and similartraditional aids. each group worked face to face and collaborated for 90minutes to draft the initial requirements statement for an automated postoffice. the designs produced by the òaidedó groups were of higher qualitythan those produced by the groups working with traditional methods. theòaidedó groups focused more on the core issues of the problem (in otherwords, they did less extensive exploration of the design space). however,the òaidedó groups did not like their experience in the experiment as well asthe control groups.research interest has been dramatic. in the most recent association forcomputing machinery conference on computersupported cooperative work,191 research papers were submitted (48 were selected for inclusion) (turnerand kraut, 1992:1). the conference papers appear to reinforce the researchstrategies recommended above. in the area of assessment, there was a feelingthat empirical studies of the impact of aids on group work need to be longerterm than studies of individual work. according to cool et al. (1992:31),òwhile the basic cycle of buildstudyredesign is still valid, the implementation should be more complete and robust, and the study should extend over alonger time period before one trusts conclusions about ultimate value of anew communications system.ó regarding the second recommendationñstudyexisting work situations in order to determine how best to aid themñberlinand jeffries (1992) did precisely that for consultants helping apprentices.bentley et al. (1992) carried out an ethnographic study of air traffic controllers in the united kingdom. this methodology, relatively new to systemsdesign, uses observational methods and puts emphasis upon identifying thesocial and cooperative processes involved in group work.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work305research need and strategy 2:empirically study ongoing intellectual workin contrast to the first strategy (assessment), in which the emphasis isupon studying both an aid and a task, here the emphasis is upon studying anintellectual work domain or task itself (which, of course, is already aided insome way, since all tasks are). this means identifying the social, organizational, physiological, and cognitive mechanisms involved in the task. thegoal is to use these observations to gain insights into what would makegood new aids. there is no cookbook for this transition; one hopes thestudies cited below will help generate ideas. particularly in the case ofgroup work, deciding which task to study can be a major challenge. issuesinclude whether to study longterm tasks (such as effectiveness in increasing sales, morale, safety, and student learning) or shortterm tasks (such asteacherstudent contact hours), entire work assignments (such as changes inproductivity of a group) or subtasks (such as effectiveness in communicating). the underlying belief is that mental analysis and task analysis canhelp in aiding intellectual work more effectively.to this end, it is probably more important to study the work of groupsand organizations than the work of individuals because (1) it is harder todo, (2) most people work in organizations, and (3) there is uncertainty abouthow increases in individual performance affect organizational performance(see chapter 1).many formal and informal human factors methods are available forcarrying out empirical studies of ongoing intellectual work. figure 11.3methods for observing ongoing intellectual work¥visit worker locations.¥study the work organizationñunderstand the target groupõs role.¥observe workers workingñwith and without existing aids they may use orwish they had.¥talk with workersñabout their work and any existing aids.¥have workers think aloud while they work.¥videotape workers doing their jobs with and without intellectual aids.¥try the job yourselfñwith and without intellectual aids.¥collect opinions from associated workers outside the target group.¥study workermade notes attached to equipment, documentation, bulletinboards for insights into what would be a better aid.¥surveys and questionnaires.¥use computer forums to learn about other possible aids.figure 11.3 methods for collecting data on ongoing intellectual work. source:gould (1988).emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.306emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchkey methodological points in identifying thecharacteristics of useful intellectual aids¥understand the work that you want to aid, so that the proposed aid willlikely have the right characteristics.¥focus on the work itself and the workers themselves: this keeps youclose to the tasks you are trying to aid.¥pay attention to the social and organizational interactions and needs.¥analyze at a sufficiently abstract level for the purpose of identifying newways for people to work.¥understand the context of the work (e.g., what policemen actually do) sothat a proposed aid (e.g., a geographic database system) will be appropriate.¥go beyond activity analyses; involve workersõ personal and organizationalintentions, motivations, socialization.¥will the aid reduce manufacturing and development cycle times (òdesignfor manufacturingó)?¥consider the tradeoffs between integrating several intellectual aids, ratherthan using intellectual separate aids.figure 11.4 key points in studying ongoing intellectual work for the purposes ofidentifying the characteristics of useful intellectual aids.lists some informal ones; these are described more fully in gould (1988),with the emphasis upon designing computer applications. in addition, thereis a substantial sociological and anthropological literature on participantobservation and ethnography. all of these methods emphasize coming intodirect contact with workers, their organizations, and the intellectual tasksthey do or could perform. failure to do this will lead to misunderstandingthe characteristics of potentially valuable aids as surely as if one attemptedto define an important aid for intellectual workers who live on other planets. figure 11.4 provides further methodological guidelines.the studies cited below are more valuable even than the followingmethods and results might indicate. nearly every one provides a thoughtfuldiscussion of the motivation, methods, results, and their implications.example of studieswork activity analysesobservational studies, using a variety of methodologies, have summarized how office workers spend their time. for example, klemmer andsnyder (1972) had observers note specific types of work behavior exhibitedin a large research and development laboratory in offices, hallways, andother areas. in addition, employees answered questionnaires on how theyemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work307spent their time. they found that office professionals in the late 1960sspent most of their work time (42 percent) communicating interactively(talking face to face or on the telephone) and less time writing (14 percent)and reading (12 percent). they spent only 3 percent of their time interacting with office machinesñwhich is certainly less than the time office workers spend today interacting with computer terminals. mintzberg (1973)followed five veryhighlevel executives for two weeks each, observing andcategorizing their activities, and wrote a widely read book summarizing thefindings. panko (1992) recently reviewed over 50 of these useoftimestudies and made general suggestions for office automation technology consistent with the main results.while these studies, and many others, have illuminated how whitecollar workers spend their work time, few intellectual work aids have so faremerged based upon insights from them, especially as related to the work ofgroups and organizations. what has been needed for some years are studiesthat relate these observed activities to personal and organizational motivations and goals, trigger events, and interruptions. new methodology isneeded to go beyond òactivity countsó and gain insights into work processesthat can be aided. although such studies are very hard to carry out correctly, they could provide insights into potentially valuable aids.a related approach to these activity analyses has involved detailed coding and classification of verbal communications at the level of individualutterances. this approach has been used to analyze group interactions inflight simulations and in the investigation of aircraft accidents (e.g., kankiand palmer, 1993; predmore, 1991). a more holistic approach has usedexperienced raters to evaluate interactions in real time using specific behavioral markers to exemplify effective and ineffective processes (helmreich etal., 1990). both methodologies can be useful in evaluating aids since theyappear to be transferable to a variety of work situations of which the researchers have a detailed knowledge.desk organizationto learn more about office work, malone (1983) interviewed 10 professional and clerical workers about the way they organized their desks andoffices. participants first gave a verbal tour of their offices, explainingwhat information was where and why they put it there. as an indicator oftheir informationretrieval ability, the participants were then asked to findcertain documents (chosen by a knowledgeable coworker as being eithereasy or hard to find). maloneõs motivation was to obtain insights intodesigning natural and convenient computerbased information systems toaid office workersõ productivity. his two main conclusions (1983:99), whichhave implications for the design of intellectual aids, were the following:emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.308emerging needs and opportunities for human factors research(1) a very important function of desk organization is to remind the user ofthings to do, not just to help the user find desired information. failing tosupport this function may seriously impair the usefulness of electronicoffice systems, and explicitly facilitating it may provide an important advantage for automated office systems over their nonautomated predecessors. (2) the cognitive difficulty of categorizing information is an important factor in explaining how people organize their desks. computerbasedsystems may help with this difficulty by (a) doing as much automaticclassification as possible (e.g., based on access dates), and (b) includinguntitled òpilesó of information arranged by physical location as well asexplicitly titled and logically arranged òfiles.óthe point is not so much to focus on these particular implications ofmaloneõs study, but rather to appreciate how he drew implications for system design from his observational methodology. a second, more general,point has to do with the distinction between the need to design electronicaids (e.g., to replace paper) that allow people to work in about the sameway they now work (an approach maloneõs conclusions seem to favor),versus the need to design electronic aids that allow people to work in relatively new ways.communication in software development organizationsprobably millions of people are employed in system development work.to understand better how to aid the coordination of work activities in system development, kraut and streeter (1995) studied the communicationpractices of people in such organizations. hundreds of software professionals in the software development divisions of one companyñincluding managers, analysts, software engineers, programmers, testers, and documentation specialistsñcompleted a written survey. they reported that they gotmuch of their important information directly from other people. when theyhad a large network of personal contacts outside the project, informationflow improved, especially when the project was uncertain. they said thatinterpersonal techniques for getting information from beyond their immediate work group were underused, while more formal procedures for trackingroutine information were overused in terms of their value. the designimplication seems clear: aids to facilitate informal communication are needed.kraut and streeter note that planners are especially illserved by currentcoordination techniques. importantly, kraut and streeter conclude withvaluable organizational and technological suggestions for increasing communication across project boundaries. this type of welldesigned studyshould be imitated by future researchers.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work309software developmentmany studies have contributed to a shared understanding of the social,cognitive, and behavioral characteristics of the software development process (e.g., boehm, 1988; jones, 1986). the study by kraut and streeter(1995), just described, and one by curtis et al. (1988) show how humanfactors researchers can investigate very large task domains through surveys,visits, observations, and interviews. using their findings, they can thendevelop theoretical understandings of work organizations, which in turn canlead to ideas about the characteristics of helpful electronic aids. curtis etal. (1988) carried out extensive visits to workplaces and interviewed manyindividuals involved in 17 large software development projects. they foundthree general classes of behavioral problems that limited development productivity: thin spread of application domain knowledge, communicationand coordination breakdowns, and conflicting requirements. it is possibleto design new tools for software developers that address these problems.diagnostic judgmentsdiagnostic judgments and decision making are intellectual activitiesthat cut across most work domains. people frequently make diagnosticjudgments to answer important questions in their work lives (e.g., whichperson to hire? which applicants to admit to law school? what is the likelyresponse from this drug treatment?), as well in their personal lives, which inturn affect their work lives (e.g., should i marry this person? should wehave children? what is the best form of discipline to use with my children?at which supermarket should i shop?).consider a clinician examining a patient who is feeling ill, an employerselecting salespeople, a teachersõ committee deciding whether to refer ayoungster to special classes for learning disabilities, and a graduate schooladmissions committee selecting students for scholarships. if these òjudgesóbase such difficult decisions upon years of personal experience as successful diagnosticians, intuition about particular cases, and knowledge of theindividuals involved, then they are using the clinical method of decisionmaking. this is said even if they base their judgment upon one or morequantitative predictors as well.on the other hand, sometimes people rely only on statistical predictorsto make judgments (the actuarial method). òto be truly actuarial, interpretations must be automatic (that is, prespecified or routinized) and based onempirically established relationsó (dawes et al., 1989:1668). the insuranceindustry, for example, predicts peopleõs life expectancy (and therefore insurance rates) based only on a combination of statistical predictors. noemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.310emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchintuition or human element is involved. òin the clinical method the decisionmaker combines or processes information in his or her head. in theactuarial or statistical method the human judge is eliminated and conclusions rest solely on empirically established relations between data and thecondition or event of interestó (dawes et al., 1989:1668).nearly all of over 100 studies comparing these two general approacheshave shown that actuarial methods lead to more accurate diagnostic judgments than do clinical methods (dawes et al., 1989). the topics studiedincluded prediction of progressive brain damage, survival time followinghodgkinõs disease, differential diagnosis of psychiatric disorders, length ofpsychiatric hospitalization, violent behavior, paroleeõs behavior after release, and graduate student performance. even when clinicians are able tocombine actuarial test results with their own interview data, the predictionsbased only upon the test results proved superior (dawes et al., 1989). inother words, in this case, a third approach consisting of combining the twomethods does not seem to help. this conclusion is not limited to clinicaland social science situations. murphy and brown (1984) reported that òobjectiveó (actuarial) weather forecasting is equal to or sometimes superior toòsubjectiveó weather forecasting. the important point is that in straightforward ways, actuarial methods have the potential to be useful electronic aids,once the variables that correlate with successful predictions about the topicsbeing judged are established.there are elements of all three recommended research strategies in theaggregate of these studies. one problem for human factors research is howto put this conclusion into practiceñwhere it presumably would have realvalue for society in many domains. to date, the results have had littleimpact. dawes et al. (1989) cite several reasons, including lack of familiarity with the evidence, the continuation of previous practices in spite of theevidence, the feeling that an actuarial approach dehumanizes people, misconception, and inflated confidence about oneõs own ability to make accurate predictions (including situations in which the actuarial method, althoughsuperior to clinical judgment, achieves only modest results). actuarial methods,when applied to new domains, can seem mechanistic, antidemocratic, inhuman. one task for human factors researchers is to figure out how to getpeople to internalize the research conclusion in this area so that it affectstheir behavior. mccauley (1991) notes that, when psychologists have toselect national science fellows from a large list of applicants, they do notmake use of available actuarial predictors.a second problem for human factors research is how to extend theseresults to new domains (e.g., labor disputes, employee conflicts, systemdevelopment planning). here, one needs to identify the crucial predictors(which may already be known), carry out the empirical work when necessary, figure out ways to present the data effectively to potential users, assistemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work311them in using the data, and design and carry out the necessary followupstudies to verify whether the actuarial method helps in the new domain ofconcern.additional approachesthere are several other approaches to studying ongoing intellectual work.there are many variations of task analysis methodology (see drury et al.,1987). one can apply task analysis to the work of an isolated individual orto that of individuals working within an organization. task analysis can belimited to òlogical analysisó of all the possible steps in a work process (aswith an entirely new, nonexisting work system), or it can involve behavioralobservations. task analysis has been carried out mainly in military organizations, but there are many examples in industrial settings. the same handbook containing the drury et al. paper contains chapters describing taskanalyses applied to process control systems (woods et al., 1987) and to airtraffic control systems (lenorovitz and phillips, 1987).another possible approach is to carefully study, through interviews,observations, task analyses, and other methods, experienced, successful workersperforming crafts of high intellectual content (e.g., a physician diagnosing,a nurse treating, a musician composing, an architect designing, a teacherteaching). the goals would be to identify the intellectual skills involved,develop a theory about the task, and identify the characteristics of an aidthat would presumably be helpful. some designers find that, in the earlystages of designing and developing a complex system, they want a list ofclasses of subtasks that most need augmenting or even automating. thechallenge is to identify in general terms, if possible, these classes (e.g.,spatial orientation, data interpretation, handling radioactive materials).another possible approach is to identify intellectual skills that cut acrossa large number of human intellectual tasks and then identify the characteristics of useful aids for that work. existing examples of such aids are electronic verifiers for spelling and even grammar and electronic calculators forarithmetic. the idea is to determine not what the tasks have in common,but what common mental operations are carried out while working on avariety of tasks.research need and strategy 3:interdisciplinary development workhuman factors researchers, to date, have been more likely to assess thevalue of an aid developed by others (e.g., the studies under strategy 1) thanto join with others to develop an aid and then carefully assess its value andemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.312emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchimpact. there is a need for human factors researchers to become involvedin interdisciplinary efforts to create superior intellectual aids. this work isneeded for several reasons.first, working alone is generally not enough. it is hard to find examples of human factors researchers who, by themselves, develop effectiveelectronic aids. making good electronic aids requires many disciplines.second, many engineers and scientists have come to realize that òhumanfactorsó determine the difference between success and failure of most aids.third, there is evidence that human factors involvement in developmentprojects is costeffective (karat, 1992). fourth, iterative testing and improvement of proposed aids are vital if the aids are to increase productivityand enhance the quality of work life.if human factors researchers are involved, such testing and improvement are likely to be carried out much more thoroughly. thus, the potentialaid under development has a greater probability of improving organizational or individual productivity or other aspects of work lives. chapters 4and 5 have made similar recommendations for interdisciplinary work in,respectively, emerging medical and environmental domains, areas that offergreat rewards for successful collaboration. fifth, successfully instantiatingideas into technology is a much bigger problem than most human factorsresearchers uninitiated in this process realize, and it is something they oftencannot carry out on their own. this is true no matter how well the ideasseem to have worked in the experimental psychology laboratory or withprototypes. the studies referred to above on decision making and thosedescribed below by landauer et al. (1993) illustrate this. finally, many ofthe disciplines underlying human factors, such as computer science andexperimental psychology, have a much larger supply of techniques, procedures, and results than there is a demand for by others. this proposedadvanced development strategy can identify, select, and shape the techniques that others want and the context in which they must fit. human factors researchers should become partners with others in designing, developing, and iteratively improving good aids. this recommendedstrategy is not just a plug for employment opportunities for human factorsresearchers or a professionoriented expression of the importance of humanfactors. the idea is not just to work in support roles, as most industrial andgovernment human factors workers now do, but to work as equal, longtermparticipating partners, with all the commitment, risk, and pressure that leadership demands. the idea is that as copartners, human factors researchersshould develop a sense of responsibility for the initiation and successfulcompletion of an interdisciplinary project to produce a significant aid, withall the burdens this entails. for many human factors researchers, this requires new learning, motivations, work organizations, and professional payemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work313off (particularly as related to the university promotion system). it requiresa new conceptualization of what constitutes legitimate research. as outlined below, there are already some situations that can serve as organizational models of how to do the work and write it up for professional credit.this recommended interdisciplinary workñwherein end users actuallyuse, on a regular basis, the aid that human factors researchers jointly madewith other necessary disciplinesñmay be hard to carry out because of personal and institutional barriers. it is longerterm work than is typical ofmany graduate school projects and may require longerterm commitmentsof funding than traditional research. to be successful, it will also requireprofessional recognition and rewards, including ammunition for gaining tenure.there has been a start toward giving this work professional recognition.case studies describing innovative research and development efforts involving human factors researchers in advanced development work exist, including xeroxõs star system (smith et al., 1982), ibmõs audio distributionsystem (gould and boies, 1984), and ibmõs multimedia 1984 olympicmessage system (gould et al., 1987). it is generally accepted that thesesystems were innovative and have influenced others who have made similarones. figure 11.5 summarizes key points to keep in mind carrying outinterdisciplinary development work. these points are based upon personalexperience and published case studies.key characteristics about effective multidisciplinary development work¥strong technical leader and mentor, not lacking greatly in people skillsñatechnical champion.¥small group of talented people.¥individual members do what they are good at.¥commitment to colleagues.¥drive to become famous as a group for making an outstanding aid.¥willing to do what is necessary to be successfulñno 80/20 or 90/10 rule,where the remainder is left to others.¥use iterative engineering, including good development tools.¥make early prototypes.¥involve intended users from the outset.¥use the aid that you are making yourselves whenever possible (ifapplicable).¥follow up, and measure the value of the aid created.figure 11.5 key points in interdisciplinary work aimed at making effective aidsfor intellectual work.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.314emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchexamples of studiessuperbookmany developers believe that electronic computers hold greater potential than printed books for helping people find desired information. yetlandauer et al. (1993), working at bellcore, noted that nearly every experimental study failed to find an advantage for various electronically presentedtext systems over comparable printed versions. they concluded that a significant human factors problem is to develop an electronic text system thatpeople will use to better advantage than a standard printed book.because of experimental results on the use of command languages andnavigational tools, as well as results related to other relevant cognitiveissues they had been studying (summarized in landauer et al., 1993), landaueret al. felt that they had a chance to change this history. they observed thatmuch information already exists in published books and that this is thefavorite medium of most authors. so, in contrast to most developmentefforts, which focus on electronic books only, they focused on how to helppeople find information in already published books that are also stored incomputers. they called this approach superbook. they combined òfulltext indexingó with a òdynamic, hierarchical table of contentsó of the storedbook. a review of some of their previous research is in order.two fundamental problems that users have in trying to find helpfulinformation in electronic databases have to do with the command languagethey use and how they navigate through databases.with respect to command languages, almost all electronic informationretrieval systemsñbe they library subject catalogs, dialup query systems,relational databases, or computer file systemsñrequire users to select orenter some words that must match words used as identifiers by the authorsor indexers. after many observations, landauer et al. became convincedthat most occasional users are usually unsuccessful in using standard querylanguages or in producing boolean expressions from ands and ors to getdesired information from databases. thus, they rejected this approach as away of helping casual users of electronic data bases.why not discover what words people naturally prefer to use? whentrying to devise new command names that would help novices learn wordprocessors, the bellcore group (landauer et al., 1993:76) decided:that any two people were unlikely to agree on a best term, so the commonexpedient of a one word command, file name or table label will usually failto put a user in touch with data stored by someone else. . . . the chancesthat any two people would choose the same name for a command were lessthan twenty percent, and the most popular term was chosen by only thirtypercent of potential users. this observation was extended to the use ofemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work315terms for queries in data bases of several kinds, from classified ad listingsto recipe files and program names.the bellcore researchers built upon these observations by experimentally evaluating inventions of their own derived from their results. forexample, unlimited aliasing (i.e., using every term that a sample of usersapply to an item as an index to that item) led to a hit rate of over 70 percentin an interactive retrieval task on a small database of 188 recipes, with littleincrease in false positives. the same level of success was achieved withfull text indexing (i.e., every word contained in each item in the database ispart of the index for that item). unfortunately, these results do not scale upto much larger databases because too many irrelevant items (i.e., false positives) are returned. note how these researchers were not misled by optimistic lab results based upon limited tasks.with respect to navigation, the bellcore experimental studies (landaueret al., 1993:80) found that people have fundamental problems when usingmenus to navigate through electronic databases:typically menu selection schemes have a branching factor of four to tenoptions; more often than not, users stray from the path to their target by thethird hierarchical level. put differently, if there are more than about thirtyitems in the data base, the chances of finding the right one in a singleerrorfree traversal drop below half.they concluded provisionally that (landauer et al., 1993:82):menutraversal methods are fundamentally, and probably irremediably flawedas a primary method for information retrieval. as conceived by humans,almost all categories are essentially fuzzy; most items belong only partiallyor with only moderate probability to any one category, and can often fitreasonably well into several.the bellcore group also retained a òrather cautious use of links in thesuperbook systemó (landauer et al., 1993:129).thus, as the experiments showed, neither full text indexing nor a dynamic, hierarchical table of contents is sufficient by itself, but the bellcoregroup thought a combination of the two might help. full text indexingreturns a superset of desired items, as they had already found, but thedynamic table of contents, they reasoned, should provide contexts to helpusers narrow this superset of items to those that are relevant to their intentions. so they built a prototype, and used it themselves (landauer et al.,1993:98):we were . . . perfectly delighted with our system design. we were sooverwhelmed with its obvious superiority to anything we had previouslyseen, and so pleased with our early inhouse use that we dubbed it òsuperbook.ó we immediately began technology transfer efforts, efforts to makeemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.316emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchthis marvelous new tool available to other organizations at bellcore. . . .fortunately, [a new group member] reminded us of some of our publicpronouncements about, and past experiences with the necessity of evaluation studies.to judge how well the superbook actually aided people, the bellcoregroup gave college students queries which they had to answer using either apublished statistics book or its electronic clone.using the first version of the electronic aid (version 0), participantsfound slightly more correct answers with superbook than with the originalprinted book, but took significantly longer to do so. so the bellcore groupmade many changes to its electronic aid, most based upon analyses of itsexperimental data. with the next version, participants answered their queries faster and more accurately with superbook than with the original printedbook. based upon what they learned in this experiment, the bellcore researchers made more changes to their electronic aid and tested it again.this third evaluation study found that participants performed even betterwith superbook.this interdisciplinary effort illustrates many important points. no onediscipline could have done all the design, implementation, testing, and transferefforts. human factors researchers, like experts in other disciplines, can beoverenthusiastic about their own inventions when empirical data are absent.development of a successful aid usually takes a long time. the work showsthe potential payoff of interdisciplinary effort directed at a very hard problem. the work reflects elements of all three recommended research strategies.the experimental evaluations showed the status of the aid and suggested possible improvements. and the testing still goes on: landauer etal. (1993) have carried out several other experimental evaluations with othermaterials and have made superbook available to over 40 research labs.aid for detecting drunk driversharris (1980) designed and carried out a study to develop an aid to helppolice officers spot drunk drivers. in the end, harris provided officers inpatrol cars with a lowtech, effective aidña list of driver behaviors thatbest predict which motorists are driving while intoxicated (dwi). moreimportant here is the process that led up to his designing, implementing,and evaluating this aid. his study is valuable for its methodology, completeness, impact, clear writeup, and (inexpensive) aid developed to helppolice select which drivers to stop.in general, six percent of drivers at night have a bloodalcohol level of0.10 or greater (most states define this as dwi), and another 9 percent haveemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work317a bloodalcohol level between 0.05 and 0.10 (some states define this asòdriving while impairedó).first, harris studied 1,288 dwi arrests throughout the united states,analyzing the reported driver behaviors associated with each of these arrests. these driver behaviors could all be observed by police officers making the arrests (e.g., swerving, straddling) and could therefore serve asvisual cues to aid in deciding whether or not to stop a potentially drunkdriver. harris also rode with officers in two states as they stopped drivers,and he noted the driving behaviors of those motorists and the conditionsunder which they were stopped. nearly all of the stopped drivers (93percent) were given a bloodalcohol test when they were stopped: 38 percent had a bloodalcohol level greater than 0.10 (dwi), and another 23percent had a bloodalcohol level between 0.05 and 0.10. (this 61 percentis already 4 times higher than the 15 percent that could be expected bychance.) from these analyses he produced a drunk driver detection guide, asmall card listing several visual cues (e.g., following too closely) and thepercentage of drivers with this behavior who have a bloodalcohol levelgreater than .01 (e.g., 60%). the card was for police to carry with them orto attach wherever convenient. harris then went on to study the value ofthis aid by studying 10 law enforcement agencies across the united states.before and after they used his guide. he found that dwi arrest rates increased significantly overall (from 66 to 74 percent; p < .ol) for these 10agencies. (no mention is made of false positivesñarrests that did not leadto convictions.) harris (1980:731) also reported:experienced police officers . . . were generally skeptical that . . . the guidewould enhance their own dwi detection ability. however, most officersconsidered the guide to be a valuable aid for increasing patrol awareness ofuseful detection cues, training inexperienced patrol officers, preparing dwiarrest reports, and supporting court testimony.other approaches the landauer et al. (1993) studies provide an excellent example ofextending the cognitive findings of oneõs own group to the design of a realelectronic aid. human factors researchers could take the initiative to extendother existing behavioral and cognitive knowledge to applied domains (atask much harder than many experimental and cognitive psychologists generally suppose). for example, for some years many secretaries and professionals have used commercially available computerexecutable, rulebasedstyles to lay out and format their documents, for example, in prespecifiedfonts, margins, number of columns, line spacing, headings, and graphics.now, if there exists behavioral knowledge of how to design textbooks andrelated reading material to enhance learning, human factors people, workingemerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.318emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchwith computer scientists, could develop a similar rulebased style to lay outdocuments according to this knowledge. another example would be toextend the results on human decision making, described above, to realworld aids. the landauer et al. (1993) studies provide an excellent example of extending oneõs own cognitive findings to the design of a realelectronic aid.another approach might take existing technology or aids and combinethem in behaviorally innovative ways. perhaps the xerox star system (smithet al., 1982), the highly influential graphic user interface developed at xeroxparc in the 1970s, is an example of this. the developers took existinghardware (bitmapped displays, mouse), existing software techniques, behavioral knowledge, and cognitive engineering models and integrated theminto something much greater than the sum of the parts. many observersagree that this work influenced subsequent graphic user interfaces made byother major corporations.acknowledgmentsi thank liz gould, bob helmreich, bob kraut, tom landauer, raynickerson, lynn streeter, jacob ukelson, and frank yates, who providedhelpful written reviews and suggestions to improve this chapter, and severalother committee colleagues for additional suggestions.referencesattewell, p.a.1994information technology and the productivity paradox. pp. 1353 in d.h. harris,ed., organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. panel onorganizational linkages, committee on human factors, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.bentley, r., j.a. hughes, d. randall, t. rodden, p. sawyer, d. shapiro, and i. sommervile1992ethnographicallyinformed systems design for air traffic control. pp. 123129 inj. turner and r. kraut, eds., proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperative work. new york: acm press.berlin, l.m., and r. jeffries1992consultants and apprentices: observations about learning and collaborative problem solving. pp. 130137 in j. turner and r. kraut, eds., proceedings of theconference on computersupported cooperative work. new york: acm press.boehm, b.w.1988improving software productivity. ieee computer september:4356.card, s.k., w.k. english, and b. burr1979the keystrokelevel model for user performance time with interactive systems.report ssl791. palo alto, calif.: xerox palo alto research center.card, s.k., j.m. robert, and l.n. keenan1984online composition of text. pp. 231236 in proceedings of interactõ84, firstifip conference on humancomputer interaction, vol. 1. london, england: elseviernorth holland.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work319cool, c., r.s. fish, r.e. kraut, and c.m. lowery1992iterative design of video communication systems. pp. 2532 in j. turner and r.kraut, eds., proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperativework. new york: acm press.curtis, b., h. krasner, and n. iscoe1988a field study of the software design process for large systems. communications ofthe acm 31:12681287.dawes, r.m., d. faust, and p.e. meehl1989clinical versus actuarial judgment. science 243:16681673.druckman, d., and r.a. bjork, eds.1991in the mindõs eye: enhancing human performance. committee on techniquesfor the enhancement of human performance, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academy press.druckman, d., and j.a. swets, eds.1988enhancing human performance: issues, theories, and techniques. committeeon techniques for the enhancement of human performance, national researchcouncil. washington, d.c.: national academy press.drury, c.g., b. paramore, h.p. van cott, s.m. grey, and e.p. corlett1987task analysis. pp. 370401 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of human factors.new york: wiley.ferber, m.s., b. oõfarrell, and l. allen, eds.1991work and family: policies for a changing work force. panel on employerpolicies and working families, committee on womenõs employment and relatedsocial issues, national research council. washington, d.c.: national academypress.gould, j.d.1978aan experimental study of writing, dictating, and speaking. pp. 299319 in j.requin, ed., attention and performance vii. hillsdale, n.j.: lawrence erlbaumassociates.1978bhow experts dictate. journal of experimental psychology: human perceptionand performance 4(4):648661.1980experiments on composing letters: some facts, some myths, and some observations. pp. 97118 in l. gregg and e.r. steinberg, eds., cognitive processes inwriting. hillsdale, n.j.: erlbaum and associates.1982writing and speaking letters and messages. international journal of manmachine studies 16:147171.1988how to design usable systems. pp. 757789 in m. helander, ed., handbook ofhumancomputer interaction. amsterdam, netherlands: northholland, elsevierscience publishers.gould, j.d., and s.j. boies1978how authors think about their writing, dictating, and speaking. human factors20:495505.1983human factors challenges in creating a principal support office system: the speechfiling system approach. acm transactions of office information systems 4(1):273298.1984speech filing: an office system for principals. ibm systems journal 23:6581.gould, j.d., s.j. boies, s. levy, j.t. richards, and j.w. schoonard1987the 1984 olympic message system: a test for behavioral principles of systemdesign. communications of the acm 30(9):758769.harris, d.h.1980visual detection of driving while intoxicated. human factors 22(6):725732.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchhelander, m., ed.1988handbook of humancomputer interaction. amsterdam, netherlands: northholland, elsevier science publishers.helmreich, r.l., j.a. wilhelm, s.e. gregorich, and t.r. chidester1990preliminary results from the evaluation of cockpit resource management training:performance ratings of flightcrews. aviation, space and environmental medicine61(6):576579.jones, t.c.1986programming productivity. new york: mcgrawhill.kanki, b.g., and m.t. palmer1993communication and crew resource management. in e.l. wiener, b.g. kanki, andr.l. helmreich, eds., cockpit resource management. san diego, calif.: academic press.karat, c.1992costjustifying human factors support on software development projects. humanfactors society bulletin 35(11):14.klemmer, e.t., and f.w. snyder1972measurement of time spent communicating. journal of communication 22:148158.kraut, r., s. dumais, and s. koch1989computerization, productivity, and quality of worklife. communications of theacm 32(february):220237.kraut, r.e., and l.a. streeter1995coordination in software development. communications of the acm 38(3):6981.landauer, t., d. egan, j. remde, m. lesk, c. lochbaum, and d. ketchum1993enhancing the usability of text through computer delivery and formative evaluation: the superbook project. in c.m. mcknight, a. dillon, and j. richardson,eds., hypertext: a psychological perspective. new york: horwood.lenorovitz, d.r., and m.d. phillips1987human factors requirements engineering for air traffic control systems. pp. 17241770 in g. salvendy, ed., handbook of human factors. new york: wiley.malone, t.w.1983how do people organize their desks: implications for designing office automationsystems. acm transactions on office automation systems 1:99112.mccauley, c.1991selection of national science foundation graduate fellows. a case study ofpsychologists failing to apply what they know about decision making. americanpsychologist december:12871291.mintzberg, h.1973the nature of managerial work. new york: harper and row.murphy, a.h., and b.g. brown1984a comparative evaluation of objective and subjective weather forecasts in theunited states. journal of forecasting 3:369393.norman, d.1988the psychology of everyday things. new york: basic books.olson, j.s., g.m. olson, m. storrosten, and m. carter1992how a groupeditor changes the character of a design meeting as well as itsoutcome. pp. 9198 in j. turner and r. kraut, eds., proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperative work. new york: acm press.emerging needs and opportunities for human factors researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aiding intellectual work321panko, r.r.1992managerial communication patterns. journal of organizational computing 2(1):95122.pool, r.1992computing in science. science 256(april 3):4464.predmore, s.c.1991microcoding of communications in accident analyses: crew coordination in united811 and united 232. pp. 350355 in proceedings of the sixth international symposium on aviation psychology. columbus: ohio state university.roberts, t.l.1979evaluation of computer text editors. unpublished phd dissertation. computerscience department, stanford university.smith, d.c., c. irby, r. kimball, b. verplank, and e. harslem1982designing the star user interface. byte 7(4):242282.turner, j., and r. kraut, eds.1992proceedings of the conference on computersupported cooperative work. newyork: acm press.wiener, e.l., t.r. chidester, b.g. kanki, e.a. palmer, r.e. curry, and s.e. gregorich1991the impact of cockpit automation on crew coordination and communication. i.overview, loft evaluations, error severity, and questionnaire data. nasacontractor report no. 177587. moffett field, calif.: nasaames researchcenter.woods, d., j.f. oõbrien, and l.f. hanes1987human factors challenges in process control: the case of nuclear power plants.pp. 17241770 in g. salvendi, ed., handbook of human factors. new york:wiley.